Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume XX, Congo Crisis (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 1994)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1961-63v20).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Congo Crisis (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume XX)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963

Volume XX

Congo Crisis

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on May 30, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

Congo Crisis (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume XX)Contents

Preface

Contents

List of Sources

List of Abbreviations

List of Persons

Congo CrisisJanuary–August 1961: The Problem of Lumumba and the Gizenga Regime (Documents 1-101)

September–December 1961: Hostilites in Katanga and the Kitona Accord (Documents 102-182)

January–November 1962: Efforts to find a Peaceful Solution to the Katanga Problem (Documents 183-346)

December 1962–January 1963: Collapse of the Katangan Secession (Documents 347-413)

February–December 1963: The Congo After the Crisis (Documents 414-434)

Index

Preface Preface

The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government. The series documents the facts and events that contributed to the formulation of policies and includes evidence of supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately adopted.

The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The staff of the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, plans, researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series. This documentary editing proceeds in full accord with the generally accepted standards of historical scholarship. Official regulations codifying specific standards for the selection and editing of documents for the series were first promulgated by Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925. These regulations, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991.

A new statutory charter for the preparation of the series was established by Public Law 102–138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1992 and 1993, which was signed by President George Bush on October 28, 1991. Section 198 of P.L. 102–138 added a new Title IV to the Department of State's Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 USC 4351, et seq.).

The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be a thorough, accurate, and reliable record of major United States foreign policy decisions and significant United States diplomatic activity. The volumes of the series should include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation of major foreign policy decisions and actions of the United States Government, including facts that contributed to the formulation of policies and records that provided supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately adopted.

The statute confirms the editing principles established by Secretary Kellogg: the Foreign Relations series is guided by the principles of historical objectivity and accuracy; records should not be altered or deletions made without indicating in the published text that a deletion has been made; the published record should omit no facts that were of major importance in reaching a decision; and nothing should be omitted for the purposes of concealing a defect in policy. The statute also requires that the Foreign Relations series be published not more than 30 years after the events recorded.

The editors of this volume are convinced that it meets all regulatory, statutory, and scholarly standards of selection and editing. Although this volume records policies and events of more than 30 years ago, the Foreign Relations statute allows the Department until 1996 to reach the 30-year line in the publication of the series.

Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series

This volume is part of a subseries of the Foreign Relations series for the years 1961–1963. The subseries presents in 25 print volumes and 5 microfiche supplements a documentary record of major foreign policy decisions and actions of the administration of President John F. Kennedy. In the 1961–1963 triennium, the record of U.S. foreign policy with respect to Africa comprises two print volumes and a portion of a microfiche supplement.

This volume documents U.S. policy with respect to the Congo crisis and U.S. relations with the Republic of the Congo from January 1961 through December 1963. Material on the first 6 months of the Congo crisis is included in Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, volume XIV, Africa. Volume XXI includes records concerning general U.S. policy toward Africa and relations with the other countries of Africa, including North Africa, during the years 1961–1963. Additional documentation relating to the Congo and other African countries will be published separately in a microfiche supplement that will also contain material on the Middle East.

The Foreign Relations statute requires that the published record in the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation on major foreign policy decisions and actions of the U.S. Government. It further requires that agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Government cooperate with the Department of State Historian by providing full and complete access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and by providing copies of selected records. The editors believe this volume was prepared in accordance with the standards and mandates of the statute, although access to some records was restricted, as noted below.

Sources for theForeign RelationsSeries

The editors have had complete access to all the retired records and papers in the Department of State: the central files of the Department; the decentralized ("lot files") of the Department at the bureau, office, and division levels; the files of the Department's Executive Secretariat, which contain the records of international conferences and high-level official visits, correspondence with foreign leaders by the President and Secretary of State, and memoranda of conversations between the President and Secretary of State and foreign officials; and the files of overseas diplomatic posts.

The editors of the Foreign Relations series also have access to the papers of President Kennedy and other White House foreign policy records. Presidential papers maintained and preserved at the Presidential libraries include some of the most significant foreign affairs-related documentation from other federal agencies including the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. All of this documentation has been made available for use in the Foreign Relations series thanks to the consent of these agencies and the cooperation and support of the National Archives and Records Administration.

Department of State historians also have access to records of the Department of Defense, particularly the records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretary of Defense and his major assistants.

As noted above, the Foreign Relations statute requires that the editors have full and complete access to all records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions. Since early 1991, the Central Intelligence Agency, in cooperation with the Department of State, has provided expanded access to Department historians to high-level intelligence documents from those records still in the custody of that Agency. Department historians' expanded access was arranged by the History Staff of the Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency. This access arrangement coincided with the research of volumes for the 1961–1963 triennium. As Department of State and CIA historians have continued to work out the procedural and scholarly aspects of this access, the variety of documentation made available and selected for publication in the volumes has improved.

Principles of Document Selection for the Foreign Relations Series

In preparing each volume of the Foreign Relations series, the editors are guided by some general principles for the selection of documents. Each editor, in consultation with the General Editor and other senior editors, determines the particular issues and topics to be documented either in detail, in brief, or in summary. Some general decisions are also made regarding issues that cannot be documented in the volume but will be addressed in a microfiche supplement or in bibliographical notes.

The following general selection criteria are used in preparing volumes in the Foreign Relations series. Individual compiler-editors vary these criteria in accordance with the particular issues and the available documentation. The compiler-editors also tend to apply these selection criteria in accordance with their own interpretation of the generally accepted standards of scholarship. In selecting documentation for publication, the editors give priority to unpublished classified records, rather than previously published records (which are accounted for in appropriate bibliographical notes).

Selection Criteria (in general order of priority): 1. Major foreign affairs commitments made on behalf of the United States to other governments, including those that define or identify the principal foreign affairs interests of the United States;

2. Major foreign affairs issues, commitments, negotiations, and activities, whether or not major decisions were made, and including dissenting or alternative opinions to the process ultimately adopted;

3. The decisions, discussions, actions, and considerations of the President, as the official constitutionally responsible for the direction of foreign policy;

4. The discussions and actions of the National Security Council, the Cabinet, and special Presidential policy groups, including the policy options brought before these bodies or their individual members;

5. The policy options adopted by or considered by the Secretary of State and the most important actions taken to implement Presidential decisions or policies;

6. Diplomatic negotiations and conferences, official correspondence, and other exchanges between U.S. representatives and those of other governments that demonstrate the main lines of policy implementation on major issues;

7. Important elements of information that attended Presidential decisions and policy recommendations of the Secretary of State;

8. Major foreign affairs decisions, negotiations, and commitments undertaken on behalf of the United States by government officials and representatives in other agencies in the foreign affairs community or other branches of government made without the involvement (or even knowledge) of the White House or the Department of State;

9. The role of the Congress in the preparation and execution of particular foreign policies or foreign affairs actions;

10. Economic aspects of foreign policy;

11. The main policy lines of U.S. military and economic assistance as well as other types of assistance;

12. The political-military recommendations, decisions, and activities of the military establishment and major regional military commands as they bear upon the formulation or execution of major U.S. foreign policies;

13. The main policy lines of intelligence activities if they constituted major aspects of U.S. foreign policy toward a nation or region or if they provided key information in the formulation of major U.S. policies;

14. Documentation that illuminates special decision-making processes that accomplished the policies recorded in particular volumes;

15. Diplomatic appointments that reflect major policies or affect policy changes.

Scope and Focus of Documents Researched and Selected for Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, Volume XX

In planning and preparing this volume documenting U.S. policy toward the Congo crisis during the Kennedy administration, the research and editing of which was completed in 1991, the editor undertook research in the records of various agencies and individuals.

The John F. Kennedy Library is the most important repository for records on high-level policy formulation for this period. The National Security Files, the President's Office Files, the Ball Papers (which include some records of conversations between George Ball and the President), the Hilsman Papers, and the Sorensen Papers all yielded material for this volume. The papers of Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., and Harlan Cleveland were not available to Department of State historians at the time the research was done on this volume. The Robert Kennedy papers are closed to official researchers as well as to others. The volume also draws upon material from the Dwight D. Eisenhower and Lyndon B. Johnson Libraries.

The Department of State played the leading role in formulating foreign policy alternatives and providing advice on foreign policy matters to the President, and it had the principal responsibility for conducting exchanges of views and negotiations on policy matters with foreign governments. The Department of State's files contain a vast amount of documentation on the Congo crisis, including the extensive exchange of messages between the Department, the U.S. Mission to the United Nations in New York, the Embassies in Leopoldville and other capitals, and the Consulate in Elisabethville. They also include many White House and National Security Council documents, interagency communications, and records of interagency discussions, some of which are duplicated at Presidential libraries and in other agency files, and some of which are not found elsewhere.

In preparing this volume, the editor enjoyed complete and unrestricted access to all retired files of the Department of State. Certain intelligence-related files maintained in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research were unknown to the Department historians at the time this volume was compiled. Arrangements have been made for Department historians to have access to these records for future volumes.

The military establishment had a role in both the formulation and execution of U.S. policies regarding the Congo. The editor had access to records of the Office of the Secretary of Defense as maintained by the Washington National Records Center and to declassified JCS files at the National Archives and Records Administration. Copies of classified JCS materials were obtained from the Joint Staff by request. Copies of other Department of Defense and JCS documents are in the Department of State files and in the relevant Presidential libraries.

Among the records made available by the CIA historians, a collection of documents prepared in 1975 for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (the Church Committee) and maintained by the CIA Office of Congressional Affairs was especially useful. The records of Director for Central Intelligence John A. McCone are a valuable source, much more than those of his predecessor, Allen W. Dulles. Special National Intelligence Estimates were made available by the CIA historians (there were no National Intelligence Estimates on the Congo during this period). Copies of important CIA documents were found in Department of State files and at the Kennedy Library, where Department of State historians have full access to classified intelligence records (except for donor-restricted materials) as a result of the cooperation of the CIA History Staff.

The Averell Harriman Papers at the Library of Congress, with extensive material from Harriman's tenure as Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, constitute another important source for U.S. foreign policy for this period. The Maxwell Taylor Papers at the National Defense University contain material on Taylor's role as the President's Military Representative and include records of staff meetings that illuminate the role of White House advisers on national security affairs. The Lyman Lemnitzer Papers at the National Defense University contain Lemnitzer's handwritten notes of some White House meetings during the time when he served as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The Adlai E. Stevenson Papers at Princeton University contain much Stevenson correspondence for the period but yielded only a little material for this volume.

This volume focuses on U.S. policy formulation and diplomacy with regard to the Congo crisis. It includes documentation on U.S. support of the U.N. intervention in the Congo, discussions with U.N. authorities, U.S. political and economic relations with the Republic of the Congo, U.S. efforts to ensure that the Congo Government remained Western-oriented and not Soviet-influenced, diplomatic efforts to bring about a peaceful resolution of the Katangan secession, and, after the conclusion of the crisis in early 1963, efforts to promote stability in the Congo and to bring about the withdrawal of U.N. forces. In general, the emphasis is on political developments, including military and intelligence components of such developments. Documentation is also included on significant economic concerns, including the possible use of economic sanctions to end the Katangan secession. U.S. logistical support to U.N. forces in the Congo is not documented except insofar as it raises policy issues, nor is the implementation of U.S. economic aid to the Congo.

The crisis generated vast quantities of official communications and reports. Space limitations for the volume and the series as a whole necessitated great selectivity in the choice of documents included. The editor gave primary consideration to the formulation of policy within the U.S. Government, with emphasis on the highest level at which policy on a particular subject was determined, and to high-level exchanges with foreign governments and U.N. officials. Space constraints precluded any attempt at full documentation of the Congo's internal developments, but the editor included a selection of Embassy reportage and intelligence estimates, with emphasis on documents that were seen by high-level policymakers and may have influenced the making of policy at critical points.

President Kennedy made the major foreign policy decisions during his Presidency, and the editor of this volume tried to document his role as much as possible. White House staff members had expanded responsibilities, compared with the Eisenhower years, in overseeing the traditional national security affairs agencies and providing President Kennedy with additional information. That increased role is reflected in this volume, as in others for this period. The bulk of the documentation in this volume, however, originated in the Department of State, reflecting the Department's responsibility for conducting the wide-ranging diplomacy of the Congo crisis.

The policymaking process of the Kennedy administration was much less structured and formal than that of the Eisenhower administration. The documentation reflects that difference. Formal approved policy papers were rare in the Kennedy administration, and internal discussions between the President and his advisers were not always recorded. This was especially true in the early months of 1961 and is especially noticeable in this volume in the scarcity of documentation on the review of policy with respect to the Congo held immediately after Kennedy took office. In some cases, the only available record of a Presidential decision is a Department of State telegram transmitting instructions to a diplomatic mission with a statement that the instructions represent a decision reached at a White House meeting or by "highest authority." Insofar as possible, the editor has sought to document Presidential decisions by drawing upon the best material available.

Editorial Methodology

The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time or, in the case of conferences, in the order of individual meetings. Incoming telegrams from U.S. Missions are placed according to time of receipt in the Department of State or other receiving agency, rather than the time of transmission; memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted.

Editorial treatment of the documents published in theForeign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General Editor and the chief technical editor. The source text is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes. Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted conventions for the publication of historical documents in the limitations of modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the editors for each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained as found in the source text, except that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes and omissions in the source text are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an addition in roman type. Words or phrases underlined in the source text are printed in italics. Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the source text, and a list of abbreviations is included in the front matter of each volume.

Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classified after declassification review (in italic type). The amount of material not declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of source text that were omitted. Entire documents withheld for declassification purposes have been accounted for and are listed by headings, source notes, and number of pages not declassified in their chronological place. The amount of material omitted from this print volume and from the microfiche supplement because it was unrelated to the subject of the volume, however, has not been delineated. All ellipses and brackets that appear in the source text are so identified by footnotes.

The unnumbered first footnote to each document indicates the document's source, original classification, distribution, and drafting information. The source footnote also provides the background of important documents and policies and indicates if the President or his major policy advisers read the document. Every effort has been made to determine if a document has been previously published, and this information has been included in the source footnote.

Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and elucidate the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and other first-hand accounts have been used when appropriate to supplement or explicate the official record.

Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation

The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation, established by the Foreign Relations statute, reviews records, advises, and makes recommendations concerning the Foreign Relations series. The Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation and editorial process of the series and assists with any access and/or clearance problems that arise. Time constraints prevent the Advisory Committee from reviewing all volumes in the series.

This volume has not been reviewed by the Advisory Committee.

Declassification Review

The declassification review of this volume between 1991 and 1993 resulted in the decision to withhold a little more than one percent of the documents originally selected. The remaining documents provide an account of the major foreign policy issues confronting, and the policies undertaken by, the U.S. Government concerning the Congo during this period.

The Division of Historical Documents Review of the Office of Freedom of Information, Privacy, and Classification Review, Bureau of Administration, Department of State, conducted the declassification review of the documents published in this volume. The review was conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 12356 on National Security Information and applicable laws.

Under Executive Order 12356, information that concerns one or more of the following categories, and the disclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause damage to the national security, requires classification: 1) military plans, weapons, or operations;

2) the vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, projects, or plans relating to the national security;

3) foreign government information;

4) intelligence activities (including special activities), or intelligence sources or methods;

5) foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States;

6) scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to national security;

7) U.S. Government programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or facilities;

8) cryptology; or

9) a confidential source.

The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information, subject only to the current requirements of national security and law. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and the appropriate foreign governments regarding specific documents of those governments.

Acknowledgements

The editors wish to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the John F. Kennedy Library, in particular Suzanne Forbes, who assisted in the collection of documents for this volume. Mary McAuliffe of the Central Intelligence Agency History Staff assisted in arranging access to that Agency's materials. Officials at the Department of Defense, especially Sandra Meagher, and officials at the National Defense University also deserve special thanks.

Harriet Dashiell Schwar compiled and edited the material presented in this volume, under the supervision of former Editor in Chief John P. Glennon. David W. Mabon and Nina J. Noring provided planning and direction. General Editor Glenn W. LaFantasie supervised the final steps in the editorial and publication process. Gabrielle Mallon prepared the lists of sources, persons, and abbreviations. Rita M. Baker and Vicki E. Futscher did the copy and technical editing and Barbara-Ann Bacon of the Publishing Services Division (Natalie H. Lee, Chief) oversaw the production of the volume. Do Mi Stauber prepared the index.

William Z. Slany
The Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

August 1994

Contents Contents

Preface III

List of Sources XV

List of Abbreviations XXI

List of Persons XXV

Congo Crisis January-August 1961: The problem of Lumumba and the Gizenga regime 1

September-December 1961: Hostilities in Katanga and the Kitona Accord 201

January-November 1962: Efforts to find a peaceful solution to the Katanga problem 350

December 1961-January 1963: Collapse of the katangan secession 706

February-December 1963: The Congo after the crisis 835

Index 887

List of Sources List of Sources

Unpublished Sources

Department of State Decimal Central Files. Through January 1963, the Department of State continued to use the decimal central file system familiar to users of previous volumes of the Foreign Relations series. The following files were most useful in compiling this volume for the period through January 1963: 033.70G11, visits by Congolese leaders to the United States

110.12–McG, mission to the Congo by Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs George C. McGhee

325.70G, U.N. intervention in the Congo

332.70G, U.N. intervention in the Congo

611.55, U.S. relations with Belgium

611.70G, U.S. relations with the Congo

770G.00, political affairs and conditions in the Congo (the major file for the Congo crisis)

770G.5, Congolese military affairs

855.0070G, Belgian economic relations with the Congo

870G.00, economic affairs and conditions in the Congo

870G.25, question of Katangan foreign exchange

Subject-Numeric Central Files. In February 1963, the Department of State adopted a subject-numeric central file system. Under this system, files on the Republic of the Congo (now Zaire) were designated THE CONGO, and files on the Congo Republic (capital at Brazzaville) were designated CONGO. The following files for the period February through December 1963 were most useful in compiling this volume: POL THE CONGO/US, U.S. relations with the Congo

POL 15 THE CONGO, the Congolese central government

POL 23–9 THE CONGO, internal security in the Congo

POL 27 THE CONGO, military operations in the Congo

POL 27–4 THE CONGO/UN, U.N. operations in the Congo

DEF 19–2 THE CONGO/UN, U.N. military forces in the Congo

FN 10 THE CONGO, issues relating to Congolese monetary policy

FN 17–1 THE CONGO, issues relating to Congolese monetary policy

AID (US) 9 THE CONGO, question of U.S. aid to the Congo

Lot Files. Documents from the central files have been supplemented by lot files of the Department of State, which are decentralized files of regional or functional offices and bureaus and the files of the Executive Secretariat. A list of the principal lot files cited in this volume follows: AF Files: Lot 64 D 281 Files on military assistance and internal security in various African countries, 1957–1963, as maintained by the Politico-Military Adviser in the Bureau of African Affairs, later in the Office of Inter-African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs.

AF Files: Lot 65 D 187 Files on the Congo, 1960–1963, as maintained by the Officer in Charge of Congo Affairs in the Office of West African Affairs, later in the Office of Central African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs.

AF Files: Lot 65 D 496 Miscellaneous files of the Congo Working Group, 1961–1963.

AF Files: Lot 69 D 246 Economic files on the Congo, 1964–1967, and miscellaneous political files, 1961– 1964, including an incomplete file of records of Congo Working Group meetings, as maintained by the Office of Central African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs.

AF Files: Lot 72 D 457 Subject files on Zaire for 1970, with miscellaneous files dating from 1961– 1963, as maintained by the Office of Central African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs.

Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366 Collection of documentation on official visits by heads of government and foreign ministers to the United States and on major international conferences attended by the Secretary of State, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533 Records of official visits by heads of government and foreign ministers to the United States and international conferences attended by the President or Secretary of State, 1962, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. In addition, CF 2215 and CF 2216 contain a collection of documents pertaining to the Congo maintained by the Executive Secretariat in December 1962 and January 1963.

Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110 Collection of documentation on international conferences abroad attended by the President, the Secretary of State, and other U.S. officials, May 1961–December 1964, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204 Correspondence between the President and Secretary of State and heads of foreign governments and foreign ministers, 1953–1964, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

President's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149 Memoranda of conversation between the President and foreign visitors, 1956– 1964, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192 Files of Secretary of State Dean Rusk, 1961–1969, including texts of speeches, miscellaneous correspondence files, White House correspondence, chronological files, and memoranda of telephone conversations.

Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330 Chronological file of memoranda of conversations of the Secretary of State and Acting Secretary of State, 1961–1964, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

Secretary's Staff Meetings: Lot 66 D 147 Records of the Secretary of State's staff meetings, 1961–1963, and additional ad hoc meetings, reports, papers, and memoranda of Under Secretary of State Chester Bowles' telephone conversations.

S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199 Files of the Policy Planning Council, 1963–1964.

S/S–NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265 Master set of papers pertaining to National Security Council meetings, including policy papers, position papers, and administrative documents, 1961–1966, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316 Master file of National Security Action Memoranda (NSAMs), 1961–1968, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95 Administrative and miscellaneous National Security Council files, including NSC Records of Action, 1947–1966, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

State-JCS Meetings: Lot 70 D 328 Records of meetings between representatives of the Department of State and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 1959–1963, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

National Archives and Records Administration

Record Group 59, Records of the Department of State S/P Files: Lot 67 D 548 Records of the Policy Planning Staff, 1957–1961.

S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121 Records of the Policy Planning Council, 1962.

Williams Records Records of the Bureau of African Affairs: Files of G. Mennen Williams, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, 1961–1966.

Record Group 84, Records of the Foreign Service Posts of the United States Leopoldville Embassy Files: FRC 64 A 532, Item 14 (Lot 63 F 85) Embassy subject files, 1960–1961; Consulate General subject files, 1956– 1960.

Leopoldville Embassy Files: FRC 65 A 160, Item 10 (Lot 64 F 73) Embassy subject files, 1962.

Leopoldville Embassy Files: FRC 66 A 1134, Item 49 (Lot 64 F 96) Embassy subject files, 1963.

Record Group 319, Records of the Army Staff Records of the Assistant Chief of Staff, G–2 (Intelligence), "Secret" Incoming and Outgoing Messages, 1961–1963.

Dwight D. Eisenhower Library, Abilene, Kansas Whitman File Papers of Dwight D. Eisenhower as President of the United States, 1953–1961, as maintained by his Personal Secretary, Ann Whitman. The Whitman File includes the following elements: Name Series, Dulles-Herter Series, Eisenhower Diaries, Ann Whitman (ACW) Diaries, National Security Council Records, Miscellaneous Records, Cabinet Papers, Legislative Meetings, International Meetings, Administrative Series, Project Clean Up, and International File.

Lyndon B. Johnson Library, Austin, Texas Rusk Appointment Books

Vice Presidential Security File

John F. Kennedy Library, Boston, Massachusetts Ball Papers Papers of George W. Ball, Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, 1961, and Under Secretary of State, 1961–1963, consisting of records of telephone conversations during his tenure as Under Secretary.

Hilsman Papers Papers of Roger Hilsman, Jr., Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, 1961–1963, and Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, 1963.

National Security Files Agency Series

William H. Brubeck Series

Chester V. Clifton Series

Countries Series: Congo

Meetings and Memoranda Series

Trip Series

President's Appointment Books

President's Office Files Countries Series, Congo

Sorensen Papers Papers of Theodore C. Sorensen, Special Counsel to the President, 1961–1964.

Central Intelligence Agency Director of Central Intelligence, McCone Files Files of John A. McCone, 1962–1965.

Office of Congressional Affairs, Review Staff Files Material pertaining to the Congo collected for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence in 1975.

Department of Defense OSD Historical Office, Secretary of Defense Cable Files, Congo

Library of Congress, Manuscript Division Harriman Papers Special Files of W. Averell Harriman, Ambassador at Large, 1961; Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, 1961–1963; and Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, 1963.

National Defense University, Fort McNair, Washington, D.C. Lemnitzer Papers Papers of General Lyman L. Lemnitzer, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 1960–1962.

Taylor Papers Papers of General Maxwell D. Taylor, the President's Military Representative, 1961–1962, and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 1962–1964.

Princeton University Library, Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library, Princeton, New Jersey Stevenson Papers Papers of Adlai E. Stevenson, Representative at the United Nations, 1961–1965.

Washington National Records Center, Suitland, Maryland

Record Group 59, Records of the Department of State UNP Congo Files: FRC 71 A 5255, Item 69 (Lot 65 D 219) Files on the Congo, 1960–1964, as maintained by the Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs in the Bureau of International Organization Affairs.

Record Group 330, Records of the Office of the Secretary of Defense OASD/ISA Files: FRC 64 A 2382 General and country files of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1961.

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501 General and country files of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs for 1962.

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 67 A 4564 General and country files of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1963.

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926 Top Secret files of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1961–1963.

OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3464 Files of the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense and their assistants, 1961.

OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3529 Top Secret files of the Deputy Secretary of Defense and his assistants, 1961–1963.

OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542 Files of the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense and their assistants, 1962.

OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131 Files of the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense and their assistants, 1963.

OSD Files: FRC 71 A 3470 Files of Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, 1961–1968.

OSD Files: FRC 71 A 6489 Miscellaneous records of the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense and their assistants, 1951–1966.

List of Abbreviations List of Abbreviations

Abako, Alliance des Ba-Kongo Party

AC, Advisory Committee

AF/AFN, Office of Northern African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State

AF/AFW, Office of West Coast and Malian Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State

AFB, Air Force Base

AFN, Office of Northern African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State

AFP, Agence France Presse

AID, Agency for International Development

AIRA, Air Attache

ALN, Armee de la Liberation Nationale; National Army of Liberation (Algeria)

ANC, Armee Nationale Congalaise

ARMA, Army Attache

BNA, Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

CAB, Civil Aeronautics Board

CAC, United Nations Advisory Committee on the Congo

CARE–MEDICO, Cooperative for American Remittances to Everywhere-Medical International Cooperation

CCC, Commodity Credit Corporation

CENTO, Central Treaty Organization

CG, Consulate General

CIA, Central Intelligence Agency

CINCLANT, Commander in Chief, Armed Forces, Atlantic

CINCSAC, Commander in Chief, Strategic Air Command

CNA, Congo National Army

COMAFELM, Commander, Air Force, Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean

Conakat, Confederation des Associations Tribales du Katanga

ConGen, Consulate General

CONUS, Continental United States

CSK, Comite Special du Katanga

CU, Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs, Department of State

CY, calendar year

DAC, Development Assistance Committee (OECD)

DCI, Director of Central Intelligence

Depcirtel, Department of State circular telegram

Deptel, Department of State telegram

DG, Director General

DL, Development Loan

DLF, Development Loan Fund

DOD, Department of Defense

ECA, Economic Commission for Africa

ECOSOC, Economic and Social Council of the United Nations

EEC, European Economic Community (Common Market)

Embtel, Embassy telegram

EUR, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

EUR/WE, Office of Western European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

Eville, Elisabethville

EximBank, Export-Import Bank

FLN, Front de Liberation Nationale (Algeria)

FonOff, Foreign Office

FRC, Federal Records Center

FRG, Federal Republic of Germany

FY, fiscal year

FYI, for your information

GA, General Assembly (United Nations)

GDR, German Democratic Republic

GMT, Greenwich Mean Time

GOA, Government of Algeria

GOF, Government of France

GOG, Government of Ghana; Government of Guinea

GOK, Government of Katanga

GOL, Government of Libya

GOM, Government of Morocco

GOP, Government of Portugal

GOS, Government of Sudan

GOT, Government of Tunisia

GRN, Government of Rhodesia and Nyasaland

GSA, Government of South Africa

GSR, Government of the Somali Republic

HIM, His Imperial Majesty

HMG, Her Majesty's Government

HQs, headquarters

IATA, International Air Transport Association

IATSG, International Air Transport Study Group

IBRD, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World Bank)

ICA, International Cooperation Administration

ICAO, International Civil Aviation Organization

ICFTU, International Confederation of Free Trade Unions

ICJ, International Court of Justice

IEG, Imperial Ethiopian Government

ILO, International Labor Organization

IMF, International Monetary Fund

INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

ISA, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

ITU, International Trade Union

JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff

JCSM, Joint Chiefs of Staff Memorandum

JTF, Joint Task Force

KAF, Katangan Air Force

Leo, Leopoldville

MAP, Military Assistance Program

MATS, Military Air Transport Service

MAAG, Military Assistance Advisory Group

memcon, memorandum of conversation

MiG, A.I. MIkoyan i M.I. Gurevich (Soviet fighter aircraft named for designers Mikoyan and Gurevich )

MNA, Mouvement Nationaliste Algerienne

MNC, Mouvement National Congolais

MOD, Ministry of Defense

NAC, North Atlantic Council

NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization

NBC, National Broadcasting Company

NIE, National Intelligence Estimate

Noforn, no foreign dissemination

NR, Northern Rhodesia

NSAM, National Security Action Memorandum

NSC, National Security Council

OASD/ISA, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

OAU, Organization of African Unity

OECD, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

ONUC, Operation des Nations Unies au Congo

OPLAN, operation plan

OSD/ISA, Office of the Secretary of Defense, Bureau of International Security Affairs

PAG, Provisional Algerian Government

PAFMECA, Pan-African Freedom Movement of East and Central Africa

PGAR, Provisional Government of the Algerian Republic

PL, Public Law

PM, Prime Minister

PNP, Parti National du Progres

POLAD, Political Adviser

Polto, series indicator for telegrams from the United States Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations to the Department of State

PSA, Congolese political party

RG, Record Group

SA, South Africa

SAC, Strategic Air Command

SAG, South African Government

SC, Security Council (United Nations)

Secto, series indicator for telegrams from the Secretary of State while away from the United States

septel, separate telegram

SNIE, Special National Intelligence Estimate

Sov, Soviet

SR, Southern Rhodesia

S/S, Executive Secretariat, Department of State

SWA, South West Africa

SYG, Secretary-General of the United Nations

TIAS, Treaties and Other International Acts Series

Topol, series indicator for telegrams from the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations

Tosec, series indicator for telegrams to the Secretary of State while away from Washington

UAR, United Arab Republic

UK, United Kingdom

UM, Union Miniere

UMHK, Union Miniere du Haut-Katanga

UN, United Nations

UNESCO, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization

UNOC, United Nations Operations in the Congo

UNSYG, United Nations Secretary-General

UPI, United Press International

UPU, Universal Postal Union

USAF, United States Air Force

USCINCEUR, United States Commander in Chief, Europe

USG, United States Government

USIA, United States Information Agency

USN, United States Navy

USNAVEUR, United States Naval Forces, Europe

USOM, United States Operations Mission

USSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

USUN, United States Mission to the United Nations

VOA, Voice of America

WE, Office of Western European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

List of Persons List of Persons

Adoula, Cyrille, Congolese Minister of the Interior until July 1961; Prime Minister from August 1961

Alphand, Herve, French Ambassador to the United States

Balewa, Sir Abubakar Balewa, Prime Minister of Nigeria

Ball, George W., Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, February–December 1961; thereafter Under Secretary of State

Bell, David E., Director of the Bureau of the Budget, January 1961–December 1962; thereafter Administrator of the Agency for International Development

Blue, William L., Deputy Director of the Office of Western European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, until July 1961; Director, July 1961–February 1962

Bomboko, Justin, President of the Congolese College of Commissioners and Commissioner for Foreign Affairs until February 1961; Foreign Minister, February 1961–April 1963; thereafter Minister of Justice

Bowles, Chester A., Under Secretary of State until December 1961; President's Special Representative and Adviser on African, Asian, and Latin American Affairs, and Ambassador at Large, December 1961–June 1963; Ambassador to India from July 1963

Brubeck, William H., Deputy Executive Secretary, Department of State, August 1961–May 1962; Special Assistant to the Secretary of State and Executive Secretary, May 1962–July 1963; thereafter member of National Security Council Staff

Bruce, David K.E., Ambassador to the United Kingdom from March 1961

Buffum, William B., Deputy Director, Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State, until November 1963; thereafter Director of that Office

Bunche, Ralph J., United Nations Under Secretary for Special Political Affairs

Bundy, McGeorge, Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs from January 1961

Burden, William A.M., Ambassador to Belgium until February 1961

Burdett, William C., Jr., Director, Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, until September 1962; thereafter Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs

Burke, Admiral Arleigh A., Chief of Naval Operations until August 1961

Caccia, Sir Harold, British Ambassador to the United States until October 1961

Canup, William C., Consul at Elisabethville until September 1961

Carlucci, Frank C., III, Second Secretary at the Embassy in the Congo until December 1961; Officer in Charge of Congo (Leopoldville) Affairs, Office of Central African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State, from February 1962; Officer in Charge of Congo (Leopoldville) Political Affairs from May 1963

Cardoso, Mario, Congolese Permanent Representative to the United Nations until June 1962; thereafter Charge of the Embassy in the United States

Cleveland, Harlan, Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs from February 1961

Couve de Murville, Maurice, French Foreign Minister

Dayal, Rajeshwar, Special Representative of the U.N. Secretary-General in the Congo until May 1961

Dean, Jonathan, Consul at Elisabethville from August 1962

Dean, Sir Patrick, British Permanent Representative to the United Nations

Dillon, C. Douglas, Secretary of the Treasury from January 1961

Dulles, Allen W., Director of Central Intelligence until November 1961

Eisenberg, Robert, Office of West African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State, until June 1961; Deputy Director, Office of Central African Affairs, from June 1961 until March 1963

Eisenhower, Dwight D., President of the United States until January 20, 1961

Fredericks, J. Wayne, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs from May 1961

Gardiner, Robert K.A., United Nations Representative in the Congo, April 1961–February 1962; Officer in Charge of the U.N. Operation in the Congo, February 1962–April 1963

Gbenye, Christophe, Minister of the Interior in the opposition regime in Stanleyville until July 1961; Congolese Minister of the Interior, August 1961–February 1962; Deputy Prime Minister, February–July 1962

Gilpatric, Roswell L., Deputy Secretary of Defense from January 1961

Gizenga, Antoine, Prime Minister of the opposition regime in Stanleyville until July 1961; Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of the Congo, August 1961–January 1962; thereafter imprisoned

Godley, G. McMurtrie, II, Counselor of Embassy in the Congo, June 1961–August 1962; thereafter Director of the Office of Central African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State

Greene, Colonel M.J.L., Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs; headed Special Military Advisory Team to the Congo, June–July 1962

Gullion, Edmund A., Ambassador to the Republic of the Congo from September 1961

Hamilton, Fowler, Administrator of the Agency for International Development, September 1961–December 1962

Hammarskjöld, Dag, Secretary-General of the United Nations until his death on September 18, 1961

Harriman, W. Averell, Ambassador at Large, February–December 1961; Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, December 1961–April 1963; thereafter Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Herter, Christian A., Secretary of State until January 20, 1961

Hilsman, Roger, Jr., Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, February 1961–April 1963; thereafter Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

Hoffacker, Lewis, Consul at Elisabethville, October 1961–August 1962; thereafter First Secretary at the Embassy in the Congo

Home, Lord (Alexander Frederick Douglas-Home), British Foreign Secretary until October 1963

Ileo, Joseph, President of the Republic of the Congo Senate; Prime Minister, February–August 1961; Minister of Information and Culture, August 1961–July 1962; Minister Resident in Katanga from January 1963

Johnson, U. Alexis, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs from April 1961

Kasavubu, Joseph, President of the Republic of the Congo

Kaysen, Carl, member of the National Security Council Staff, June–December 1961; thereafter Deputy Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Kennedy, John F., President of the United States from January 20, 1961, until his death November 22, 1963

Khiari, Mahmoud, Chief of the United Nations Civilian Operation in the Congo, September 1961–September 1962

Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich, Chairman of the Soviet Council of Ministers

Kohler, Foy D., Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs until August 1962; Ambassador to the Soviet Union from September 1962

LeMay, General Curtis E., Chief of Staff, United States Air Force, from June 1961

Lemnitzer, General Lyman L.,, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff until September 1962

Linner, Sture C., Chief of the United Nations Civilian Operation in the Congo until September 1961; Officer in Charge of the United Nations Operation in the Congo, May 1961–February 1962

Loridan, Walter, Belgian Representative to the United Nations

Lumumba, Patrice, former Prime Minister of the Republic of the Congo; died January 1961

MacArthur, Douglas, II, Ambassador to Belgium from May 1961

Macmillan, Harold, British Prime Minister until October 1963

Mathu, Eliud W., United Nations representative in Katanga

McGhee, George C., Counselor of the Department of State and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council, February–December 1961; Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, December 1961–March 1963

McKeown (MacEoin), Major General Sean (later Lieutenant General), Commander, United Nations Force in the Congo until March 1962

McNamara, Robert C., Secretary of Defense from January 1961

Mobutu, Colonel Joseph, Chief of Staff of the Congolese National Army; after January 23, Major General and Commander in Chief of Congolese Forces

Munongo, Godefroid, Katangan Minister of the Interior until April 1963; thereafter Minister of Health

Nehru, Jawaharlal, Prime Minister of India

Nkrumah, Kwame, President of Ghana

O'Brien, Conor Cruise, United Nations Representative in Elisabethville, June–December 1961

Ormsby Gore, David, British Ambassador to the United States

Plimpton, Francis T.P., Deputy Representative to the United Nations and Deputy Representative to the Security Council from March 1961

Prem Chand, Major General Dewan, United Nations military commander in Katanga

Rikhye, Brigadier General Indar Jit, Military Adviser to the U.N. Secretary-General

Robiliart, Herman, President of Union Miniere and a Director of the Societe Generale

Rothschild, Robert, Special Assistant to the Belgian Foreign Minister for Congo Affairs, January–April 1961; thereafter Chef de Cabinet, Belgian Foreign Ministry

Rusk, Dean, Secretary of State from January 1961

Satterthwaite, Joseph C.,, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs until February 1961; thereafter Ambassador to the Republic of South Africa

Scheyven, Louis, Belgian Ambassador to the United States

Sisco, Joseph J., Director, Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State, July 1961–November 1963; thereafter Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs

Spaak, Paul-Henri,, Belgian Vice Premier and Foreign Minister from April 1961

Stevenson, Adlai E., Representative to the United Nations

Taylor, General Maxwell D., President's Military Representative until October 1962; thereafter Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Thant, U, Acting Secretary-General of the United Nations, November 1961–November 1962; thereafter Secretary-General

Timberlake, Clare H., Ambassador to the Congo until June 1961

Truman, Lieutenant General Louis W., headed mission to the Congo, December 1962

Tshombe, Moise, President of Katanga Province in the Republic of the Congo

Tubby, Roger, Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, March 1961–April 1962

Tyler, William R., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs, May 1961–September 1962; thereafter Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs

Vance, Sheldon B., Director, Office of Central African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State, June 1961–August 1962

Wachuku, Jaja, Nigerian Representative to the United Nations and Chairman of the United Nations Conciliation Commission for the Congo, January–March 1961; Nigerian Minister for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs from July 1961

Wallner, Woodruff, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs

Welensky, Sir Roy, Rhodesian Prime Minister

Wigny, Pierre, Belgian Foreign Minister until April 1961

Williams, G. Mennen, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs from January 1961

Yost, Charles W., Ambassador to Morocco until March 1961; thereafter Deputy Representative to the U.N. Security Council and Representative to the U.N. General Assembly

Congo CrisisCongo Crisis

Contents

January–August 1961: The Problem of Lumumba and the Gizenga RegimeJanuary–August 1961: The Problem of Lumumba and the Gizenga Regime

1. Editorial Note

2. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, January 10, 1961.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Files. Secret. National Intelligence Estimates (NIEs) and Special National Intelligence Estimates (SNIEs) were interdepartmental reports drafted by officers from agencies represented on the Intelligence Advisory Committee (IAC), coordinated by the Office of National Estimates of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), approved by the IAC, and circulated to the President, the National Security Council, and other appropriate officers of cabinet level. A note on the cover sheet reads in part as follows: "Submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence. The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff. Concurred in by the United States Intelligence Board on 10 January 1961." The representatives of the AEC and FBI abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

3. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, January 10, 1961, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1061. Secret; Priority. Also sent to USUN and repeated to Brussels, Elisabethville, Paris, and London.

4. Editorial Note

5. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, January 12, 1961, 8:22 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1261. Secret; Priority. Drafted by William I. Cargo, Director of the Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs (UNP), Joseph J. Sisco, Deputy Director of that office, and William B. Buffum, Officer in Charge of United Nations Political Affairs; cleared by Deputy Under Secretary of State Raymond A. Hare and Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Joseph C. Satterthwaite; and approved by Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs Woodruff Wallner. Repeated to Léopoldville.

6. Editorial Note

7. Briefing Paper Prepared in the Department of State

Washington, undated.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.11–KE/1–1861. Secret. This briefing paper, unsigned and undated, was prepared for a January 19 meeting between President Eisenhower and President-elect Kennedy. It was enclosed with a memorandum of January 18 from Director of the Department of State Executive Secretariat Walter J. Stoessel, Jr., to Staff Secretary to the President Brigadier General Andrew J. Goodpaster, which states that it had been approved by the Secretary. Kennedy's adviser Clark M. Clifford and Secretary of Defense-designate Robert S. McNamara both summarized the discussion at the meeting in separate memoranda to Kennedy, both dated January 24; neither memorandum records any discussion of the Congo. (Ibid., Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, White House Correspondence, 1/61–11/63, and Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3464, respectively)

8. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, January 20, 1961, 9 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2061. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville.

9. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State

Brussels, January 23, 1961, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2361. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Léopoldville.

10. Editorial Note

11. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, January 26, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2661. Secret. Drafted by James R. Ruchti. Participants not previously identified include Deputy Assistant Secretaries of State for African Affairs James K. Penfield and Henry J. Tasca, Director of the Office of West African Affairs C. Vaughan Ferguson, U.N. Adviser in the Bureau of African Affairs Martin Herz, Officer in Charge of Congo Affairs Arthur Woodruff, Deputy Director of the Office of Western European Affairs William L. Blue, Director of the Office of Research and Analysis for Africa Richard H. Sanger, and William B. Edmondson, Acting Chief of the West Africa Division in that office.

12. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, January 26, 1961, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2661. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution.

13. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, January 28, 1961, 8:29 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2861. Confidential. Drafted and approved by Director of the Office of Western European Affairs Robert H. McBride and cleared by Donald B. Easum of the Executive Secretariat. Repeated to Léopoldville and USUN.

14. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, January 28, 1961, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2861. Secret; Priority. Received at 8:12 a.m. on January 29 and repeated to Brussels, Elisabethville, and USUN.

15. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, January 31, 1961, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–3161. Secret; Priority.

16. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze) to the Assistant Secretary of State-Designate for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland)

Washington, January 31, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.70G/1–3161. Secret.

17. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, February 1, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Secret. The source text includes no drafting information, but a copy filed with a covering memorandum of the same date from Wallner to Rusk indicates that the memorandum was drafted by Sisco. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.70G/2–161)

18. Editorial Note

19. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, February 2, 1961, 11:07 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–261. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Ferguson and Rene Tron of the Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs; cleared by Williams, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs G. Lewis Jones, Rusk's Special Assistant Emory C. Swank, and Peter A. Seip of the Executive Secretariat; and approved by Wallner. Also sent to Lagos and repeated to USUN.

20. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, February 4, 1961, 5:51–6:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–461. Confidential. Drafted by Penfield on February 6 and approved in S on February 7. The time of the meeting is taken from the Secretary's appointment book. (Johnson Library)

21. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, February 4, 1961, 9:32 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–461. Secret. Drafted by McBride, cleared by Seip, and approved by Wallner. Repeated to USUN and Léopoldville.

22. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, February 5, 1961, 5:16 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–561. Secret. Drafted and approved by the Officer in Charge of French-Iberian Affairs L. Dean Brown and cleared by Cargo and Seip and in substance by Ferguson. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and USUN.

23. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, February 6, 1961, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–661. Secret; Niact. Received at 1:32 p.m. and repeated to Brussels, Paris, USUN, and London.

24. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, February 6, 1961, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–661. Confidential; Priority.

25. Editorial Note

26. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, February 10, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–1061. Secret; Priority. The source text does not indicate the time of transmission; it was received at 10:28 p.m.

27. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, February 14, 1961, 8:37 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–1061. Top Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Officer in Charge of Swiss-Benelux Affairs Philip H. Chadbourn; cleared by Hare, Assistant Secretary for European Affairs Foy D. Kohler, Williams, Wallner, McBride, and Frank A. Mau of the Executive Secretariat; and approved and signed by Rusk. Repeated to Léopoldville.

28. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, February 14, 1961, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–1461. Confidential; Priority.

29. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, February 15, 1961, 6:57 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–1561. Secret; Priority. Drafted and approved by Wallner and cleared by Swank and Mau. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, New Delhi, Paris, and USUN.

30. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, February 15, 1961, 7:42 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–1561. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Ferguson, cleared by Wallner, and approved by Penfield. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, and Elisabethville.

31. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate in Elisabethville

Washington, February 16, 1961, 5:15 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–1661. Confidential. Drafted by Ferguson, cleared by Wallner, and approved by Penfield. Also sent to Brussels, Léopoldville, and USUN.

32. Memorandum by the Deputy Representative-Designate to the United Nations Security Council (Yost)

Washington, February 17, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–1761. Secret. Sent to Rusk with a covering memorandum from Penfield endorsing Yost's views. An attached note from the Secretary's Special Assistant Charles E. Bohlen to Wallner commenting on Yost's memorandum stated that the issue was not the establishment of a Communist regime in the Congo but the establishment of a Soviet-oriented regime in Stanleyville which might spread to the rest of the country. He concluded: "If, by holding Mobutu [from a military offensive in Orientale], we can prevent foreign intervention and the resulting consolidation of Gizenga's position, I would entirely agree, and I certainly support reinforced U.N. action in the Congo."

33. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, February 20, 1961, 11:01–11:40 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Confidential. Drafted by McBride and approved in S on March 5. The time of the meeting is taken from Rusk's appointment book. (Johnson Library)

34. Editorial Note

35. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, February 22, 1961, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–2261. Confidential.

36. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, February 22, 1961, 4:40 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–2261. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Woodruff; cleared by Sisco and in draft by Ferguson, United Nations Adviser for African Affairs Donald Dumont, and Jerome Lavallee of the Bureau of African Affairs; and approved by Penfield. Repeated to Paris, Elisabethville, Brussels, USUN, Brazzaville, Yaounde, Abidjan, Tananarive, and Dar es Salaam for Williams, who was visiting several African countries.

37. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, February 23, 1961, 4:35 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–2361. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Chadbourn and Robert H. Miller of the Office of Western European Affairs; cleared by Wallner, Penfield, and Kohler; and approved and signed by Rusk. Also sent to USUN and repeated to Léopoldville and Paris.

38. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, February 24, 1961, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–2461. Confidential.

39. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, March 1, 1961, 9:11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–161. Secret. Drafted by McBride, cleared by Easum, and approved by Cleveland. Also sent to USUN and repeated to Léopoldville and Paris.

40. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, March 2, 1961, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–261. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to Brussels, Paris, USUN, London, and Tunis.

41. Editorial Note

42. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, March 4, 1961, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–461. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Brussels, USUN, and Lagos.

43. Editorial Note

44. Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Congressional Affairs, Review Staff Files. Secret. The memorandum, unsigned and undated, is filed with a March 7 covering note to Dulles, which reads as follows: "You were asking that the Division get together in a memorandum our best estimate of the actual facts and circumstances surrounding the death of Patrice Lumumba. This memorandum is attached and I am not sure whether you intended to send it to the President or not. FMC" The note was initialed by Dulles, but the document bears no indication that it was sent to the President. It is filed with a routing slip of June 19, 1975, which states that it was located in an AF/DDP (Africa Division of the Directorate of Plans) file.

45. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 8, 1961, 4:20–5:18 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Ghana. Secret. Drafted by Penfield on March 9 and sent to the White House for approval under cover of a March 13 memorandum from Department of State Executive Secretary Lucius D. Battle to Ralph A. Dungan of the NSC Staff. The time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is taken from the President's appointment book. (Kennedy Library)

46. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, March 9, 1961, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–861. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Buffum, cleared by Wallner and Ferguson, and approved by Penfield. Repeated to USUN.

47. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, March 10, 1961, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–1061. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution.

48. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, March 12, 1961, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–1261. Limited Official Use; Niact. Repeated to Brussels and USUN.

49. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, March 13, 1961, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–1361. Confidential; Priority.

50. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, March 16, 1961, 5:34 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.49/3–1661. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Ferguson and Buffum, cleared by Wallner, and approved by Penfield. Repeated to USUN and Brussels.

51. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, March 22, 1961, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–2261. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Léopoldville, London, Paris, and Brussels.

52. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, March 24, 1961, 10:13 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–2461. Secret. Drafted by Buffum; cleared by Williams, Wallner (in draft), and Deputy Executive Secretary William H. Brubeck; and approved by Bowles. Also sent to Léopoldville.

53. Editorial Note

54. Memorandum of Conversation Between Prime Minister Nehru and Secretary of State Rusk

New Delhi, March 30, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Dictated by Rusk, according to a handwritten notation by Swank. Except for the reference to Minister-Counselor Edward P. Maffitt, the source text does not indicate others who may have been present. Secretary Rusk visited New Delhi briefly on his return from a visit to Bangkok, where he attended the SEATO Council Meeting March 27–29.

55. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 4, 1961, 10:55 a.m.–1:10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Director of the Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs William C. Burdett, Jr., and approved in S on April 11. The time of the meeting is taken from the Secretary's appointment book. (Johnson Library) Other topics discussed were recorded in separate memoranda of conversation. (Ibid.) Those present not previously identified include Ambassador to the United Kingdom David K.E. Bruce, Deputy Assistant Secretary for European Affairs Ivan B. White, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs John M. Steeves, and Officer in Charge of United Kingdom and Ireland Affairs James W. Swihart.

56. Editorial Note

57. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, April 6, 1961, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–661. Confidential; Priority. Received at 2:23 p.m. and repeated to Brussels, Elisabethville, and USUN.

58. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, April 6, 1961, 8:21 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 310/4–661. Confidential. Drafted by Woodruff; cleared by Ferguson, Wallner, Dumont, Penfield (in substance), Stoessel, and Williams; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, Paris, and London.

59. Editorial Note

60. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, April 22, 1961, 1 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–2261. Secret; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Léopoldville.

61. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, April 26, 1961, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4-2661.Secret;Priority.

62. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, April 28, 1961, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–2861. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, Elisabethville, London, and Paris.

63. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State

Brussels, May 5, 1961, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.55/5–561. Confidential. Repeated to Léopoldville, Paris Topol, and USUN.

64. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, May 10, 1961, 9:31 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–961. Confidential. Drafted by Tron, cleared by Dumont, and approved by Cleveland. Repeated to Léopoldville and Elisabethville.

65. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State

Brussels, May 16, 1961, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 855.0070G/5–1661. Confidential; Priority; Noforn. Repeated to Léopoldville, USUN, and Paris.

66. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Bowles to President Kennedy

Washington, May 20, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential.

67. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, May 22, 1961, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–2261. Confidential; Priority; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Léopoldville.

68. Editorial Note

69. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State

Brussels, June 5, 1961, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 855.0070G/6–561. Confidential. Received at 5:41 p.m. and repeated to Léopoldville, Elisabethville, USUN, and Paris.

70. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, June 5, 1961, 7:55 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–561. Secret. Drafted by Woodruff; cleared by Wallner, Deputy Director of the Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs Milton C. Rewinkel, and David Korn of the Executive Secretariat; and approved by Williams. Repeated to USUN and Brussels.

71. Editorial Note

72. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, June 13, 1961, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–1361. Confidential. Also sent to Elisabethville and Léopoldville and repeated to Brussels.

73. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, June 17, 1961, 2:19 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 855.0070G/6–1761. Confidential. Drafted by Robert H. Miller of the Office of Western European Affairs; cleared by Woodruff, Blue, and Sisco; and approved by Wallner. Also sent to USUN, Léopoldville, and Elisabethville.

74. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, June 20, 1961, 9:25 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–2061. Confidential. Drafted by Deputy Director of the newly-created Office of Central African Affairs Robert Eisenberg; cleared by Blue, Wallner, Williams, and Andre J. Navez of the Executive Secretariat; and approved by Bowles. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, London, Paris for USRO, and Elisabethville.

75. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, June 22, 1961, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–2261. Confidential; Priority. Also sent to Léopoldville and Elisabethville and repeated to Brussels, London, and Paris.

76. Editorial Note

77. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, June 27, 1961, 8:58 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–2661. Secret. Drafted by Woodruff, cleared in draft by Wallner and Officer in Charge of Swiss-Benelux Affairs Galen L. Stone, and approved by Director of the Office of Central African Affairs Sheldon B. Vance. Also sent to Brussels, Paris, London, USUN, and Elisabethville and repeated to Khartoum by pouch.

78. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, July 8, 1961, 5:25 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–261. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Tron and Woodruff; cleared by Blue, Vance, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs J. Wayne Fredericks, and in draft by Sisco; and approved by Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs U. Alexis Johnson. Repeated to Léopoldville, Paris, London, USUN, and Elisabethville.

79. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, July 13, 1961, 2:45–3:45 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–1361. Confidential. Drafted by Blue and approved in S on August 8. The time of the meeting is taken from the Secretary's appointment book. (Johnson Library) Other topics discussed were recorded in separate memoranda of conversation.

80. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Williams) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, July 15, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7– 1561. Confidential. Drafted by Vance and Officer in Charge of United Nations Congo Affairs Jerome Lavallee, concurred in by Tron, and initialed by Williams.

81. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, July 15, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–1561. Confidential. Drafted and initialed by Cleveland.

82. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State

Brussels, July 18, 1961, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–1861. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, USUN, Elisabethville, London, and Paris.

83. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, July 20, 1961, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2061. Secret; Niact. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to Brussels, USUN, Paris, and London.

84. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, July 20, 1961, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2061. Secret. Repeated to Brussels, Elisabethville, USUN, London, Paris, and Brazzaville.

85. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, July 22, 1961, 6:17 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2261. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Vance; cleared by Fredericks, Tasca, and Cleveland; and approved by Johnson. Repeated to USUN.

86. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, July 25, 1961, 9 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2561. Secret; Niact; Eyes Only.

87. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, July 26, 1961, 9:59 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2661. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Vance, cleared by Buffum and in draft by Fredericks and Blue, and approved by Rusk. Also sent to London and Paris and repeated to Brussels and USUN.

88. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, July 28, 1961, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2861. Secret; Niact. Received at 9:55 a.m. and repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, and Paris.

89. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, July 28, 1961, 5:14 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2861. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Vance, cleared by Buffum and Miller in draft, and approved by Fredericks. Also sent to Elisabethville and USUN and repeated to Paris, London, and Brussels.

90. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, July 29, 1961, 5:34 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2961. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Vance, cleared by Fredericks and in draft by Cleveland, and approved by Johnson. Repeated to London, Paris, Brussels, and USUN.

91. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, July 29, 1961, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2961. Confidential; Priority. Received at 4:12 a.m. on July 30. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to Brussels, USUN, Paris, and London.

92. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, August 3, 1961, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–361. Confidential; Priority. Received at 3:01 p.m. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to Brussels, USUN, Paris, and London.

93. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, August 3, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Secret. The source text does not indicate the drafter, but another copy indicates that the memorandum was drafted by Vance. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–361)

94. Memorandum of Conversation

Paris, August 7, 1961, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366, CF 1940. Secret. Drafted by Deputy Director of the Office of Western European Affairs L. Dean Brown and approved in S on August 9. The meeting was held at the Quai d'Orsay. Those not previously identified include Ambassador to France James M. Gavin, Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs Roger W. Tubby, British Ambassador to France Sir Pierson Dixon, and French Ambassador to Laos Pierre-Louis Falaize.

95. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Paris, August 8, 1961, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–861. Confidential. Repeated to USUN, Léopoldville, and Brussels.

96. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, August 11, 1961, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1161. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, Elisabethville, USUN, London, Paris, Khartoum, and Usumbura and pouched to Brazzaville, Lagos, Accra, Bamako, Dakar, Addis Ababa, Cairo, Rabat, and Monrovia.

97. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, August 17, 1961, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1761. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to Brussels.

98. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, August 20, 1961, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–2061. Confidential; Priority. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to Brussels, USUN, Paris, and London.

99. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, August 26, 1961, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–2661. Confidential; Niact. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to Brussels, USUN, Paris, and London.

100. Editorial Note

101. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, August 31, 1961, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–3161. Top Secret; Niact; Eyes Only. Secretary Rusk commented on this telegram in a September 1 telephone conversation with Cleveland. Notes of the conversation by Phyllis D. Bernau read in part as follows:"The Sec thinks this attitude of Linner's is unacceptable particularly when he talks about taking action there to throw out Belgians working there on various administrative jobs. He is not playing completely clear with the SYG because he does not want his hands bound too tightly. He is not a sovereign state and we have a lot at stake. C thought it was extreme in Katanga even though there was provocation. The Sec said to look at it and he thinks we should have a serious talk. He is not the responsible party here and we have a tremendous stake here—we expect to be kept informed and expect the SYG to be informed. If you can mask it in a friendly way, fine." (Ibid., Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192)

1. Editorial Note 1. Editorial Note

At the 473d meeting of the National Security Council on January 5, 1961, Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles discussed developments in the Congo in the course of an oral briefing for the Council on significant world developments. The memorandum of discussion by Deputy NSC Executive Secretary Marion W. Boggs, dated January 5, reads as follows:

"Mr. Dulles then reported that Gizenga had sent a telegram to Khrushchev requesting that the Soviets undertake immediate intervention by force of arms in the Congo. He pointed out that the Soviets had been trying to develop an airlift into Stanleyville but had had difficulties due to the Sudan's refusal to provide refueling rights. The President asked whether the UN forces in the Congo had any combat planes which could interrupt the Soviet airlift. Mr. Dulles said the UN forces would not use planes against the Soviet airlift even if such planes were available. Continuing, he said that Mobutu's first effort against Gizenga had failed and a second effort was now being made. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] indicated that UAR agents were slipping into Stanleyville with arms and money. The UAR nationals going into the Congo were publicly described as technicians.

"Secretary Herter said that the activities of the UAR in the Congo had long disturbed him but he had been unable to indicate the extent of such activities to the Secretary General of the UN because most of our information about them was based on [4 lines of source text not declassified] representatives had briefed the Secretary General on UAR activities in the Congo [8 lines of source text not declassified].

"Mr. Dulles then concluded his briefing on the Congo by noting that the African Conference just starting in Morocco had started on a divisive note. Secretary Herter said he understood that the King of Morocco had turned completely against the idea of an African confederation." (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records)

The conference under reference was a meeting of the heads of state of Ghana, Guinea, Mali, Morocco, and the United Arab Republic, together with representatives of Ceylon, Libya, and the provisional government of Algeria, which met January 3–7 at Casablanca. A declaration on the Congo, issued on January 7, declared the intention of the governments represented to withdraw their troops from the U.N. Operational Command in the Congo; for text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, page 750.

Secretary-General Hammarskjöld was in the Congo January 4–6. For information concerning his visit, see Dayal, Mission for Hammarskjöld: The Congo Crisis, pages 168–172.

2. Special National Intelligence Estimate 2. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, January 10, 1961.

SNIE 65–61

MAIN ELEMENTS IN THE CONGO SITUATION

The Problem

To assess the main factors affecting the situation in the Congo.

Conclusion

1. In the Congo situation, given present trends we see little chance for signal improvement, and virtually none at all for a decisive outcome which would bring early stability. As civil authority continues to be exercised in haphazard, often arbitrary, and sometimes violent fashion, tribal warfare and blood feuds are likely to lead to more widespread disorders. There is no indication that the Congo is developing a national leader, a national party, or a national consciousness. Political instability on a grand scale, probably leading to increased violence and other excesses, both organized and disorganized, appears to be the most likely prospect for the Congo for some time to come. This might result in the disintegration of the Congo into a number of separate states. As long as the UN retains a substantial military force it will probably continue to supply some modicum of public order, and more importantly to put some restraint upon the intervention of outside powers. Yet this restraint will be only partial. It is virtually certain that any individual or faction within the Congo that promises to gain enough power to provide a government will be supported by outside powers, but will be opposed by other Congolese factions which are also supported by outside powers, and so will be rendered largely ineffectual.

Discussion

I. Present Situation

2. There is still no effective central government in the Congo. Large areas of the country, as well as major elements of the national security forces, remain outside of Léopoldville's control. In some outlying areas UN forces have almost no control of the situation. Anarchy lies close to the surface; political fragmentation continues; and the pro-Lumumba regime which has proclaimed itself in Orientale Province may at any time be directly attacked by Mobutu's forces. Meanwhile the UN's diminished ability to serve as a restraining influence on the several external and internal forces maneuvering in the Congo has allowed tensions to rise. Under these circumstances new opportunities for short and long-range Bloc exploitation are increasing.

3. In this condition of political turmoil no one faction or leader can be regarded as having either a firm grip on the reins of government or the chance of establishing an effective administration in the near future. The present governing authority rests on an uneasy collaboration between President Kasavubu, whose position is recognized by nearly all as legal but who wields little actual power, and Colonel Mobutu, whose strength is largely derived from the shifting and transitory loyalties of elements of the Congolese National Army. In general Mobutu ignores Kasavubu and has never explicitly recognized the preeminence of the President's authority. For his part Kasavubu, who derives most of his popular following from Léopoldville Province, is dubious about the extent of Mobutu's political aspirations. The fragile political equilibrium now tacitly accepted by both men could break down at any time.

4. Lumumba retains considerable influence in his home province, Orientale; probably enjoys more popular support throughout the rest of the country than any other leader; and has powerful friends among African nationalists and in the Bloc. In the eyes of the UN Secretary General as well as of many UN members he still has a legal basis to his claim for the Premiership. He may return to power. Yet even he would almost certainly be unable to extend his authority over the entire country without extreme difficulty and probably much violence. He would be hampered—as would any other government—by the various disruptive political forces at work throughout the country, the exacerbation of the Congo's massive fundamental social and economic problems since independence, and the lack of competent administrative and military personnel. He would, however, receive considerable aid from the Bloc and from such African countries as Ghana, Guinea, and the UAR.

II. Basic Problems and Political Forces

A. Internal

5. Important factors evident in the Congo's political, social, and economic life suggest that events are likely to continue in near chaotic fashion for a long time regardless of the outcome of the immediate struggle for political power. The country was grossly unprepared for independence. The Congolese people, largely illiterate and primitive, had no concept of national unity. Prior to independence there had been no long continued struggle for liberation, which might have produced a feeling of unity and brought forward strong national leaders. Thus the sudden grant of political independence to a weak Congo government was accompanied by terrorism and a resurgence of tribalism; nearly all the inexperienced and unstable political groupings that appeared on the scene were based on tribal associations and were concerned mainly with local interests. Although the tribes represent the only visible basis for an indigenous political organization, they offer little hope of coping with the Congo's problems.

6. Political institutions such as the provisional constitution and parliament, hastily erected as independence loomed, proved unable to function when the administrative order imposed and operated by the Belgians dissolved. Thereafter the Congolese executive did not have at its disposal the normal instruments of power such as a loyal security force and an effective administrative organization. The almost total lack of trained Congolese makes a competent indigenous administration of the country out of the question for a long time to come.

7. The Congo National Army (CNA) is a scattered, disorganized, and undisciplined force, consisting of about 20,000 men of the former Force Publique. Tribal animosities or immediate needs, such as food and pay, often determine the direction of CNA loyalties and the course of the troops' frequently capricious and disruptive actions. Nevertheless, the force remains a key factor in the situation, since nearly all important Congolese factions depend upon some army units for support. Most of Mobutu's power stems from about 8,000 troops in the Léopoldville area, and from less dependable units in Equateur and Kasai Provinces. Mobutu also apparently draws some support from about half the 3,500 troops in Orientale Province; the remainder probably back the Stanleyville regime. About 3,000 troops in Kivu Province have generally supported the nearly autonomous provincial government, but have now yielded to pressures and blandishments from Stanleyville. Tshombé, in Katanga, relies on a Belgian-led force of 4,000, much of which has been recently recruited, and which is wholly independent of the Congo National Army.

8. Although the new Congolese Government was established on a national and centralized plan, resurgent tribalism and the absence of national consciousness quickly posed the fundamental problem of separatism. Tribal antagonisms became crucial and unsettling political issues, both within the central government and in its relationships with the tribally dominated provincial governments. The breakdown in order which undermined the authority of the national government provided a ready-made opportunity for local leaders to proclaim autonomy.

9. Apart from the government in Léopoldville there are now three more-or-less independent regimes in the Congo: one in Katanga, one in South Kasai, and one in Stanleyville. Of these the last probably deserves most attention, at least for the near future. This regime was proclaimed on 13 December by two of Lumumba's principal lieutenants, Antoine Gizenga and Bernard Salumu. It is precariously based on terrorism in and around Stanleyville, and on such popular support as Lumumba still enjoys in much of Orientale Province. It calls itself the legitimate government of the entire Congo. The regime is poorly led at present, and scarcely organized at all. Yet it has shown a good deal of vitality. The Bloc and certain African states are already attempting to set up a military supply line to it, and the regime has recently succeeded in establishing some control over neighboring Kivu Province. Its importance would be greatly increased if Lumumba should escape to Stanleyville to direct it and rally additional support. It is possible that the Bloc, together with the African states which favor Lumumba, may recognize it as the legitimate Congolese Government.

10. At present the separatist issue is also acute in Katanga Province, where Premier Tshombé has declared a tentative state of independence. In recent years Katanga has accounted for about 50 percent of the Congo's national income. Since its mineral properties still remain in Belgian hands, and since Tshombé relies heavily on Belgian technical and military advice, his regime has drawn sharp criticism from Africans and Asians generally as a colonial puppet. While Tshombé is today generally master in much of Katanga, he would almost certainly be unable to survive without Belgian help. On the other hand his departure, or the withdrawal of the Belgians, would probably throw all of Katanga into economic and tribal chaos, and the riches of the territory would invite invasion from elsewhere in the Congo.

11. In spite of the sharp reduction of income from Katanga Province, the Congolese economy as a whole has shown an ability to stumble along precariously, nourished from time to time by emergency measures from external agencies. While severe famine exists in South Kasai, where tribal warfare is rife, the locally produced food supply has been generally adequate in the rest of the country, and a high rate of urban unemployment since early spring has not yet resulted in overt labor unrest. The majority of Congolese live in villages, with their livelihood dependent upon subsistence farming, hunting, and fishing. For the most part the economy of these settlements remains unaffected by other than local calamities.

12. Nevertheless, the sustained political crisis cannot fail to have serious effects on the modern segment of the economy. About one-third of the Congolese population is now at least partially dependent upon the money economy, as rural villagers have been attracted to the labor markets of the large cities, the mines, and plantations. Investment and government spending have virtually dried up, the transportation and distribution system has slowed, and small business has greatly suffered. Large sums urgently needed for balance of payments, budgetary, and rehabilitation requirements are not now available in the Congo; they can come only from sources abroad. Thus, additional prolonged political instability would have economic consequences of the utmost gravity, and of unpredictable magnitude. Furthermore, should Katanga remain autonomous or independent the balance of the Congo would be separated from its principal income base.

B. External

The Belgians

13. The return of some 3,000 Belgians to the Congo, the continued presence of more than 20,000 who never departed, and the activities of prominent Belgians in the entourages of Kasavubu and Tshombé, have stirred resentment in the UN, elsewhere in Africa, and, of course, among the "Lumumbists." There is no evidence to suggest that these Belgians are involved in a "recolonialization plan" concocted by the Belgian Government or in the board rooms of the Union Minière. Nevertheless they are widely considered to be the advance party of a revised colonialism, and their presence is taken as evidence of the determination of the Belgians to regain their control of the country. Moreover, by assisting the Congolese outside UN channels, by supporting separatist movements, and by providing military equipment and financial aid to anti-Lumumbists, the Belgians have come to loggerheads with the UN Secretary General and have left themselves open to Bloc and Afro-Asian charges that they are attempting to reimpose colonial rule.

14. The Belgians remaining in the Congo include civil and technical advisors; over 2,000 employees of the Léopoldville government; staffs of large commercial enterprises in Kasai and Katanga; soldiers of fortune as well as Belgian officers and NCO's serving the regimes in Léopoldville, Elisabethville, and South Kasai; small businessmen, missionaries, and teachers. They are widely diffused over the countryside. Like the Belgians at home, and the government in Brussels, they are very much puzzled and distressed by the disaster which has befallen them and their interests. There is certainly no united aim or clear purpose in their present activities; indeed there are so few basic objectives common to all of them as to suggest that neither the Belgian Government nor any other Belgian interests have as yet a coordinated long-range policy toward their future role, if any, in the Congo.

15. In fact, the Belgians remain the only available source for an estimated 4,700 essential government positions. They supply, in addition, thousands of needed teachers and artisans, and were at one time counted on to provide important financial and development assistance. On the other hand, Belgian prestige was badly damaged even before independence and many Congolese are resentful of the Belgian presence. Even if the Belgians should weather current storms, they will face residual Congolese bitterness, drives for "Congolization," and pressures from elsewhere in Africa. This makes it unlikely that they will continue to play an important role in the future of the Congo. On the other hand, it is difficult to see how any reasonably competent administration of the country can be conducted without them.

The African States

16. At the beginning of the Congo crisis most of the independent African states supported UN intervention as a means of forcing the withdrawal of Belgian troops and re-establishing the authority of the Lumumba central government. Many of them also looked upon the UN's Congo venture as affording them an opportunity to enhance their prestige on the world scene and to broaden their influence in the UN. They all agreed on the basic goals of ending colonialism in the Congo and as far as possible keeping the cold war out of the African continent.

17. As the situation developed, however, diversities of opinion emerged among the African states. Ghana, Guinea, and the UAR showed themselves firm partisans of Lumumba. They found in him a kindred radical nationalist spirit attuned to their policy of eradicating colonial influences while using East-West competition for assistance in building an African power bloc. More recently, Morocco and, on a diplomatic level, Mali have associated themselves with this group. On the other hand, 12 of the most recently independent French-speaking African states support Kasavubu. They desire to offset Ghana and Guinea's expansionist ambitions in West Africa, and are less apprehensive of continuing connections with the former metropole. Tunisia, Liberia, and Ethiopia have committed themselves to no Congolese faction, and would like to see an impartial and orderly solution of the Congo's problems by the UN. Nigeria falls generally into the same category. Nevertheless, these four countries also regard Lumumba as the legal Prime Minister. The Sudan has voted with the Guinea-Ghana-UAR faction in the UN, but up to the time of writing has not given support to Lumumba in the Congo. Nor has the government openly granted general transit rights to the countries supporting the Stanleyville regime, though at least one UAR aircraft did transit Sudan en route to Lisala in Equateur Province.

18. As these differences appeared the Congo became a focus of conflicting interests among rival African leaders. Some states have played an aggressively active role, while others, particularly the former French African states, have displayed more caution, and have sought to undercut radical African nationalists, such as Nkrumah, both inside and outside the Congo. Despite the recent expulsion from the Congo of the diplomatic missions of Ghana, Guinea, and the UAR, these states will continue to meddle in Congolese affairs. They have come to view any actions taken in the Congo that do not serve Lumumba's cause, including those taken by the UN, as playing into the hands of the "imperialists." They continue to regard strong unitary states under radical leadership as their natural allies in creating a bloc strong enough to enforce a policy of "Africa for the Africans" and hastening the advent of similar regimes elsewhere in Africa. They are willing to accept Soviet assistance to achieve these goals as a means of balancing what they believe to be colonialist pressures in the Congo.

The Bloc

19. The Congo has also become a battleground in the East-West struggle, although the UN has to some extent provided a buffer between the major powers. Soviet hopes of capitalizing quickly on the Congo's troubles to gain a foothold in Central Africa suffered an early setback. At least temporarily stymied in carrying out direct intervention in the Congo, the USSR now welcomes continuing chaos and unrest. However, the USSR and the Bloc have been generally successful in identifying their interests in the Congo with those of radical African nationalists. By supporting African radicals in the Congo, and by openly maneuvering in the UN, the Soviets seek to re-establish Lumumba and their technical and military missions. In a broader context they have found the issue increasingly useful in their general attacks on the West as the stronghold of colonialism. It has been particularly useful in their campaign to damage the prestige of the UN, especially of the Secretary General.

The United Nations

20. The Congo operation represents by far the largest and most complex task yet undertaken by the UN and much of that body's standing is staked on its success. Yet the UN's present undertaking to maintain law and order without supporting any Congolese faction is almost impossible to carry through. By and large, the UN has been successful in preventing unilateral interventions and partially limiting tribal conflagrations. However, continuing political and civil chaos has placed the UN in the crossfire of both local and international political struggle, where either action or inaction provokes criticism by the participants and their foreign supporters. Much of the Afro-Asian world, supported and inspired by the Bloc, regards UN actions in the Congo as constituting opposition to Lumumba and support of "imperialism." On the other hand, some of the UN's own forces, notably the Ghana, Guinea, and UAR contingents, have used the UN label to support Lumumba. The weaknesses of Léopoldville governments, and the general state of disorder—as well as the contradictions inherent in the assigned mission to maintain law and order without taking sides—have made it nearly impossible for the overextended UN forces to do more than deal with day to day emergencies.

III. Prospects

21. No clear direction of events can be discerned among the countervailing forces and capricious actions which characterize the Congo situation. On the other hand, the interests and aims of outside powers—the Bloc, the West, the various African states—are to a large degree contradictory. These interests meet and clash in the UN; they have made a decisive UN policy impossible in the past few months, and they will almost certainly continue to do so in the months to come. The vigor with which these contradictory aims are pursued, however, and the methods employed, depend considerably upon the course of events within the Congo itself, and this course is determined almost as much by accident as by design. Thus any firm estimate of the future is out of the question. It may nevertheless be useful to examine briefly a few possibilities, and consider some of their implications.

22. One possibility is that some form of confederation might be achieved by the Léopoldville-Kasai-Katanga regimes, perhaps after a conference assembled by Kasavubu. The chances of this occurring appear to fluctuate almost from day to day, and to range from negligible to something slightly better than even. Even if such a confederation were formed, it is almost certain that neither Lumumba personally, nor the Stanleyville regime, would associate with it. Accordingly, it would be supported neither by the Bloc nor, in all probability, by the Guinea-Ghana-UAR group of African states; indeed it would probably have to cope with their active hostility, implemented through their support of the rival Stanleyville regime (assuming that regime continued in existence). Even under the most favorable of circumstances, the confederation would still be confronted by the basic weakness and immaturity of Congolese political and administrative institutions which led to the present crisis, and it would be a long time before a relatively stable and responsible political order could emerge, even at the regional level. Nevertheless, if the confederation came into existence at all, the circumstances would probably be such as to give it a fair chance of surviving. It would almost certainly receive assistance from the UN, and would probably be politically strong enough to accept Belgian help in administering the country.

23. The return of Lumumba to power is another possibility, particularly as long as Stanleyville offers a base of operations. A new Lumumba bid for power would almost certainly have the vigorous support of the Bloc and of various African and Asian states. However, it is probable that Lumumba would still be unable to extend his power to Léopoldville unless the Kasavubu-Mobutu position disintegrated, and he would almost certainly be unable to gain control over Katanga except by fighting. Thus Lumumba's seizure of the initiative would probably usher in a period of intensified conflicts in which East-West lines would be sharply drawn and the present position of the UN gravely impaired and perhaps destroyed.

24. It is possible that the UN presence in the Congo might be so weakened as to become negligible, or that it might be ended altogether. This might occur in various ways: if several states separately withdrew their forces from the country, or left them in the country but withdrew them from the UN command. Or the UN itself, frustrated by difficulties, dissensions, and lack of money, might terminate the enterprise. The result would be to make the Congo an unrestricted area of conflict among the various outside powers, which have hitherto been restrained to a considerable degree by the UN presence. Nkrumah has already invited nine counties, including the UAR, to join Ghana in forming an army under African command for possible intervention in the Congo. This has been agreed to in principle by the nations appearing at the Casablanca Conference. The withdrawal or threat of withdrawal of any of the forces of the countries concerned would have a serious impact on the UN. Any African High Command formed, however, almost certainly would not establish any effective military force. The USSR probably will not become involved in a direct military intervention in the Congo, but it would almost certainly provide direction and support, including supplies of food, ammunition, and military equipment, to any radical African nationalist or pro-Communist African force which remained in the Congo after UN withdrawal. Moreover, a large Soviet aid effort—by air or overland through the Sudan to Stanleyville—could materialize if Lumumba's followers should be able to sustain themselves in Orientale Province, or if the regime received recognition from other African states or the Bloc. Should this occur, an inter-African war might result, with the Stanleyville regime receiving strong backing and material aid from the radical African nationalists, as well as from other states such as the Sudan which might be pressured into aiding their cause.

25. On the whole, it seems to us likely that pressures to force the UN to withdraw from the Congo can be successfully resisted. There appears to be some recognition among the African states, and in the Congo itself, that the consequences of a UN withdrawal would almost certainly be disastrous. For a while, at least, we believe that the UN will stay. It may be suggested, however, that if one or another faction in the Congo felt itself to be in a fair way to establish control, and if it also felt that the activities of the UN were lessening its chances, then it might demand UN withdrawal and its demand might be backed up by its partisans among the outside powers.

26. In sum, given present trends we see little chance for signal improvement in the Congo situation, and virtually none at all for a decisive outcome which would bring early stability. As civil authority continues to be exercised in haphazard, often arbitrary, and sometimes violent fashion, tribal warfare and blood feuds are likely to lead to more widespread disorders. There is no indication that the Congo is developing a national leader, a national party, or a national consciousness. Political instability on a grand scale, probably leading to increased violence and other excesses, both organized and disorganized, appears to be the most likely prospect for the Congo for some time to come. This might result in the disintegration of the Congo into a number of separate states. As long as the UN retains a substantial military force it will probably continue to supply some modicum of public order, and more importantly to put some restraint upon the intervention of outside powers. Yet this restraint will be only partial. It is virtually certain that any individual or faction within the Congo that promises to gain enough power to provide a government will be supported by outside powers, but will be opposed by other Congolese factions which are also supported by outside powers, and so will be rendered largely ineffectual.

[Here follows a map of the Republic of the Congo.]

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency Files. Secret. National Intelligence Estimates (NIEs) and Special National Intelligence Estimates (SNIEs) were interdepartmental reports drafted by officers from agencies represented on the Intelligence Advisory Committee (IAC), coordinated by the Office of National Estimates of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), approved by the IAC, and circulated to the President, the National Security Council, and other appropriate officers of cabinet level. A note on the cover sheet reads in part as follows: "Submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence. The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff. Concurred in by the United States Intelligence Board on 10 January 1961." The representatives of the AEC and FBI abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

3. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 3. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, January 10, 1961, 7 p.m.

1501. Embtel 1498.2 Even discounting reports transmitted reference telegrams, I am genuinely alarmed at direction in which military developments are going and I am increasingly skeptical of capacity of Mobutu or GOC to arrest, let alone reverse, it. Loyalists of ANC units have always been tenuous and fluid; they go along with their paymasters, they do not like to fight and they like to be on winning side. It would be not at all surprising if ANC troops now in this area were to interpret present or further advances of Gizenga's troops as wave of immediate future and decide to join them. Neither the troops nor more than a handful of their officers know what that would mean for them or their country.

There have been recurring rumors recently to effect that Mobutu has been negotiating with Lumumba on formula which would permit return latter to government, not necessarily as Prime Minister. We have until now discounted such rumors but feel they can no longer be ignored. The inactivity of Mobutu's troops in face of advances by those of Gizenga, and the Bukavu fiasco, may be indications such dickering. We also have reports on fairly reliable authority of differences between Kasavubu and Mobutu on several counts, (1) formation of new government and (2) proposal to encourage Sendwe to go to north Katanga. For our reaction to latter proposal see Embtels 1491,3 and 1498. We also know that Bomboko and Ndele4 have been unsuccessfully prodding Mobutu to take military action against Stanleyville. Mobutu has said he will not be able to take field until March 1 which would, in our opinion, be much too late.

We have viewed (and reported) with mounting concern directives and actions of UN military forces and results therefrom. It seems clear to us that Kivu was handed over to Gizenga after which Mobutu's attempt to regain position there was hamstrung. The invasion of the so-called neutral zone in north Katanga was not opposed by UN but an Indian source close to Rikhye quotes him as saying "UN is just waiting for Tshombe's forces to violate neutral zone."

We have quite reliable information that UAR plane at Lisala unloaded arms, money and supplies for Gizenga under UAR troop protection while UN has reported plane understood be carrying only "recreational supplies" for troops there. Should note UN has had to rely on UAR troops alone for direct intelligence from Lisala and Equateur area.

I am also disturbed over reports and attitudes of Duran (UNOC civil head Orientale) and UNOC acceptance authority Gizenga government over province Kivu.

Reports of UN military distribution and plans to concentrate in large centers is further indication that control, never very extensive, in most of Congo will go to ANC.

It is therefore not exaggerating to say we may now be very close to a takeover by Lumumba. Momentum is being built up and it could go very fast in this country where deals can be made tomorrow which appear impossible today. Even though the opening formula might not disturb Kasavubu as Chief of State or restore Lumumba as Prime Minister immediately, there is no question in my mind that it would be but a short time before he would manage, with a respectable parliamentary facade, to install himself as dictator.

This would, of course, face us with the most serious problem of continued support for UN effort in Congo, if indeed it could continue at all. The possibility of withdrawal has already been presented to Kasavubu in the recent letter from Hammarskjöld, and Lumumba can be expected to demand again that it serve his policies or get out.

It seems to me that such eventuality would shake the UN to its very foundation. Under the most generous interpretation, it would mean that the effort of the UN to aid the Congo had failed and that the country had been pushed into the Communist camp under UN aegis and with a substantial UN military force in place which could have prevented it. I wonder whether the import of such an event is understood by the small nations (many of whom are performing the UN effort) which stand to lose their greatest insurance to date against becoming themselves victims in an unmoderated power struggle.

We have done what we could, under our self imposed abstention, to encourage a fair and just solution for the benefit of the Congo and its people. Our policy and actions have been in keeping with our own high principles. What we should do in the event that Communist intervention gets the upper hand is, I hope, a matter which is being given urgent consideration by Department and other agencies.

Meanwhile, and more urgently, I would welcome any indication that we might now be prepared to take a stronger line in UN which could counter the trend which this report indicates. I feel very certain that we have reached the most critical juncture in the Congo and that the result may well affect deeply the whole future of the UN.

Timberlake

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1061. Secret; Priority. Also sent to USUN and repeated to Brussels, Elisabethville, Paris, and London.

2 Telegram 1498, January 10, conveyed reports on a number of recent developments. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 1491, January 9, reported a conversation with Jason Sendwe, who represented Elisabethville in the Congolese Chamber of Representatives. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–961)

4 Albert Ndele, Commissioner for Finance.

4. Editorial Note 4. Editorial Note

At the 474th meeting of the National Security Council on January 12, Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles commented on developments in the Congo during his briefing on significant world developments, and a brief discussion ensued. According to the memorandum of discussion by Marion W. Boggs, January 12, Dulles reported: "In Léopoldville, our Ambassador is alarmed over developments and skeptical about Mobutu's ability to remain in power. Lumumba may even return to power.

"Secretary Herter said he had the strong feeling that our interests have not been advanced by the way the UN operation in the Congo had been conducted. In response to a question from the President, Secretary Herter said both the Secretary General of the UN and Dayal, the UN Representative in the Congo, were responsible for this situation. For example, Egypt had been allowed to use troops against the UN.

"The President said one of our most serious problems soon would be the determination of our relations with the UN. He felt the UN had made a major error in admitting to membership any nation claiming independence. Ultimately, the UN may have to leave U.S. territory." (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records)

5. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 5. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, January 12, 1961, 8:22 p.m.

1273. You should approach SYG soonest with view obtaining his full assessment current situation in Congo. In course discussion you should make following points:

US greatly concerned that situation in Congo has seriously deteriorated despite fact UNGA has accepted Kasavubu authority and UN has nearly 20,000 troops stationed in Congo. Pro-Lumumba elements, with outside support contrary to UN resolutions, extending their influence to substantial part of Congo territory. We are especially disturbed at reports, as yet unconfirmed, that participants Casablanca Conference secretly agreed there should be coup d'etat in March in which their troops would be used outside UNOC framework to assist in restoring Lumumba to power, confronting UN with fait accompli. We believe SYG should be reminded strongly that if Congo falls under Communist domination while UN sharing major responsibility for security of country, the results in US public and Congressional opinion likely to be extremely damaging to UN. We therefore request he consider taking all necessary steps to rectify situation. Following are concrete suggestions we hope he will consider urgently: 1. Replace Dayal soonest. As result series of incidents, we have no doubt Dayal's sympathy for return Lumumba and that his conduct of UN operations reflects this bias. We believe his removal too long delayed, and that Dayal's activities have contributed substantially to deterioration of situation in Congo.

2. Now that Guinea has requested withdrawal its troops from UN Command, we believe SYG should consider encouraging withdrawal of those other contingents who have proved most unreliable and who threatened withdrawal anyway. In particular, Ghana, the UAR and perhaps even Morocco.

3. To fill future requirement, believe SYG should again consider urgently requesting troops from more reliable countries, such as French-African States, Latin America, etc. and increasing contingents from reliable countries already furnishing forces.

4. Any unreliable forces that would remain should as far as possible be placed in less strategic positions. In particular we have in mind urgent need to transfer UAR troops from present critical location in Equateur Province.

5. We also believe stiffer and more precise instructions should be issued ONUC forces to prevent recurrence such incidents as kidnapping of Kivu political leaders and indifference to local acts of violence.

6. Responsibilities UN forces in Katanga must be clarified so that their position does not continue to redound to benefit of Lumumba group. Either they must assure against incursion of neutral zone as was provided in initial agreement as recorded in Dayal's Second Progress Report (A/4557, pp. 25–26)2 or they should not contemplate restraining Tshombe in his legitimate efforts to counter such takeover (Deptel 322 to Léopoldville, repeated USUN 1264).3

We are continuing our efforts with President Kasavubu to bring about cabinet government along lines of our earlier discussions with SYG. We regret that this has not already been achieved.4

Herter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1261. Secret; Priority. Drafted by William I. Cargo, Director of the Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs (UNP), Joseph J. Sisco, Deputy Director of that office, and William B. Buffum, Officer in Charge of United Nations Political Affairs; cleared by Deputy Under Secretary of State Raymond A. Hare and Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Joseph C. Satterthwaite; and approved by Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs Woodruff Wallner. Repeated to Léopoldville.

2 Dated November 2. The reference is to an October 17 agreement between the U.N. Command and Katangan authorities providing for a neutral zone in northern Katanga.

3 The reference should be to telegram 322 to Elisabethville, January 11, also sent to Léopoldville, which instructed the Consulate and the Embassy to inform U.N. authorities of the U.S. view that the U.N. Command should either prevent violation of the neutral zone by advancing forces from Stanleyville or permit Tshombe to take such action. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1061)

4 Telegram 1930 from USUN, January 14, reported a joint U.S.–U.K. approach to Hammarskjöld, in which Representative to the United Nations James J. Wadsworth set forth the views contained in this telegram. Hammarskjöld's attitude was antagonistic but telegram 1930 noted that "knowledge from time to time of fairly stiff attitude on our part continues to help counter pressure he is receiving from others." (Ibid., 770G.00/1– 1461)

6. Editorial Note 6. Editorial Note

On January 17, former Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba and two of his associates, Maurice Mpolo and Jeseph Okita, were removed from the Congolese army camp at Thysville where they had been imprisoned since December 3, 1960, and flown to Elisabethville, where they were put into jeeps and removed from the airport. They were never seen again by independent witnesses. Katangan Minister of the Interior Godefroid Munongo announced on February 10 that they had escaped from prison and stated on February 13 that they had been killed by Katangan villagers the previous day. A U.N. commission subsequently established to investigate the circumstances of Lumumba's death concluded that Lumumba and his associates had been killed at Elisabethville on January 17.

According to the U.N. commission report, Lumumba and his companions were taken by a representative of the Congolese Sûreté to an airport near Thysville and flown on a small plane to Moanda, from which they were flown to Elisabethville on an Air-Congo DC–4. The plan was reportedly to take them to Bakwanga, capital of South Kasai, the government of which was headed by Albert Kalonji, an avowed enemy of Lumumba, but the plane was diverted to Elisabethville, apparently because U.N. troops were at the Bakwanga airport. According to several accounts, the prisoners were beaten during the flight and were further beaten while being transferred to jeeps at the Elisabethville airport. The report concluded that Lumumba and his companions had been killed on January 17 near Elisabethville, probably in the presence of high officials of the government of Katanga Province. (Report of the Commission of Investigation established under the terms of U.N. General Assembly Resolution 1601 (XV) of April 15, 1961, dated November 11, 1961; U.N. document S/4976 (also A/4964)).

A January 17 CIA report, based on information from a Belgian source in Léopoldville, stated that the Congolese Government had moved Lumumba to Bakwanga that day. (TDCS 3/462,509; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 319, Assistant Chief of Staff, G–2 (Intelligence), "Secret" Incoming and Outgoing Messages, 1961, Congo/Army) A CIA report of January 19 stated that the January 17 report was sent on the basis of information that Lumumba was being moved to Bakwanga and that only after he reached Elisabethville was it learned that the plans had been changed. The January 19 report, based on information from Congolese sources in Léopoldville, stated that the Congolese Government had decided at the last minute to take Lumumba to Elisabethville because it believed he would be murdered on arrival in Bakwanga and that this would turn world opinion against it. (TDCS 3/462,726; ibid.) Despatch 295 from Léopoldville, February 7, based on a report from a "reliable informant," provided a more detailed account of Lumumba's transfer to Elisabethville. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–761)

Rumors of Lumumba's death began to circulate soon after his arrival in Elisabethville. Consul William Canup stated in telegram 420 from Elisabethville, January 20, that he thought it was impossible to disregard persistent rumors that Lumumba had died shortly after his arrival as a result of mistreatment. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–2061) Unconfirmed reports of his death, originating in Léopoldville, are recorded in CIA reports of February 7, 8, and 9. (TDCS 3/464,615, TDCS 3/464,787, and TDCS 3/464,885; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 319, Assistant Chief of Staff, G–2 (Intelligence), "Secret" Incoming and Outgoing Messages, 1961, Congo/Army)

CIA telegrams of February 9 and 10 from Elisabethville noted conflicting reports, however. The February 10 telegram stated, "Lumumba fate is best keep secret in Katanga. In addition, consulate démarche to Munongo to request humane treatment for Lumumba has caused GOK make every effort deny firm data to US Govt." (Telegrams 0370 and 0372 from Elisabethville, February 9 and 10, respectively; Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Congressional Affairs, Review Staff Files) Regarding the Consulate démarche, see Document 8.

The Select Committee established by the Senate in January 1975 to investigate U.S. intelligence activities concluded that although CIA representatives in Léopoldville were aware of Congolese plans to move Lumumba to Bakwanga, neither they nor CIA representatives in Elisabethville had advance knowledge that Lumumba would be taken to Katanga. The committee also concluded that in spite of CIA activities in late 1960 aimed at bringing about Lumumba's demise, CIA representatives in the Congo were not involved in Lumumba's death and had no certain information concerning his fate after his arrival in Katanga. (Senate Select Committee To Study Governmental Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities, Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders: An Interim Report, Senate Report No. 94–465, 94th Congress, 1st Session, pages 49–51) Documentation available to the editors in Central Intelligence Agency records as well as in records of the Department of State and other agencies, the Eisenhower Library, and the Kennedy Library supports these conclusions. See also Document 44.

7. Briefing Paper Prepared in the Department of State 7. Briefing Paper Prepared in the Department of State1

Washington, undated.

THE CONGO AND THE AFRICAN SITUATION

The pro-Lumumba regime of Antoine Gizenga in Stanleyville has consolidated its hold over Orientale Province and adjoining Kivu Province. It has invaded Northern Katanga as far as Manono, about 300 miles from Elisabethville. Although the Katanga army is loyal to Tshombe, for the moment at least, the invaders are supported by local Baluba leaders who violently oppose Tshombe. The United Nations has attempted to block the pro-Lumumba invasion of the Katanga and we have reports of serious fighting between UN (Nigerian) forces and Congo National Army (CNA) units at the Manono airport. Tshombe has refused to attend the round-table conference of political leaders called by Kasavubu for January 25, but talks aimed at rapprochement are continuing. The situation is equally bad in Kivu with anti-white activities reported. UN contingents have been reinforced, but have taken no action to neutralize pro-Lumumba forces in the province. Long-distance firing has broken out between CNA units in Goma and Belgian forces in Kisenyi, just across the border in Ruanda-Urundi.

No effective counterforce is presently available to block the extension of the power of the Stanleyville regime, and they may attempt to move into Equateur and Kasai Provinces in the near future. The longer the Stanleyville regime continues in power, the greater is the likelihood of a permanent division of the Congo which might become another source both of protracted East-West conflict and of serious division among African states themselves.

We have approached both the French and the British for their views. The British have little new to offer, but the French might be more inclined to favor unilateral Western support for the Kasavubu regime. In this connection, a Kasavubu representative has now asked Belgium for military aid. The French have not yet taken a position on the request and the UK is completely unsympathetic. We believe a UN solution is still the best answer for the Congo and that the advantage of adherence to our policy of support for the UN outweighs possible advantages inherent in a program of unilateral action in the Congo.

The effect of the Congo on the Afro-Asian world has been divisive in the extreme with three basic blocs discernible. That formed by Ghana, Guinea, Morocco and the UAR has actively backed Lumumba as a radical anti-colonial nationalist. Toure of Guinea and Nkrumah of Ghana have, in addition, entertained hopes of using Lumumba in their efforts to gain leadership of West Africa and the Pan-African movement. The support of this bloc for the UN effort has been in direct proportion to the amount of assistance the UN appeared to be giving Lumumba at any given time. A second group composed of India, Tunisia, Liberia, Ethiopia and Malaya has remained essentially committed to a UN solution in the Congo and a revival of parliamentary government, rather than support for Lumumba personally. The third group, which must be considered to include the United States, groups the 11 French-speaking African states which met at Brazzaville, December 15–20, and which have supported Kasavubu.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.11–KE/1–1861. Secret. This briefing paper, unsigned and undated, was prepared for a January 19 meeting between President Eisenhower and President-elect Kennedy. It was enclosed with a memorandum of January 18 from Director of the Department of State Executive Secretariat Walter J. Stoessel, Jr., to Staff Secretary to the President Brigadier General Andrew J. Goodpaster, which states that it had been approved by the Secretary. Kennedy's adviser Clark M. Clifford and Secretary of Defense-designate Robert S. McNamara both summarized the discussion at the meeting in separate memoranda to Kennedy, both dated January 24; neither memorandum records any discussion of the Congo. (Ibid., Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, White House Correspondence, 1/61–11/63, and Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3464, respectively)

8. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 8. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, January 20, 1961, 9 a.m.

421. Re Department telegram 343.2 During call on Minister Interior Munongo today I had occasion to raise question of treatment of prisoner Lumumba with him, in accordance with reference instruction, underlining that Department's interest in his welfare stems from considerations of international opinion and not from tender feelings toward him. Munongo said, speaking for himself only, that he astounded that USG would raise question of welfare of prisoner while thousands of victims have died or will die throughout Congo which Communist Lumumba disrupted. When I repeated reason for USG position, Munongo said he and rest of Katanga Government stand on their own feet in present circumstances and give no credit to world opinion. Munongo added that in former times West African dictators such as Nkrumah or Sekou Toure had no influence in central Africa and Katanga Government intends that it remain that way.

Munongo said Lumumba in safe keeping outside Elisabethville and receiving same treatment as any prisoner anywhere in world. He did not indicate Lumumba being well-treated or in good physical condition. On other hand, Katanga Government today issued denial Lumumba beaten up on arrival here, adding that, as Consulate has reported,3 Lumumba arrived with head injuries. Berendsen4 told me UN report on arrival of prisoner did not indicate that any mistreatment occurred at airport.

Comment: I request Department's opinion whether, in view of conversation with Munongo, this matter should be taken up with Tshombe himself. I believe such move would be counterproductive and would dissipate little remaining influence USG has here. Also, I believe that any effort to convince Katanga Government not to make use of its white legion in combatting Lumumbist ANC doomed to failure and would probably lead to another explosive incident between Tshombe and Consulate.

Further instructions requested.5

Canup

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2061. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville.

2 Telegram 343, January 18, instructed Canup to inform Tshombe that the U.S. Government deplored reports that Lumumba had been severely beaten by the gendarmerie upon his arrival at Elisabethville and it hoped he would be given humane treatment and his case disposed of in accordance with the law. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–1861) In telegram 412 from Elisabethville, January 18, Canup reported that Lumumba had been transferred there from Thysville and commented, "I believe there is certain chance authorities will permit harm to him, possibly 'suicide' or other mishap." (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 415 from Elisabethville, January 19, reported that all Consulate officers had heard reports from various sources that Lumumba had arrived in Elisabethville with a badly beaten face. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–1961)

4 U.N. representative in Katanga Ian Berendsen.

5 Telegram 354 to Elisabethville, January 23, stated that the approach to Munongo appeared to be sufficient and agreed that an approach to Tshombe might be counterproductive. (Department of State, Central Files, 770.G.00/1–2061)

9. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State 9. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State1

Brussels, January 23, 1961, 7 p.m.

1358. I am seriously concerned about rapidly deteriorating situation in Congo and ill-considered Belgian attempts to respond to it (Deptel 1355)2 which come at time when we are re-thinking our own position and have no firm guidance to offer.

All recent telegrams from Ambassador Timberlake (Léopoldville's 1517 to Department3 latest example) indicate that UN effort in Congo has been completely unable to restore law and order and continues to pursue policy partly responsible for present serious situation. Mobutu-Kasavubu regime shows little sign of reorganizing itself into more permanent and effective government and appears increasingly to be losing control of own military. On other hand, Gizenga-Lumumba group is growing in strength and rapidly expanding its sphere of influence.

Large numbers of Belgians still in Kivu and Orientale now in serious danger from Lumumbist CNA. Belgian government and people, which still have strong emotional ties and extensive economic interest in Congo, are understandably responding with dismay to present Congo situation. This reaction has led to ill-planned, uncoordinated and inadequate attempts to improve military situation (Embtels 1345 and 1354)4 which I have had the greatest trouble in discouraging. I am fully aware that unilateral measures outside framework of general Western policy can serve only to destroy position of Belgium and West in UN and in Africa without any countervailing advantage, but situation is in part result of vacuum created by failure to formulate clear and effective US policy.

In my view, disapproval of initial Belgian response to Bomboko request (Embtel 1293, Deptel 1341)5 is not enough. If we are not able to formulate clear US policy on Congo to deal with rapidly deteriorating situation and sell it to our allies rather soon, different elements in Belgium will, in spite of my efforts, continue to supply their own paramilitary ad hoc solutions, greatly complicating the situation.

I appreciate fact that our position is being formulated on urgent basis (Deptel 1271)6 and that Congo is by no means only serious situation confronting Department. However, my concern is increased by Deptel information 13257 and Burgess reply (Polto 978)8 which suggest there may be delay of several weeks before we re-think our Congo policy.

I am fully aware of number and difficulties of issues involved. However, there is great time pressure on us both in Belgium and in Congo. I therefore suggest that you give consideration to recalling Timberlake and me for immediate consultation in order to help develop coherent and positive policy as soon as possible.9

Burden

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2361. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Léopoldville.

2 Not found. The reference may be to telegrams 1345 or 1354 from Brussels. Telegram 1345, January 19, reported that Minister for African Affairs d'Aspremont was considering sending more Belgian officers to Léopoldville to act as advisers to Mobutu but that Ambassador Burden had persuaded him to postpone doing so. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–1961) Telegram 1354, January 20, reported that a number of white recruits for the Katanga gendarmerie had left Brussels the previous day. It noted that, although the Defense Ministry had apparently abetted this, d'Aspremont and Foreign Minister Wigny had not known about it in advance and had been apologetic when Burden complained. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–2061)

3 Dated January 14. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–1461)

4 See footnote 1 above.

5 Telegram 1293 from Brussels, January 12, reported a discussion with Foreign Office Secretary General Jean van den Bosch concerning a request by Congolese Foreign Minister Bomboko for military assistance. Van den Bosch stated that Belgium was willing to provide the assistance but would not do so without U.S. support. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1261)Telegram 1341 to Brussels, January 22 (approved by Secretary Rusk), stated the Department had concluded that assistance outside the United Nations as requested by Bomboko would be unacceptable in terms of its risks to U.S. and Western interests. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–1861)

6 Telegram 1271, January 14, stated that Bomboko's request and Belgian willingness to agree to it posed a problem of the "gravest implications," and instructed Burden to inform the Belgians the U.S. position was being formulated on an urgent basis. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–1261)

7 Telegram 1325, January 19, repeated Topol 982 to Paris, which stated that the Department would prefer to have NATO Council discussion of the Congo deferred for a few weeks. (Ibid., 770.00/1–1861)

8 Dated January 20. (Ibid., 770.00/1–2061)

9 In telegram 1728 to Léopoldville, January 26, also sent to Brussels, Rusk requested that Timberlake and Burden return to Washington for consultations but not simultaneously: Timberlake should arrive by January 30 or 31 and Burden in early February. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–2361)

10. Editorial Note 10. Editorial Note

At Secretary of State Dean Rusk's staff meeting at 9:15 a.m. on January 25, the Congo was the first item of discussion. The memorandum of the meeting by Executive Secretariat Director Stoessel reads in part as follows: "The Secretary asked Governor Williams and IO to give urgent thought to what new departures we can make in the Congo situation. He thought rather drastic new directions might be necessary. For example, could we consider having a group of UN countries—from Africa as well as the West—go to the General Assembly and obtain approval for accepting on behalf of the UN military and economic responsibilities in the Congo. Solutions outside the UN should also be considered.

"Unless we can get stability in the Congo, we will need to take restorative action which could be very costly. The Secretary said that the stakes are so large that we need to take the ceiling off of our thinking as to solutions. The Secretary agreed that Ambassador Harriman should be consulted in this project and he also approved Mr. Cumming's suggestion that an INR representative also participate." (Department of State, Secretary's Staff Meetings: Lot 66 D 147)

The Congo was also discussed briefly at a meeting that morning between President Kennedy and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The memorandum of the meeting by Goodpaster, who was also present, reads in part as follows: "The President next turned to the situation in the Congo. He said that one thing that discourages him is that the UAR and Ghana are not Communist, but are working against us. General Lemnitzer said a large part of the problem is in the lack of a clear and effective mandate from the UN. The troops of Ghana and the UAR are undercutting UN objectives for lack of such a directive. Admiral Burke observed that the UN is a weak instrument. Hammarskjöld does not have the power he needs and cannot get it. He thought in the future in instances like this, some one country must take leadership." (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Clifton Series, Conferences with the President)

11. Memorandum of Conversation 11. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, January 26, 1961.

SUBJECT

Congo Policy

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Hare, Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs

Mr. Satterthwaite, Assistant Secretary, AF

Governor Williams, Assistant Secretary designate, AF

Governor Stevenson, USUN

Governor Harriman

Ambassador Yost (Morocco)

Mr. Cleveland, Assistant Secretary designate, IO

Mr. Wallner, IO

Mr. Cargo, IO

Mr. Sisco, IO

Mr. Buffum, IO

Mr. Penfield, AF

Mr. Tasca, AF

Mr. Ferguson, AF

Mr. Herz, AF

Mr. Woodruff, AF

Mr. Ruchti, AF

Mr. Blue, EUR

Mr. Sanger, INR

Mr. Edmondson, INR

Governor Stevenson reported his meeting with the Secretary General2 giving the following details of the SYG's estimate: Both Mobutu and Gizenga have about 5,000 troops each. Gizenga is a barbarian but Lumumba is capable and dangerous. The Congo is now divided into three parts (the Kasavubu, the Gizenga and the Tshombe areas). UNOC can control the borders between the parts of the Congo without U.S. assistance and wants none. Nasser practices brinksmanship but he would not go too far. The Sudanese will not cooperate with the USSR. As to the future, an Ileo government should be formed, parliament should be summoned, and the Congolese should be left alone to fight out the political struggle internally. If more UN troops are needed to replace those withdrawn by the current contributors, the following countries could be called upon: Senegal, Iraq, Mexico and Ethiopia. Such troops may be required if UNOC drops much below 20,000.

Asked for his opinion of the next U.S. move, Governor Stevenson said that he had been considering a direct approach by the U.S. to Khrushchev. He felt that Khrushchev has not been successful with his own tactics in the Congo, that he may be willing to back away if we do likewise, and this would reduce the Cold War danger in Africa. Governor Stevenson commented that this was an old idea which he had mentioned a month ago.

Ambassador Yost said that a Moroccan troop withdrawal would be based on their disagreement with UN policy in the Congo. The essential background for such a move, however, would be "palace considerations", i.e., the King and the Crown Prince were determined not to allow any other Moroccan political element to be more "nationalistic" than they. Ambassador Yost felt that it would be desirable for the Casablanca powers (UAR, Ghana, Guinea, Mali and Morocco) to withdraw their troops from the Congo.

There was a general consensus that it would be desirable for the Casablanca troops to leave the Congo.

A general discussion followed on a basic point raised in a draft AF paper.3 The draft states that the U.S. faces isolation and that the Soviets seemed to be gaining increasing support due to their respective policies in the Congo. IO participants argued that the U.S. was not being isolated, citing voting statistics in the UNGA in support of seating the Kasavubu delegation. AF participants argued that the isolation of the U.S. was particularly notable among the African countries because of the widespread feeling in Africa that Lumumba represented the only legitimate government while the U.S. backed Kasavubu. Other reasons were cited by both sides as major factors: African emotions, the color problem, and racial overtones. It was agreed that the African states held unfavorable views of Mobutu and this was a further factor contributing to the "isolation" analysis. IO added that Belgian tactics of trying to retain their influence through the back door had not helped.

In answer to Governor Stevenson's question, it was agreed that we should make clear that we do not support Belgium's tactics supporting Mobutu. Mr. Wallner particularly emphasized that it was necessary to get our policy with Belgium on a clearer footing. He said the extreme points of view of Belgium policy which are held by African countries, by the Secretary General, and by the Soviet Union stem from the initial re-entry into the Congo by Belgian paratroopers and subsequent Belgian actions in the Katanga and through the Union Miniere.

Mr. Herz said that a certain inconsistency in our Congo policy plagues the U.S., especially among Africans. Even though the U.S. has succeeded in putting some distance between itself and the Belgians elsewhere in the Congo, it was a fact that Belgian military support was flowing to the Katanga, most recently in the form of white troops. Africans believe we acquiesce, at least, to this action. Belgians maintain this action is required to retain control of the Katanga for the West. Additional evidence was cited by Mr. Woodruff to show that Belgian plans were far advanced in the military field.

Governor Stevenson said that the Secretary General expected there would be a meeting of the Security Council the week of January 30 to hear the complaint raised by Mali on behalf of the Casablanca powers.4 The Secretary General's advice to the U.S. was to be quiet and let the Africans fight in the Security Council. Mr. Sisco doubted that the U.S. needs a new resolution from the Security Council since the previous ones have given us sufficient latitude.

There followed a general discussion of the internal political situation in the Congo and various views of the most prominent Congolese leaders. It was agreed that it would be desirable to have a stable, legalized Congolese government and that it would be useful to have parliament recalled. There was considerable doubt that parliament would prove stable because its members are subject to bribes and threats to their physical security. The key however would be the role of Lumumba. It was agreed that there would be a considerable danger, particularly after his imprisonment, that Lumumba would attempt rabble-rousing tactics to rally the parliament for a radical policy. It was agreed that although Lumumba was not originally a Communist that he had become violently anti-U.N. and anti-U.S. because of his lack of success in July in obtaining Western support for his strongly centralized regime and for his policy of re-uniting the Congo by force.

It was generally agreed that the Africans, north and south of the Sahara, were not frightened of Communism. They feel that they could control the Soviets or their own local Communists without any trouble. There were several comments deploring this naive and dangerous point of view.

The following points for use by Governor Stevenson in his press conference January 27 were agreed: That U.S. policy on the Congo would remain within the UN framework; that the U.S. would oppose strongly any aid to the Congo outside of the U.N. framework; that we wished success to the Congolese Round Table Conference; that we would wait hopefully the outcome of the Conciliation Commission efforts; and that we had confidence in the Secretary General's ability to cope with the problem of adequate troops for UNOC. These points were incorporated in a message which was telephoned to USUN for Governor Stevenson.

Mr. Cleveland, referring to a draft paper prepared by IO,5 raised the question of what realistic operational alternatives could be found to the IO suggestion that we "continue to do what we are doing—only better." Mr. Penfield said we could launch a new endeavor to stir up activity by approaching Nehru and by asking the British to talk to the Nigerians. Mr. Hare explained that such an endeavor was based upon the following consideration: If we are to get a new Congolese government, get it to work with the U.N. to keep foreign powers out, encourage it to retain its security forces and have a reasonable expectation that it can restrain the Congolese, then we must mobilize other African states in support of this policy. This would help us to achieve our minimum goal of keeping the Cold War out.

Mr. Hare reviewed the development of the Congo problem from the preindependence period this Spring. He cited our original decision to go along with Lumumba, our decision to refrain from recognition of the Katanga, and our need to obtain the cooperation of the other African states. This led us to the U.N., since we needed this mechanism to achieve our objectives. The key problem now is that we are losing the support of Afro-Asians. This is due to the Cold War problem, the role of the Belgians and the Lumumba–Kasavubu controversy. Since we can no longer build on the Congolese, we must have the support of the Afro-Asians. If we can not rely on the Afro-Asians we must either try to split the Afro-Asians or resort to the Belgians.

Governor Williams said that he did not believe the IO and AF papers were contradictory. Both were designed to gain time. He felt, however, that the chances of successfully pursuing the course of action advocated by IO were quite small. His opinion was based on the lack of success that this policy has had so far.

Mr. Cargo reviewed our efforts to obtain a Congolese government and to re-establish order. He said this is the course that IO would like to set in motion. The IO recommendations are that we follow the Round Table Conference carefully, that if those preliminaries succeed, a more stable government should emerge, thereafter it may be possible to roll back Gizenga, and finally there would be close U.N.-Congolese cooperation.

Mr. Sanger said that any long-range U.S. policy must build on the assumption that the Congo will be really independent. He advocated that the U.N. seal off Belgium and Soviet aid to the Congo and that we go along with the Round Table Conference.

There followed a discussion of the possible outcome of the Round Table Conference. Ambassador Yost said that we must find a way to protect the Congolese Government if it is to be really effective. There was general agreement that we could not include Gizenga, who was possibly a Communist. Mr. Satterthwaite said that it would probably be necessary for Lumumba to appear at the meetings and his influence might be dangerous although he might be outmaneuvered.

Governor Williams raised the following questions: 1— What is our estimate of the situation? It is generally agreed that our current position is not good although, there is some difference between AF and IO on the effectiveness of our policy.

2— What should be our short-term program? How can we improve our current negotiating position?

3— How can we get wider support from the Afro-Asians particularly the Africans for what we want to do in the Congo?

4— What is the final set of goals that we want to achieve? It is agreed that we would like to have a legalized Congolese government but do we wish to back Mobutu in a military campaign to achieve Congolese unity?

Governor Williams asked Mr. Sanger to head an intelligence group to prepare an estimate of the situation as stated in item 1 above.6

IO was asked to prepare a study of how we can improve our short-term negotiating position.

Mr. Ferguson was asked to head a group to study how we can improve our position and gain wider support from Afro-Asians for what we wish to do.

Mr. Penfield was asked to work with someone from IO to pull together a "final package" which would synthesize the studies resulting from items 1, 2 and 3.

Next meeting for the ad hoc committee was set for Monday, January 30 at 2:30 p.m.7

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2661. Secret. Drafted by James R. Ruchti. Participants not previously identified include Deputy Assistant Secretaries of State for African Affairs James K. Penfield and Henry J. Tasca, Director of the Office of West African Affairs C. Vaughan Ferguson, U.N. Adviser in the Bureau of African Affairs Martin Herz, Officer in Charge of Congo Affairs Arthur Woodruff, Deputy Director of the Office of Western European Affairs William L. Blue, Director of the Office of Research and Analysis for Africa Richard H. Sanger, and William B. Edmondson, Acting Chief of the West Africa Division in that office.

2 Stevenson met briefly with Hammarskjöld on January 24 and at length on January 25. The conversations are reported in telegrams 2000 and 2011 from USUN, January 24 and 26. (Ibid., 304.11/1–2461 and 320/1–2661, respectively)

3 Not identified.

4 A January 26 letter from the representatives of Ceylon, Ghana, Guinea, Mali, Morocco, the UAR, and Yugoslavia to Hammarskj old requested a meeting of the Security Council to discuss developments in the Congo. (U.N. doc. S/4641)

5 Not identified.

6 Sanger sent a situation report on the Congo with an evaluation of factors affecting prospects for the future in a January 31 memorandum to Williams. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1 –3161)

7 No record of this meeting has been found.

12. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 12. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, January 26, 1961, 7 p.m.

2009. Congo. Verbatim text. Fol is memorandum received from SYG today.2

The developments in the Congo, particularly as a result of the announced withdrawals by the United Arab Republic, Morocco and Indonesia, call for an early reassessment of the United Nations operation. If withdrawals were to remain limited to those who have thus far announced them, there would be no immediate threat to the continuance of this operation. If, however, withdrawals without any sizeable new contributions on the part of those whom we recently approached were to continue, or if Ghana, for instance, should find it necessary to withdraw its contingent, it would obviously be necessary publicly, by action of the Security Council, to reassess future United Nations policy.

The consequences of a complete United Nations withdrawal and its impact on the Congo and on African affairs in general are of course most serious and, I believe, a basis for reappraisal not only on my part but on the part of the major powers. Having regard to the successful co-operation between the American Government and myself during the Suez crisis, I feel that a strenuous diplomatic effort undertaken by the United States might yet be helpful in order to stem the tide. It would appear to me that two sets of actions by the United States Government might indeed be most helpful.

Firstly, all possible encouragement might be given, through United States diplomatic channels, to those countries whom we recently requested to provide additional troops, such as Senegal and Mexico. Also, a diplomatic intervention in Ghana for the purpose of preventing any withdrawal might, if thought opportune in Washington, be most helpful. In this connection a clarification of United States policy might indeed be helpful in order to lend emphasis to such approaches.

On the other side, the United States influence could perhaps also be utilized in the direction of bringing about a neutralistic course inside the Congo by avoiding, particularly through overt Belgian operations, the implication that the Western powers see the only solution in the regime of Mr. Kasavubu and his allies, without the possibility of adjustments and constructive compromises.

I could also imagine that there may be ways in which, at this juncture, the United States might be willing to consider whether a discreet approach to Moscow in regard to Congolese affairs might not substantially assist in reducing contentiousness in this field. From certain contacts of my own, I see at least a few straws in the wind which may indicate that Moscow itself would have some interest in removing, at least to some extent, the Congo affair from East-West contention.

I am fairly certain that some of these steps need urgently to be considered if, as a result of the recent politically immature actions by some states, the Congo should unwittingly become an even more complicated problem in relations between the major powers than it has been over these last six months.

Noyes

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2661. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution.

2 Telegram 2010 from USUN, January 26, transmitted the text of Hammarskjöld's covering letter and the texts of two messages dated January 25 from Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru to Hammarskjöld. Nehru suggested an approach to the United States and the Soviet Union to keep the Congo out of the cold war and to implement U.N. policy on foreign intervention, Congolese integrity, and the emergence of a Congolese government with wide support. He recommended enlisting Belgium's allies to bring about Belgian evacuation and to bring pressure on Kasavubu to convene the Congolese Parliament, and he urged the disarmament of Mobutu's forces and U.N. pressure for the release of political prisoners. (Ibid.)

13. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 13. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, January 28, 1961, 8:29 p.m.

1388. Following based on uncleared memo of conversation.2

Belgian Ambassador paid first call on Secretary January 27. Meeting devoted mostly to presentation Belgian viewpoint on Congo. Scheyven repeated Belgian request for US intervention with SYG for latter to assist in release eight Belgian soldiers seized in Kivu and now reportedly in Stanleyville. It was noted US had already approached UN Secretariat in this sense. Scheyven also asked US aid in obtaining UN protection for all Belgians in Kivu.

In other points, Belgian Ambassador said his Government believes Congolese round-table should be allowed proceed but stressed rapid results unlikely. He repeated Belgians opposed fragmentation Congolese state. He added Belgians also thought UN should have succeeded Belgium as guarantor law and order in Congo. Scheyven emphasized Belgian thesis economic life Congo would suffer further heavy blows if remaining 40,000 Belgians departed. He adverted to evidence Stanleyville regime receiving UAR and Soviet support.

Scheyven then referred to Bomboko's requests in Paris for arms and money and admitted furnishing arms directly to Bomboko now would contravene existing Security Council resolutions. However, he wondered what should be done because UN not now maintaining law and order. Secretary inquired what Belgians thought should be done if group UN members felt present UN policy had about been played out. Scheyven admitted matter complicated by Afro-Asian belief Lumumba remains Prime Minister legally. Secretary thought many believed that right Congolese Head of State to dismiss Prime Minister was formalistic one, exercise of which had not been expected. Scheyven also admitted need for improving present governmental situation in Congo.

Scheyven then discussed dangers Communist takeover in Central Africa if Stanleyville regime succeeded and thought UN should take unspecified action against Gizenga who he alleged was supported by only few hundred men. It was agreed US and Belgium should remain in close touch here and in Brussels on this whole range of problems.

Secretary concluded we were giving urgent thought to alternatives to present line. He said on one hand we wished keep Cold War out of Congo but on other hand Soviets seem determined join "Battle of Africa". He thought West clearly could not afford lose Congo and believed we did have various assets there including friendliness of most people. He also noted UN troops had been ineffective because of political directives and noted merely putting problem into UN does not ensure its solution.

Finally it was agreed that for present we should try maintain UN effort and help SYG if possible in obtaining new troops such as Senegalese. Scheyven again criticized Kasavubu for his public attacks on Dayal which had made solution this problem by SYG more difficult.

Scheyven made clear continuing overall Belgian concern with all aspects Congo problem.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2861. Confidential. Drafted and approved by Director of the Office of Western European Affairs Robert H. McBride and cleared by Donald B. Easum of the Executive Secretariat. Repeated to Léopoldville and USUN.

2 Drafted by McBride. (Ibid.)

14. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 14. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, January 28, 1961, 7 p.m.

1630. I spent hour with Kasavubu this morning at my request to review Congo situation with him prior my departure for Washington on consultations. After explaining to him purpose my trip I asked him whether he wished have any particular points raised with Department.

Kasavubu, who seemed usual unruffled self, made plea for prompt and direct assistance in obtaining arms to permit loyal troops take initiative against Gizenga forces. When reminded of limitations imposed on us by our commitment to UN, President said he appreciated West might be unable provide arms directly but that arms could be bought without difficulty if necessary dollars were made available in European bank account. He had apparently given some thought to possible modalities, and suggested arms might be bought in Belgium under clandestine US-Belgian agreement as Belgians made weapons identical with those presently in use and would be hardest to trace. I asked Kasavubu whether GOC had inventoried arms actually on hand, but he skirted direct answer and merely said that present stocks are inadequate and that "half soldiers have no rifles". When I commented that GOC might be able make better case for additional arms if it gave clear evidence willingness use material on hand, Kasavubu simply reiterated need for more weapons.

At this point, I mentioned to him that many people were talking about alternative possibility disarming all Congolese soldiers, whether loyal Léopoldville, Stanleyville or Elisabethville regime, and asked his views on this point in order that I might answer questions likely to be raised in Washington. Kasavubu replied he considered such total disarmament impractical idea, both because of serious difficulties involved in carrying out disarmament operation and because he felt UN force incapable maintaining necessary order throughout country. In addition he said giving such responsibility to UN forces would be tantamount to placing Congo under UN trusteeship and would be incompatible with national sovereignty.

Turning to political sphere, I asked Kasavubu about status Ileo government and prospects for its investiture. He explained installation such government had been deferred until after round-table conference to permit consultation by Ileo with Congolese leaders assembled for conference. This was done both to avoid danger Parliament might favor Lumumba if convened prior to conference and also to determine good or bad faith various Congolese factions. Those who failed attend conference, he said, would thereby reveal their bad faith. Asked specifically about Katanga, President said Tshombe had used series pretexts about date and site to avoid attending, but Léopoldville had given into him on enough points that onus for failure attend falls entirely on him. Said decision not yet made on site phase two of roundtable.

Kasavubu then launched into critical discussion Belgian policy with regard Katanga, which he said will end by strangling Tshombe and stirring anti-Belgian uprising. When he asked whether I could clarify GOB stand on Katanga, I said there appeared to be divergence of view within GOB and between GOB and Belgian private interests but that official GOB position continued favor Congo unity against Katanga separation. I took occasion reaffirm strongly our opposition to Katangan independence and described blunt statement along these lines which both Canup and I have made directly to Tshombe.

While waiting see Kasavubu, I had brief chat with Bomboko who took same line as above with regard need for arms. Bomboko said further weapons were particularly necessary equip reserve units which would receive accelerated training when units presently in Léopoldville-Thysville area moved forward to attack Gizenga forces. He outlined proposal for attack on Stanleyville by river borne para commandos while other columns diverted attention with thrusts toward Aketi and Buta in north and toward Kindu in south. However he said such attack could not be mounted unless reserve troops and arms could be assured.

Comment: Kasavubu's approach was far more positive than at previous meetings, and he concentrated for first time on possible GOC actions rather than on criticism UN inaction. His preoccupation with problem direct arms aid appeals reflect ideas Bomboko, whose influence with Kasavubu has reportedly been increasing. Key gaps in presentation remain vagueness about present stocks and side stepping suggestion attempt be made to undertake action with equipment on hand as sign willingness and ability take initiative.

Timberlake

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2861. Secret; Priority. Received at 8:12 a.m. on January 29 and repeated to Brussels, Elisabethville, and USUN.

15. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 15. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, January 31, 1961, 9 p.m.

2059. Congo.

1. Stevenson and Yost saw SYG this afternoon to discuss in general terms thinking in Dept's preparatory papers on Congo policy and to obtain further reactions in thinking of SYG. Stevenson said Dept's thinking was moving more or less parallel with that of SYG although final decision had not yet been taken.

2. SYG said he saw course of policy development in fol time sequence: A) Decision on "neutralization"

B) Constitution of middle road government under Ileo as PriMin

C) Implementation of neutralization

D) Release of Lumumba and other prisoners after neutralization had begun, and

E) Convening of Parliament.

A) and B) could be reversed in order, but if this were done time relationship should be very close, i.e., immediately after formation of govt, decision on neutralization should be taken.

3. He plans to approach problem of "neutralization" indirectly by referring back to last Aug when he spoke of necessity of keeping ANC out of politics. He had planned to say no immediate decision was needed on ANC but that Council members should give serious consideration to problem. Dayal and staff in Congo had commented that prompt decision of SC was necessary to preserve UN situation in Congo, that Congo rapidly drifting to civil war, that UN could not be third force in civil war, and that failure SC to take positive steps at this session would be serious error. They suggested res at this session should "request" SYG to take necessary and appropriate action to assure that military units of ANC did not intervene in politics. SYG was now considering possibility saying to SC he would welcome authority of this sort, virtually in these words. Otherwise, after having made statement re keeping army out of politics he would begin to move in this direction without explicit mandate in absence objections from SC members. (He is clearly open to suggestions from us on how far we think he should go on this. His statement scheduled first thing after opening amenities tomorrow afternoon.)

4. His plan on "neutralization" would be to get political agreement from Leo and Gizenga essentially on basis providing retraining programs for ANC. He does not envisage use of force by UN to bring this about at least not initially. He pointed out Congolese army was larger than UN's. He would contemplate use of force against uncontrolled units if he had political understanding with Leo and Stanleyville that forces should be neutralized. In response to question, however, he did not entirely rule out possibility UN eventually imposing its position by force except Katanga. Because of outside assistance he thought Katanga was militarily strong enough to put up heavy resistance, that Katanga would regard use UN force against it as violation agreement under which UN entered Katanga, and that Irish and Swedes (who were in Katanga) had joined ONUC on conditions they not initiate use of force.

5. On composition govt, SYG and Wieschhoff2 (who was present) strongly urged Ileo as PriMin, as SYG has consistently done since Oct. They believe Ileo has maintained independent position which will make it possible for him to head government of moderation. Among moderate pro-Lumumba people they believe inclusion Sendwe in govt is essential, with Kamitatu3 also desirable. SYG was opposed to inclusion of Gizenga or Kashamura.4 They regard Kalonji's5 presence as unimportant, and they seem to rule out Tshombe coming into such government on assumption it would be middle road government excluding extremes of both left and right. They believe that if rest of Congo can be pulled together Tshombe can later be brought to terms by US pressure on Belgians, noting he has no other international support. (While this is probably correct we believe they underestimated political difficulty of dealing with rest of Congo problem without dealing with Tshombe at same time.)

6. From conversation with "drafter" (unnamed) of res to be presented in this SC session, he believes it will include three elements: A) That Lumumba should be treated well

B) That Parliament should be called into session and

C) That Belgian military and para-military units must be withdrawn.

He was quite specific that present intention was not to call for release of Lumumba or withdrawal of Belgian civilian personnel. His source said some Africans were pushing in these directions but they did not expect to accede. (We very much doubt whether res will stay in this form, especially on status of Lumumba. Soviets, Ghana and others almost certainly will press for para on release Lumumba.) He said Indians wanted to attend SC session primarily in order to exert influence on res. He implied influence would be toward moderation and said Indians regarded adoption of a res as more important than its items. If res along above lines were developed, SYG thought para on UN force along lines suggested by Dayal might be added.

7. When we explored whether it was politically feasible to get SC decision involving time sequence he had in mind, SYG was uncertain. Key question, of course, would be timing of Lumumba release. SYG said if Afro-Asians were more experienced diplomats, this problem might be overcome. He felt there was sentiment that this was time for "statesmanship", unpalatable as that might be. He therefore had some hope that satisfactory res might be produced, although he was afraid other side might insist on "bird in hand", i.e., immediate release of Lumumba. He commented most Africans did not want Lumumba as PriMin and he was being used essentially as symbol. Most Africans did not want Communist govt in Congo; if West had made number of mistakes in Congo, Soviets had made even more, especially by identifying Lumumba totally with themselves.

8. He believes US should "play it cool" in current SC session. We should string it out until next week in order to give time to see what type of res Afro-Asians plan to come up with. Then we can see how to move and where. He thinks best time for us to approach Belgians with tough line against unilateral intervention and on formation new Congolese govt would be when we see draft or res which we think we can support.

9. On degree to which UN would really administer Congo, SYG said he did not relish prospect but that it was essential. There had to be Congolese govt which was political cover at top, but UN should provide hard core of personnel who would make most of decisions. Situation should in reality be one where Congolese consulted UN rather than vice versa.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–3161. Secret; Priority.

2 Heinrich Wieschhoff of the U.N. Secretariat.

3 Cleophas Kamitatu, President of the Léopoldville provincial government.

4 Amicet Kashamura, former Minister of Information in the Lumumba government.

5 Albert Kalonji had proclaimed South Kasai an independent state in August 1960.

16. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze) to the Assistant Secretary of State-Designate for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) 16. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze) to the Assistant Secretary of State-Designate for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland)1

Washington, January 31, 1961.

Dear Mr. Cleveland: The Department of Defense has studied the "Statement of New United States Policy on the Congo," prepared in the Department of State,2 and notwithstanding the risks involved, fully concurs that a new policy along the general lines indicated should be adopted on an urgent basis.

With regard to the three steps proposed for simultaneous implementation, the following comments are offered: 1. Strengthened Mandate to the United Nations. Defense fully agrees with the need for such a mandate and its objectives. Defense is particularly interested in the proposal to bring the Congolese military and police forces under effective United Nations direction and control. There are clear risks in pursuing this course of action and great care will have to be used in order not to over-extend the capability of the limited United Nations forces available to maintain law and order throughout the Congo. The United Nations should disarm only those Congolese forces unwilling to respond to direction by the United Nations while at the same time making maximum use of those Congolese armed units which prove amenable to control. The whole subject of re-training, control, use and deployment of the Congolese Army is a most important matter from our security point of view. The Department of Defense would recommend that immediate implementing plans for the military neutralization action in the Congo be developed, including the training and the use of Congolese forces in civic action programs.

2. Broadly Based Congolese Government Including All Principal Political Elements of the Congo. Defense feels that any such government must preserve the position of Kasavubu as Chief of State in order to prevent loss of prestige for both the United Nations and the United States. There is always the danger that the proposed coalition might fall into the hands of individuals whose purposes are known to be inimical to Western interests. This risk must be fully recognized.

3. Establishment of UN Administration for Congo. We concur in principle with the ideas advanced and feel that, as a practical matter, the United States should be prepared to furnish whatever support the United Nations may require in carrying out this course of action.

It is noted that the need for the immediate development of detailed tactical plans has been recognized. The Department of Defense stands ready to collaborate in their preparation as appropriate.

While Defense fully endorses the spirit of the final paragraph of the State paper, namely the determination to make the proposed UN program succeed, it would seem that the US should develop now a fall-back policy position. In the event of the failure of the new approach, it would appear that it would be in the US interest to continue to support the United Nations in the Congo so long as the United Nations forces remain there. However, we should be prepared to undertake a vigorous unilateral course of action at the same time. In connection with this need for a fall-back position, we have prepared and enclose herewith a list of actions,3 short of armed intervention, which we consider would be appropriate for implementation.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff have expressed the view that the United States is capable of successful military intervention in the Congo without degrading its general war posture to an unacceptable degree. However, our capability to successfully conduct other similar type operations elsewhere in the world would depend on the extent of US commitment of forces to the Congo.

Sincerely,

Paul H. Nitze

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.70G/1–3161. Secret.

2 Reference is to an undated draft bearing that title; a copy is filed as an appendix to a January 31 JCS memorandum to the Secretary of Defense (JCSM–52–61), which responded to a request from Nitze for JCS views on the draft and on U.S. capabilities for military intervention in the Congo and the consequences of such intervention. A revised version of the draft was enclosed with Document 17.

3 Not printed.

17. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 17. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy1

Washington, February 1, 1961.

SUBJECT

Suggested New United States Policy on the Congo

As you requested, we have undertaken a review of United States policy on the Congo. The enclosed memorandum is submitted for your consideration. It contains three principal recommendations.

First, with the Afro-Asians in the forefront, we would seek a new mandate for the United Nations which would give it the authority to bring under control all principal military elements in the Congo and thereby neutralize the role of Congolese forces in the politics of the country. Under this new mandate the United Nations would undertake a training program of the Congolese troops. The United Nations would also be expected to step up its efforts to prevent all outside assistance from coming into the Congo. Hammarskjöld would seek to achieve the military neutralization of the Congo by peaceful means in the first instance, though it might become necessary for the United Nations to use force if certain groups are recalcitrant.

Secondly, we would press Kasavubu to redouble his efforts to establish as soon as possible a middle-of-the-road cabinet government with Ileo as Prime Minister. If the current Round Table of Congolese political leaders fails to achieve this, the United States would give its full support to the establishment of a more broadly based Congolese Government which would include Lumumba elements but not Lumumba himself as Prime Minister. This latter position would be adopted by the United States as a fall back and only if the prior efforts to achieve a middle-of-the-road government had failed. Only after the effective neutralization of the Congolese forces had been accomplished, or is at least under way, and a new Congolese Government was established, would all political prisoners, including Lumumba, be released. Parliament would be called to approve the new Government at a later stage.

Thirdly, we would seek a greater administrative role for the United Nations in the Congo. Our assumption is that, regardless of the government formed in the Congo, it will not in fact be able effectively to govern and administer. A great deal of United Nations administrative and technical help is essential. The fact that a good deal of the operational machinery would be in the hands of the United Nations, in a context in which all principal military elements were neutralized, would provide added safeguard against a Lumumba takeover.

One of the principal purposes of the new policy is to reorient the United States position so that it will have the support of world opinion generally, and in particular the support of principal segments of opinion in Africa and Asia. For this reason, it would be our intention in implementing the new policy to encourage the Africans and Asians to take the lead on this matter. An early response by you to Nkrumah's letter2 would be involved and perhaps messages from you to the Prime Ministers of India and Nigeria and to others. Such messages as may appear desirable would be sent to you for your consideration. We would intend also to consult with our close allies, particularly the United Kingdom, France, and Belgium, as well as the United Nations Secretary General and President Kasavubu. An approach to the Soviets at some point will probably be desirable.

In our consultations, we would plan to emphasize our determination to make the United Nations succeed in the Congo. At the same time there would be advantage in leaving no doubt, particularly with the USSR, that we are determined that the Congo will not fall into Communist hands and that we would look to other means, if necessary.

I request approval to proceed on the basis of this memorandum and the attached policy paper.

Dean Rusk

Enclosure3

SUGGESTED NEW UNITED STATES POLICY ON THE CONGO

Gizenga, aided and supported directly by the UAR and indirectly by the USSR, exercises control in Orientale province; Tshombe has had increasingly to rely on open Belgian assistance to maintain himself in the Katanga; it is an open question as to whether Kasavubu can exercise the kind of leadership at the current Round Table which will result in the early establishment of cabinet government in the Congo; the increase of open Belgian activity in the Congo and the ineptness of the Kasavubu-Bomboko-Mobutu leadership has resulted in identifying United States policy increasingly with the colonialists to the detriment of our position in the Congo, in Africa, and in the world generally; and with the impending withdrawal of military contingents of Guinea, UAR, Morocco, and Indonesia, the United Nations force will be weakened thereby increasing the prospect of civil war and presaging possibly an ignominious withdrawal of the United Nations. The United Nations will have been seriously, perhaps irreparably, discredited particularly in the eyes of the Africans and Asians, and Khrushchev's recent attack against the Organization will have been given greater momentum perhaps bringing Hammarskjöld's resignation.

In these circumstances, the United States must look to new policies in order to stem the present drift towards fragmentation in the Congo which would solidify Gizenga's control over Orientale, turn this area into a Communist stronghold, and become a cancerous sore which could spread, with Communist assistance, to other parts of the Congo and Africa. We must alter the present policy since it is largely discredited in Africa and in Asia.

The United States objective in the Congo is the establishment and maintenance of a stable unified Congo with reasonable safeguards against a Communist takeover. The following three-point program is directed to this end. While there are a number of serious difficulties and risks which must be carefully weighed, the following program would provide a basis for a fresh start; it would constitute a positive initiative by the Kennedy Administration which offers reasonable hope for a solution of the Congo problem of regaining the United States position in Africa and Asia, and of placing the United States behind a more decisive United Nations program which, if successful, could strengthen the Organization as an instrumentality for peace. It is envisaged that the following three steps would be implemented simultaneously.

1. Strengthened Mandate to the United Nations

A new mandate would be sought which would give the United Nations the responsibility to maintain law and order and to bring about a military neutralization of the Congo. This new mandate would include, inter alia: (a) undertake a retraining and/or useful employment of Congolese military and police elements; (b) bring under control all military and police elements in the Congo; (c) prevent civil strife and give adequate protection against possible tribal attacks; and (d) deter and prevent all outside intervention and assistance.

Secretary General Hammarskjöld is prepared to take an initiative along the above lines and has asked the full support of the United States. Such a revised mandate would be embraced in a Security Council resolution or would be achieved by an informal understanding among the members of the Security Council (the so-called consensus procedure in which the Security Council President summarizes the sense of the Council). It is the intention of the Secretary General to carry out this new mandate by political means in the first instance, though if any of the Congolese forces refuse to be brought under control, the United Nations would have to use force. It is likely, therefore, that the United States will be called upon to exert great pressure on the Belgians, Tshombe, and Mobutu. Moreover, if the Congolese forces were not brought under control simultaneously means would have to be found to prevent disequilibrium between armed and unarmed forces. This may require the replacement of Dayal, additional United Nations forces, and the careful positioning of units of the United Nations force in various areas so that they will carry out the required actions. Military training missions, including officers training schools, would have to be established.

2. Broadly Based Congolese Government

The United States would exercise its influence with the Belgians, Kasavubu and others in order to assure the early establishment of a middle-of-the-road government under Ileo as prime minister. To this end, Kasavubu, who has convened a Round Table of Congolese political leaders, should be encouraged and assisted with a view to achieving the earliest possible agreement among the participants.

If the Round Table fails, we should adopt as a fall-back objective, the achievement of a broadly based Congolese Government through other means. Such a broadly based government would include representatives of all principal political elements in the Congo. The United Nations would mandate a balanced group of countries drawn from the Conciliation Commission (Nigeria, Tunisia, Ghana, India and Ethiopia) to assist in helping to bring about such a broadly based government. The Congolese constitution would have to be revised to provide for a federal structure with options left open for the future, but with secession banned. There should be full assurances regarding the provincial status of areas pending agreement on a central Congolese Government. After neutralization of all principal Congolese military elements was accomplished, or at least well under way, and a new broadly based Congolese Government was agreed upon, all Congolese political prisoners could be freed and their protection guaranteed by the United Nations. Such a device and time sequence is suggested to provide a safeguard against Lumumba assuming the position of prime minister. At an early subsequent stage Kasavubu would submit the new government to Parliament for its approval.

3. Establishment of United Nations Administration for Congo

Ideally, if military neutralization of all Congolese elements by the United Nations were accompanied by a political neutralization in which for a period of time no Congolese cabinet was organized and the United Nations itself would exercise all functions of government and administration, the raison d'etre for Lumumba or any other Congolese leader exercising governmental power would be removed. This would give maximum safeguard against a Lumumba takeover. However, this would probably not prove politically feasible since the Afro-Asians would see such an administration as a step backward to a United Nations trusteeship.

It is not likely that any cabinet government established either through a Round Table or the efforts of the Conciliation Commission will in fact be able effectively to govern and administer the Congo. Thus, any Government which may be formed would require a great deal of United Nations administration and technical help. This fact, coupled with the neutralization of all Congolese military forces, would help serve as an added safeguard against any individual gaining control of the country since the operational machinery of government would hopefully be largely in United Nations rather than Congolese hands.

The provision for an increased United Nations administrative role could be initiated by an early request from Kasavubu as Chief of State to the United Nations for assignment of additional personnel to help during the difficult interim period. Thus, there would be no infringement of Congolese sovereignty, but the United Nations would be running the country on a de facto basis.

A United Nations administrator would have to be selected; preferably a strong, reliable, reasonable African assisted by a group of "wise men" who would constitute the principal administration of the Congo.

Such a United Nations civil government mission would function for a number of years with a view to creating conditions in the Congo which would permit the Congolese to govern themselves. Technical assistance of all kinds would be required in addition to retention of Belgian technicians under United Nations aegis; special efforts would have to be made in the Katanga particularly in order to make the entire Congo self-sufficient economically as soon as possible; and a program of training Congolese leaders would be essential. All aid to the Congo would be channeled through the United Nations.

4. Tactics

The following general principles would be guiding: (a) While the United States would be clearly identified with the above initiative through private consultations, it would be essential to have suitable Afro-Asians, including India, Nigeria and Ghana, and the Secretary General to take the public lead along the above lines.

(b) After appropriate consultations with our close allies including the United Kingdom, France and Belgium, and with leading Afro-Asian countries, it would be desirable for the United States to consult with the USSR. The fact that from a power political point of view the United States and free world resources and capacities in the Congo and in Africa are greater than the USSR will be an inhibiting factor on the latter and work in favor of accommodation on the basis of neither the East nor the West filling the vacuum in the Congo directly and immediately.

(c) In our consultations we should emphasize our determination to make the United Nations effort succeed. However, we should leave no doubt, particularly with the USSR, that we are determined that the Congo should not fall into Communist hands and would look to other means, if necessary.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Secret. The source text includes no drafting information, but a copy filed with a covering memorandum of the same date from Wallner to Rusk indicates that the memorandum was drafted by Sisco. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.70G/2–161)

2 A letter from Ghana's President Kwame Nkrumah to Kennedy, dated January 23, argued that Lumumba was still Prime Minister under the Congo's Constitution and urged Kennedy to intervene personally to secure his release. Telegram 839 from Accra, January 25, transmitted the text to the Department. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–2561) Kennedy's interim reply was transmitted in telegram 787 to Accra, January 29. (Ibid.) A draft of that reply, sent to Kennedy under a January 27 covering memorandum from Rusk, bears Kennedy's handwritten revisions. (Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Congo Security 1961)

3 Secret. The source text includes no drafting information, but a copy filed with the Wallner memorandum cited in the source note above indicates the paper was drafted by Sisco. Wallner's memorandum states that the paper had been approved by the Department of Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency. An unsigned and undated memorandum entitled "Genesis of New Congo Program," filed with a February 6 memorandum from Deputy Director of the Office of West African Affairs Wendell B. Coote to Williams, states that the general lines of the new policy were approved at a meeting with Rusk on January 28, that the next-to-final draft was sent to Defense and CIA on January 30, and that Defense concurred in a letter of January 31 (Document 16) and CIA concurred in a telephone call that day. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–661)

18. Editorial Note 18. Editorial Note

At the 475th meeting of the National Security Council on February 1, there was only brief discussion of the Congo. According to General Lemnitzer's handwritten notes of the meeting, Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles commented on the Congo in his briefing for the Council, stating that there had been no recent dramatic developments, and Secretary of State Rusk summarized the new policy proposals sent to President Kennedy that day. (National Defense University, Lemnitzer Papers) NSC Action No. 2397–d indicates that the new proposed policy on the Congo was being submitted to the President after coordination with the Department of Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency. "The President subsequently reviewed and approved the State Department's proposal." (Department of State, S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council) No other record of the NSC meeting has been found, nor has any record been found of any further discussion of the Congo that day.

Dulles took issue with the NSC record of action in a February 5 memorandum to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs McGeorge Bundy, which reads as follows: "The record of action of the NSC Meeting of February 1, 1961 states that a recently adopted course of action dealing with Congo problems had been coordinated with the CIA. As I mentioned to you by telephone, as soon as I saw this record of action, I believe the above statement is based upon a misunderstanding since the course of action referred to was not so coordinated.

"Policy recommendations are not the functions of this Agency; however, if the coordination process had been carried out in this particular instance, the Agency would have submitted intelligence considerations which might have suggested certain changes in, or additions to, the actions proposed." (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda, NSC Meetings 1961)

President Kennedy touched on the subject of the Congo in a meeting on February 2 with his Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs Walt W. Rostow. Rostow's memorandum of the conversation includes the following sentence: "The President expressed anxiety about the present Congo plan." (Ibid., Meetings with the President)

19. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 19. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India1

Washington, February 2, 1961, 11:07 p.m.

2069. Re Congo.

For Ambassador. FYI. In light growing deterioration internal Congo situation and manifest inability UN cope with spreading civil war, new program approved by President yesterday. Major purpose new approach is secure support principal segments opinion Africa and Asia, and we hope encourage Africans and Asians take lead on matter. We are informing principal allies and selected Africans and Asians.2 In view great importance India and Nigeria to success of operation, we believe particular pains should be taken secure their approval of program and agreement take lead in advancing it. End FYI.

You are accordingly requested make appointment see Nehru and Balewa urgently, stating you wish discuss Congo with them on explicit instructions from Secretary. You should then explain new policy US prepared support, explaining it was formulated at President's direction and has his approval. As result this intensive policy review, we are encouraged believe common ground exists between our two countries on which we can build new program which stands good chance of success. You should also make it clear we have consulted closely with SYG who is thinking along same lines.

Behind our policy lies assumption, shared by host government, that Congolese independence must be nurtured and perfected. US policy, as has Indian and Nigerian, consistently has been to provide economic, technical and military assistance through UN and to prevent all outside interference in Congo's internal affairs. Although UN operation has not proved as successful as we all had hoped, we continue believe it must be made effective; only alternative is direct East-West confrontation in Congo which would have direct consequences for people of Congo as well as peace of the world.

Situation in Congo has reached point where it is entirely clear a new approach is necessary if there ever is to be hope of seeing Congo develop its independence in peace and quiet. In developing our new approach you should say we are convinced overall prospects for improvement must not be impaired by insistence on narrow legalism or deference to any particular individual or faction in the Congo.

We are particularly concerned over possibility that present situation could result in ignominious withdrawal of UN presence. Such an eventuality would seriously, if not irreparably, discredit the UN in the eyes of many states and would lend encouragement to those who seek to weaken organization. Therefore, from all aspects, we regard it as essential UN operation in Congo be made to succeed.

Following program elaborated to achieve this purpose as well as to safeguard Congolese unity and sovereignty. We are certain it has excellent chance of success if Prime Minister will support it and play leading role in its adoption by UN.

We would propose new total approach containing three principal elements. First, we believe a broadly based Congolese Government should be established as soon as possible. We believe that if members of the Afro-Asian group get behind and encourage those principally concerned to establish soon a broadly based government that it can be achieved and can help bring about stability in the Congo. We believe the return to constitutionality under the Chief of State is essential. FYI. We are exercising our influence with Belgians and Kasavubu with view to securing early establishment of middle-of-the-road government. End FYI. As second principal element of this program new mandate for UN would be sought giving it authority to bring under control all principal military elements in Congo and thereby neutralize role of Congolese forces in politics of country. Under this new mandate UN troops could undertake training of Congolese troops. UN would also be expected to step up its efforts to prevent all outside assistance from coming into Congo. Third aspect of this program would be increase and improvement in UN civilian operation so that it can effectively assist Congo and provide only channel for external assistance.

Question which will inevitably arise under this program is when and if Lumumba would be released. On this point our view is that the SYG would be able to obtain the release of and insure the protection of political prisoners when the military neutralization of Congolese forces is at least well underway and it is clear that a civil war has been averted. Further, the establishment of a new, moderate and broadly based Congolese government would seem to us to be essential if he is to have any success in this matter. In the meantime, the US will continue its efforts to achieve dignified and decent treatment for these prisoners.

You should also indicate orally, but not include in any written memorandum you may hand PriMin, that in view of Lumumba's past record of irresponsibility as PriMin we would view with grave concern his return to that position. Even in a lesser position of authority we consider that he has a high potential for divisive, unconstructive action. It is only Afro-Asian leaders who can be expected to have any moderating influence on him and you should therefore explore with PriMin his willingness exert such influence and his estimate its effectiveness.3

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–261. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Ferguson and Rene Tron of the Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs; cleared by Williams, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs G. Lewis Jones, Rusk's Special Assistant Emory C. Swank, and Peter A. Seip of the Executive Secretariat; and approved by Wallner. Also sent to Lagos and repeated to USUN.

2 Telegram 1765 to Léopoldville instructed Timberlake to inform Kasavubu of the new program, enlist his support, and urge the immediate establishment of a middle-of-road government. Telegram 3183 to Paris transmitted a message from Kennedy to French President Charles de Gaulle and telegram 802 to Accra transmitted a message from Kennedy to Nkrumah. Telegrams 3802 and 3803 to London summarized discussions with British Embassy officials on February 1 and 2. Telegram 1440 to Brussels summarized a conversation on February 2 with Belgian Ambassador Louis Scheyven. Circular telegram 1153, sent to 22 Embassies in Africa, Asia, Europe, South America, and Australia, outlined the program and instructed the Ambassadors to inform their host governments and enlist their support. All these telegrams, dated February 2, are ibid.

3 Telegram 1617 from New Delhi, February 6, reported a February 5 conversation with Prime Minister Nehru, who expressed agreement with the program outlined but indicated that he thought the necessary prerequisites were the release of political prisoners including Lumumba and an end to military assistance to the Congo from Belgian sources. (Ibid., 770G.00/2–661) Nehru made similar comments in a February 7 message to Rusk. (Ibid., 770G.00/2–761) Telegram 703 from Lagos, February 6, reported a conversation that day with Prime Minister Balewa, who expressed general agreement with the program. (Ibid., 770G.00/2–661)

20. Memorandum of Conversation 20. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, February 4, 1961, 5:51–6:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Congo

PARTICIPANTS

Sir Harold Caccia, British Ambassador

Mr. H.S.H. Stanley, First Secretary, British Embassy

The Secretary

Mr. Woodruff Wallner, Deputy Asst. Secretary, IO

Mr. James K. Penfield, Deputy Asst. Secretary, AF

The Ambassador came in at the Secretary's request to discuss Lord Home's message concerning our proposals on the Congo.2 The Secretary first explained our thinking on the problem in general terms. We are faced with a deteriorating rather than a strengthening situation. In the context of the views of African countries, particularly on Lumumba, we are getting into a dangerous situation, both vis-a-vis these countries themselves and in regard to the Congolese. In these circumstances we are not trying to impose a hard and fast plan on anyone. Rather, our aim is to try to find some consensus which would provide a basis upon which some sense can be made out of the Congo picture. There appears to be a misunderstanding in Lord Home's mind over our views on the Congolese Army (ANC). We do not envisage disarmament enforced by fighting. We look toward a UN force strengthened by the addition of "reliable" troops, the replacement of Dayal and then negotiation, perhaps assisted by pressures, such as in the supply field, which would result in bringing the ANC into more coordination with the UN force. Congolese troops could then be retrained, reorganized and repositioned so that they would be less likely to erupt as a force on their own. The word "neutralization" is perhaps not accurately descriptive of this process but it is clear that Lord Home's idea of an integration of the ANC into the UN Force would, if it proves practical, be fully in line with our thinking.

There are two considerations bearing on the ANC problem which are of particular importance. The process of "neutralization" cannot be allowed to take place in one part of the Congo unless it can be achieved throughout the country in stages. Second, it is important to plug the loopholes through which unilaterally dispatched military supplies can enter, specially in the northeast. Gizenga appears for the moment to be in some difficulty. This in itself is a temptation to others to step up their activity. We are reluctant to gamble on Mobutu's ability to handle this situation and prefer to rely on the UN.

With reference to Lord Home's point on "turning the Congo into a sort of protectorate" we see little chance that below the Cabinet level the Congolese themselves can administer the country. They must rely on others, including Belgians, and we therefore envisage the UN building an administrative structure below the Government. The foreign technicians would thus run the country in much the same way as the British "advisers" to the Maharajas did in India. One of the objectives of such an arrangement would, of course, be to meet the financial point raised by Lord Home. Our Governments cannot continue to support the Congo while the country remains indefinitely unable to exploit its own resources which are sufficient for at least its minimal needs.

In response to specific comments and questions by the Ambassador the Secretary agreed that a long process would be involved. Kasavubu's support, or at least acquiescence, must be won, more troops must be obtained and Dayal must be replaced before real progress can be made on the "neutralization" front. The Secretary General apparently cannot get the necessary troops in the present situation and he must therefore have a new basis for action. It is still not clear, however, whether this would have to be in the form of a new Security Council resolution. The important thing is to get started. If the present Security Council session changed the atmosphere sufficiently to enable the Secretary General to get even a token force increment to replace the departing troops and if he got a strong replacement for Dayal, he might be able to start a trend in the right direction and get a long way down the trail through negotiation and maneuver. The command situation in the ANC would have to be worked out in this context. The British seem to rate Kasavubu's ability to play a lone hand higher than we do, but we feel that even Kasavubu, whose position as Chief of State we certainly have no intention of challenging, could not be an exception to whatever "neutralization" arrangements are worked out. If, for instance, he wanted to attack Katanga, the UN "would have to try not to be helpful". The Secretary and the Ambassador agreed, however, that for the moment Kasavubu should be encouraged rather than discouraged to continue his efforts to set up a broadly based Government.

The Secretary mentioned that it seemed particularly important to him that we identify ourselves with some constructive new initiative through the UN because if we later find ourselves faced with the necessity of making a serious effort in the Congo outside the UN framework, it would be essential to show that we had exerted ourselves to work effectively through the UN.

The Secretary referred to the Higgins story in this morning's Herald-Tribune and said that to the best of his recollection the Congo had not once been mentioned during the course of his conversation with Menshikov.3

In reply to the Ambassador's question the Secretary said that we had put our thoughts to Kasavubu but had so far had no reaction. He added that we had assumed that initially hardly any of the important elements in the problem would, for different reasons, agree with us. He reiterated that we must make the effort and see whether any consensus emerges.

It was agreed that the Ambassador would transmit the Secretary's views to Lord Home by way of reply to the latter's message. The Secretary said that he might later attempt to formulate a written reply incorporating these views.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–461. Confidential. Drafted by Penfield on February 6 and approved in S on February 7. The time of the meeting is taken from the Secretary's appointment book. (Johnson Library)

2 Lord Home's message to Rusk, dated February 3 and delivered on February 4, argued that neutralization of the Congolese army would not be accepted by the Congolese and would have to be forcibly imposed by the U.N. forces, that part III of the plan would in effect turn the Congo into a "sort of protectorate," and that the plan would pull the rug from under Kasavubu's feet and open the way for Lumumba's return to power. (Ibid., Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204, UK Officials Correspondence with Secretary Rusk)

3 Rusk's meeting with Soviet Ambassador Menshikov on February 3 is recorded in a memorandum of conversation by Director of the Office of Soviet Union Affairs John M. McSweeney. There is no mention of the Congo. (Ibid., Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330) It is printed in Vol v, Document 14.

21. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 21. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, February 4, 1961, 9:32 p.m.

1461. Following based on uncleared memorandum conversation:2

Belgian Ambassador at his request called on Secretary February 4 convey Belgian Government reaction to US ideas on Congo. Scheyven expressed Belgian regret they not consulted ahead of others on Congo. Belgium did not believe that since UN powerless fulfill its present mandate, it could fill stronger role. Belgian Government thought it unfortunate US concept did not differentiate among different Congo regimes. They thought this would discourage Kasavubu. Scheyven repeated view it would be difficult replace Belgian technicians with other pro-Western elements. Finally he thought UN inability protect interests in event they responsible for Katanga too would lead Belgians to depart with resultant anarchy.

Secretary commented on certain aspects US ideas and said for instance we did not envisage release Lumumba until political situation stabilized. He thought UN required direct authority prevent outside aid to Gizenga.

Scheyven added Belgians pessimistic re US ideas because they envisaged sort UN trusteeship and also because they probably not acceptable to Soviets and many Afro-Asians. They did not think UN forces really [ready?] enter into combat which might occur. Belgians thought it would be preferable for UN form elite Congolese units for Kasavubu. Scheyven said good units existed in Katanga. He added Belgians opposed any idea of Foreign Legion. However he pointed UN not now really responsible for law and order. He said total Belgian officers and "policy-makers" now in Congo less than 300 and all there at request Congolese authorities. He agreed with Secretary that original Belgian idea of unitary state had failed and that federal solution required.

Scheyven went on saying Belgians thought Kasavubu-Tshombe agreement was prerequisite to political settlement. Belgians further realized Parliament should meet but thought perhaps it could convene merely to approve new government which should be formed. If we thought this course too risky, then perhaps new government could call round-table meeting or constitutional commission. In any event it was important Parliament not remain long in session since deputies hopelessly venal. Secretary noted SYG did not want Parliament in session until law and order reestablished. Scheyven added Belgians realized new government should contain some Stanleyville elements. Secretary dispelled Belgian misapprehension we desired "shadow" Congolese regime and said we rather thought of introducing UN administrative elements in order beef up Congolese Government.

Scheyven stressed heavily economic importance of Katanga and need to retain its assets. He feared that if status Katanga force changed by UN, all Whites would leave Katanga. Secretary said that UN and Congolese forces might jointly carry out preservation law and order. He also stressed that when US plan was spoken of, what we meant was a plan for consultation with our friends and allies. Secretary said US alone could not assume responsibility for Congo.

Secretary also made point Congo matter immediately urgent because of SC meeting and that was why it has not been feasible consult with Belgians in advance of others. He made point we did not envisage UN troops fighting Congolese forces to disarm them nor did we agree to disarming Mobutu forces ahead of Gizenga. Secretary said we too sought broader based government but believed such regime would still need UN administrative help which in turn could form political framework for presence many Belgians. In closing in response to question, Secretary said we had not discussed this with Soviets yet though we thought such consultation will be needed sometime.

At conclusion meeting, Scheyven said Wigny ready at any time come see Secretary here re Congo. Secretary said we would have to think this over.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–461. Secret. Drafted by McBride, cleared by Seip, and approved by Wallner. Repeated to USUN and Léopoldville.

2 Drafted by McBride and dated February 4. (Ibid.)

22. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France 22. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France1

Washington, February 5, 1961, 5:16 p.m.

3202. Following based on uncleared Memcon:2

French Ambassador gave Secretary Feb 5 French govt's views on US suggestions re Congo. French have series reservations: one, would appear US suggesting UN control legal govt's armed forces and administration which would weaken power Kasavubu and diminish his prestige; two, UN control all forces in Congo puts legal govt on same basis with Katanga govt and rebel regimes in Kivu and Orientale; three, French worried by possible use of force by UN, fearing it could lead to secession by Tshombe and Gizenga.

Alphand said French believe it essential that agreement be made in first instance with legal govt so as to provide cover for military and administrative assistance. This would enhance Kasavubu prestige and permit coalescence around him of moderate elements in Congo, thus leading to some stability. As example, suggested we could let it be known to Tshombe at some point that aid to him would be channeled through Léopoldville. Said in essence French prefer aid to legitimate govt to neutralization all forces and believe aid so offered could slowly lead to regroupment around govt forces of moderate military elements from all provinces.

Secretary said we do not believe forcible disarming of forces is needed. Aim rather is retraining and redirection so that activities of Congo forces are in harmony with those of UN. Concept, which UNSYG shares, is not one of oversight action but series of steps. Administrative support is essential if country is not to fall into chaos. A broader govt, constitutionally organized perhaps with Ileo as Prime Minister and including elements other than those in the immediate Léopoldville area, would seem essential if present govt is to get internal and external support. Federal set-up may be needed. These are matters to be worked out in time. Present task is to get clear definition UN and UNSYG roles, perhaps through Security Council resolution or perhaps through clarification statement there. Pressure would then have to be applied Kasavubu in order have him understand actions are taken in interest governmental, political, and economic stability of Congo. Secretary made it clear we do not visualize putting UN in sovereign control of Congo. Role rather would be provide necessary support for country and to stimulate creation broadly-based govt capable taking over tasks itself in future. UN would of course have substantial role to play for some time.

Earlier Alphand expressed GOF feeling that US had acted too quickly in giving its "Plan" to large number countries, including Afro-Asians. Pointed out France's vital interest in Congo problem and its effects on French Community and stressed French desire be consulted before others.

Secretary replied we not presenting "US Plan" but rather series of suggestions on possible course of action. Noted various nations had differing reactions to our suggestions and stressed need to seek to find common ground for UN action if we are to avoid continuing deterioration in Congo and grave problems for all. Said it essential for UN to get in better posture and for legal govt accept UN suggestions and take necessary actions. Should it refuse, result could be UN withdrawal with all its grave implications. Secretary also noted pressure of time necessitated wide range consultations. We prefer have Security Council concentrate on real problems of Congo and not have discussions descend to squabble about status Lumumba.

Secretary concluded discussion by stating gap not so wide. Suggested Alphand inform GOF that US approach is broader and less rigid one than GOF had appeared believe. Aim is not UN trusteeship or protectorate; it is to clarify and strengthen UNSYG's mandate to provide aid needed if there is to be peace and orderly administration. We would seek approval of Kasavubu but believe other alternatives so bad he should be pressed hard. Suggested further consultation in UN.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–561. Secret. Drafted and approved by the Officer in Charge of French-Iberian Affairs L. Dean Brown and cleared by Cargo and Seip and in substance by Ferguson. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and USUN.

2 Drafted by Brown and dated February 5. (Ibid.)

23. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 23. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, February 6, 1961, 6 p.m.

1685. Deptel 1765.2 Spent hour with Kasavubu and Bomboko together this afternoon to present position outlined reference telegram and to obtain their reactions. As presaged in their public statements of past few days, they indicated strong opposition to any extension UNOC mandate in area public order and control of ANC. Apparent from their arguments they had three points uppermost in mind: (1) GOC has lost faith in UN and is unwilling see UNOC obtain additional powers which they feel would be used to disadvantage Léopoldville Government. Kasavubu and Bomboko continue to blame UNOC under Dayal for deterioration Congo situation and reiterate their view that new man rather than new mandate is prime requisite for effective GOC–UN cooperation;

(2) GOC would view extension UN mandate to include full responsibility for maintenance law and order as infringement on Congolese sovereignty and prelude to UN trusteeship. They consider such restriction intolerable and re-stress their belief that need is for more effective UN assistance to enable Congolese to discharge responsibilities themselves;

(3) On more immediate political plane, Kasavubu and Bomboko feel that they are gaining upper hand and any development which would undermine their direct control over ANC would prevent them from seizing what they believe to be imminent victory in Orientale and Kivu. Bomboko in fact stated that he would deliver either Gizenga or Kashamura as prisoner in Léopoldville within ten days, and supported contention with claim that Fifth Battalion at Stanleyville plus majority of troops at Rumangabu and Goma in Kivu have sent messages expressing loyalty to Léopoldville authorities. In this situation, Kasavubu and Bomboko are convinced that UN, given broader powers, would prevent them from effecting arrest Gizenga and Kashamura which they feel is essential step in consolidating their control. They cited in this connection fear that these demagogues would stir popular uprisings if left free to pursue political activities under shield of UN protection. (Bomboko delivered ten minute lecture on dangers of Communism pointing out that historically those who compromised with it were eventually devoured.)

Only point in reference telegram which brought favorable comment was reiteration US view on desirability immediate installation Ileo government. Kasavubu said negotiations actually under way looking toward prompt formation at least "provisional" government which could be installed immediately. Kasavubu said he favored retention most capable Commissioners General either as Ministers or in most cases as Secretaries of State, but their future position not yet decided. Bomboko commented that installation such government would probably complicate situation rather than clarify it since most Ministers would be incapable effectively discharging their duties, but nevertheless accepted US view (also urged by France and UK) favoring such a step.

Comment: Kasavubu and Bomboko were both relatively moderate in presenting their views but were unshakeable in their arguments against broadening UN mandate. Seems clear Kasavubu will be unwilling consent to any such program so long as he feels time is on his side in political and military developments and so long as he totally lacks confidence in UN ability to maintain neutral posture. Since it is difficult to envisage attempt to implement program outlined reference telegram with Kasavubu opposed, it may first be necessary to win his confidence through medium of new UNOC leadership before effective steps can be taken toward expanded UN role in Congo. If such climate of confidence created, it may in fact be possible to achieve much of desired effect through more vigorous UN action under present resolutions (as suggested Deptel 1764)3 without need for new mandate.

McIlvaine

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–661. Secret; Niact. Received at 1:32 p.m. and repeated to Brussels, Paris, USUN, and London.

2 See footnote 1, Document 19. It was delayed in transmission; telegram 1681 from Léopoldville, February 4, reported that the Embassy had only that day begun to receive a series of telegrams on the new Congo approach and had not yet received instructions to see Kasavubu. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–461)

3 Sent to Brussels as telegram 1440; see footnote 1, Document 19. It stated that in case of a Soviet veto of the projected U.N. resolution, one possibility would be to seek a consensus that would enable Hammarskj old to interpret the existing resolutions in such a way as to permit a more vigorous U.N. operation. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/ 2–261)

24. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 24. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, February 6, 1961, 10 p.m.

2110. Subject: Congo. Stevenson discussed our Congo plans with SYG at length this afternoon. He mentioned main objections which UK and French had found in it: that it would diminish Kasavubu's prestige and that it would interfere with Mobutu's operation against Gizenga at very time Mobutu's forces gaining ground. SYG scoffed at both these objections, saying Kasavubu "has no prestige" and that he is "absolutely convinced" military solution is impossible. He said Charpentier, French Amb in Leo whom he praised highly, shared this opinion. He said Kasavubu's legal position unassailable but that in present circumstances he is just as much in prison as Lumumba. He said he had recent report illustrating this: Kasavubu had talked for two one-half hours by telephone to Adoula. In this conversation, according to Hammarskjöld's info, Kasavubu told Adoula he had been forced by Bomboko and Mobutu to sign two letters complaining against Dayal and that he had no freedom of action.

SYG said Bomboko and Mobutu are irrevocably tied to Belgians and that they have no future in Congo without Belgian presence but that Kasavubu was in different situation. He has future independent of Belgium.

Hammarskjöld felt what needs be done is to separate Kasavubu from Bomboko and Mobutu whereupon he could be persuaded proceed with formation of constitutional government under Ileo. Hammarskjöld said it is not Kasavubu who is opposed to Dayal but Bomboko and Mobutu.

Stevenson asked SYG if there was anything to CBS report that Dayal was preparing resign. SYG said "absolutely nothing at all." He went on to say that CBS had not carried complete report of story which, according to SYG, ended up with comment that best qualified successor to Dayal would be Wachuku (Nigeria).2 SYG said with laugh that this was "as good as a signature" and that it was well known that Wachuku was after Dayal's job. He said Wachuku's opposition combined with that of Bomboko and Mobutu had forced him to conclusion that he could not permit Nehru to recall Dayal on date (around Mar 1) originally planned but instead would have persuade Nehru to let Dayal stay on little longer. (He was vague about how much longer.) He said this was necessary to prevent Dayal's opponents from asserting that their influence had forced SYG get rid of Dayal. Hammarskjöld asserted that if this idea were to gain credence it would have disastrous effect on entire top level of ONUC which was solidly behind Dayal and would inhibit SYG from recruiting good people in future.

SYG said he thought promising development in Congo situation was report he had received on Feb 3 saying three of minor parties which had been supporting Lumumba (he mentioned PSA and Sendwe's party and at least one other) had apparently agreed to take part in round-table conf which Kasavubu was organizing.

He was also encouraged by Nigeria's support for our Congo plan but said one thing that worried him about Nigerians was their tendency to expect everything to work out according to plan. Things just do not happen that way in Congo, SYG said. He had tried caution them against expecting too much while at same time attempting not discourage them from supporting kind of program we have in mind. He hoped we could make same point with them.

When Stevenson mentioned that he planned inform Zorin (USSR) of our ideas,3 SYG countered with info he about see Loutfi (UAR) and that he could predict what both would say: "Lumumba, Lumumba, Lumumba." He said he is trying counter preoccupation of "radical Africans" with Lumumba with argument that first essential step in Congo is to restore order, i.e., remove armed forces from politics. Until this done it impossible consider next step which is conciliation. Lumumba has no valid role to play until conciliation stage is reached. He felt that with help of Nigeria and other Africans it would be possible in time to bring radical Africans around to accepting this view. He said Soviet Union will not allow itself to get out in front of views held by radical Africans.

He said that one of difficulties was that so many Africans were disturbed by reports about mistreatment of Lumumba and by uncertainty as to his present condition. He said Conciliation Commission had been trying get see Lumumba for many weeks but had gotten nothing but run-around from Kasavubu and Tshombe.

In response to Stevenson's question he said that he was certain UN could not and should not attempt to take Lumumba into protective custody. He said UN could not function as jailer. If UN got Lumumba they would have no choice but to release him.

In response to Stevenson's request for his views as to SC tactics Hammarskjöld was emphatic in opinion that US should allow radical Africans speak first, then encourage responsible Africans, starting with Nigeria and including Tunisia, Cameroun, Liberia and Senegal, to speak next for kind of solution we favor.

He advised us not to press Indians to speak saying that he would be talking with Jha (India) and would let us know later if he thought there was any possibility of getting India to make helpful intervention.

He felt that with two meetings on Tues4 and possibly one on Wed, time should be about ripe for us to speak on Thurs.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–661. Confidential; Priority.

2 Jaja Wachuku, a member of the Nigerian Delegation to the United Nations and Chairman of the U.N. Conciliation Commission for the Congo.

3 Stevenson's conversation that day with Valerian A. Zorin of the Soviet Delegation is summarized in telegram 2109 from USUN, February 6. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–661)

4 February 7.

25. Editorial Note 25. Editorial Note

At the 476th meeting of the National Security Council on February 9, there was some discussion of the Congo. Paragraph a of NSC Action No. 2402 states that the Council noted and discussed an oral briefing by the Director of Central Intelligence, which included the situation in the Congo. Paragraphs a and b of NSC Action No. 2403 state that the Council noted and discussed an oral report by the Secretary of State on U.S. policies and actions and recent developments in Laos, the Congo, Cuba, and the Dominican Republic, and an oral report by the U.S. Representative to the United Nations regarding developments in connection with the U.N. Security Council consideration of the Congo. (Department of State, S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council)

A February 7 memorandum from Williams to Rusk summarizing the situation in the Congo, prepared for Rusk's use at the February 9 meeting, reads in part as follows: "The internal situation in the Congo seems relatively calm at the moment, with no further military incursions or forays reported from either side. There appears to be a growing feeling of confidence on the part of Kasavubu and his associates in Léopoldville that they are rapidly gaining the upper hand and Bomboko has gone so far as to state that he would deliver either Gizenga or the latter's Bukavu agent, Kashamura, as a prisoner in Léopoldville within ten days. We have heard this type of statement before. It is probably true, however, that Gizenga's hold on Orientale is weakening, and it is entirely possible that Gizenga and Kashamura are in serious trouble. Not only are they in very tight economic circumstances, but there are reports that their troops are not loyal to them. It should be remembered in this connection that loyalty in the Congo National Army is in direct proportion to the regularity and amount of their pay checks." (Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265)

26. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 26. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, February 10, 1961.

2163. Subject: Congo.

1. SYG told Stevenson this afternoon that if Lumumba is dead2 UN must temporarily take over country. He plans to take over airports and control all transport facilities as emergency measure. He also would establish protective guard for all political personalities in Congo and take more drastic steps to protect Belgians. He believes Kasavubu himself would ask for such protection if Lumumba killed and that ANC (Mobutu) would not resist UN action. SYG would also call for SC meeting to which he would report on this action, his defense being that this necessary emergency measure. He would ask for new mandate to cover situation. He admits he would be "way out on thin ice" in doing this, but he could base it on precedent of similar action last Sept and statement he made at end of GA on necessity of UN to give its mandate new interpretations in emergency situations. (Comment: We are not as sanguine as SYG that such move would be acceptable to Kasavubu unless it were carefully balanced in presentation in order to show that UN action is as much for purpose protecting leaders of national government and of civilians in Orientale and Kivu as in preventing any military action by national forces.) He noted that Boland (Ireland) had said earlier today that if Lumumba had been killed Western countries should immediately express their regret and opposition to such methods; SYG also considered this extremely important.

2. If Lumumba has escaped toward Léopoldville SYG thinks we should move ahead rapidly toward getting our policy adopted by SC. He is not primarily concerned with further military steps from Orientale, as he has had recent indications from Gizenga supporters here that Gizenga feels weak militarily. He would be more concerned about political moves by other states who might then recognize Stanleyville government. Rapid steps toward demilitarization would be desirable in these circumstances. Res by all means should continue to contain para demanding release of political prisoners, in these circumstances referring to Songolo and his companions.

3. If neither of these circumstances applied and Lumumba ended up still in captivity we should go ahead expeditiously with developing SC res. He commented there already was suspicion of Western motives because it had been West which wanted delay in SC meeting. SYG said everyone's main concern re res seemed to be problem of detention and release of Lumumba. Nigerians continue to stand with UK and US in rejecting immediate release as military situation not under control. On other hand Nigerians were impressed with argument of other side that prisoners concerned should not have to live at continued mercy of Tshombe and Gizenga. Nigeria was therefore interested in Indian idea of UN protective custody. SYG said he had pointed out to Nigerians problems this involved and they agreed there were snags. SYG insistent with them that we could not take responsibility for deciding when prisoners would be released. Either the criteria would have to be clear cut or there must be some procedure whereby he could share responsibility with govts. (This was first time in conversation with us SYG has agreed to any UN assumption of custody for political prisoners. He admitted this was novel and risky undertaking.) SYG thought he might play situation through SC. UN could take over protective custody of political prisoners. Under this UN would assure their safety and also that they would be under what amounted to house arrest. They would be accessible for political consultations but could not leave their place of confinement. Final decision on their release would be made by SC on recommendation of SYG with advice of advisory committee. He gave us draft of statement for use of SC Pres which would cover this (see USUN 2164).3 He suspected we might barely live with this idea which he said was in very preliminary stages of thinking. But he was not at all certain Sovs would, inasmuch as final decision for release would require substantive vote in SC. He hoped that way it would actually work would be that SYG would make report saying time had come to release prisoners and it would be acceptable to members SC without even holding a meeting.

4. Re new Congolese Government4 SYG said Mahamba (MNC)5 had sent him letter cosigned by MNC appointees as Sec of State saying "nationalist front" does not accept participate in new government except on basis of legality, that is release of prisoners, convening of Parliament, and investiture of new government by Parliament before it undertakes any functions. SYG pointed out that there were only two pro-Lumumba members of government and this letter shed considerable doubt on their willingness to participate. SYG also regarded timing of government's establishment as very bad. He was uncertain about what relationship UN could have with it. It was move in right direction and it was advance over College of Commissioners; he also agreed Kasavubu had done what he could. But UN estimate was that govt could not achieve more that 50 votes in Parliament. His basic reaction on UN cooperation was that UN would be able to cooperate with it on de facto basis somewhat better than with College of Commissioners. Political decision on UN de jure cooperation with new govt would probably have to be taken by GA in same manner as it did re Kasavubu. SYG stressed these were preliminary reactions.

5. SYG showed us text of letter to him from number Afro-Asian states6 asking for him to investigate reports about Lumumba. SYG put out press release that he had already asked for ONUC to make investigation even before he had received request.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–1061. Secret; Priority. The source text does not indicate the time of transmission; it was received at 10:28 p.m.

2 Munongo announced in Elisabethville on February 10 that Lumumba, Joseph Okito, and Maurice Mpolo, who had been captured with him in December 1960 and taken with him to Elisabethville on January 17, had escaped from custody. Both the Embassy in Léopoldville and the Consulate General in Elisabethville reported that this story was viewed with widespread skepticism. (Telegrams 1710 from Léopoldville, February 10, and 507 from Elisabethville, February 11; ibid., 770G.00/2–1061 and 770G.00/2–1161, respectively)

3 Dated February 10. (Ibid., 770G.00/2–1061)

4 On February 9, Kasavubu had established a new provisional government with Ileo as Prime Minister.

5 Alexandre Mahamba was designated Secretary of State for Mines and Energy in the new government.

6 This letter, February 10, was from the Representatives of Ceylon, Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Libya, Mali, Morocco, the United Arab Republic, and Yugoslavia. (U.N. doc. S/4682)

27. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 27. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, February 14, 1961, 8:37 p.m.

1547. For Ambassador from Secretary. Embtels 13702 and 1467;3 Deptels 1341, 1271.4 I have reviewed question of our giving tacit approval of Belgian assistance to Congo in form military officers and have come to conclusion that we cannot proceed along these lines, and that such action would be contrary to our policy. As stated Deptel 1341 the proposed course of action has altogether too many risks and might place U.S. in extremely invidious position were it to become known we had given tacit approval. Accordingly, you are not authorized give our tacit consent. I have informed Bissell5 and Timberlake (by this message) of this decision.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–1061. Top Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Officer in Charge of Swiss-Benelux Affairs Philip H. Chadbourn; cleared by Hare, Assistant Secretary for European Affairs Foy D. Kohler, Williams, Wallner, McBride, and Frank A. Mau of the Executive Secretariat; and approved and signed by Rusk. Repeated to Léopoldville.

2 Telegram 1370, January 25, reported that Burden had informed Wigny of the Department's views as set forth in telegram 1341 to Brussels (see footnote 4, Document 9) and that Wigny had reaffirmed that Belgium would take no steps in this area without at least tacit U.S. approval. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2561)

3 In telegram 1467, February 10, Burden reminded Kohler that when he was in Washington for consultations, he had asked Kohler to ask Rusk whether Burden was authorized to discuss the question of U.S. tacit approval of Belgian assistance to the Congo and, if so, how such tacit approval would be interpreted. (Ibid., 770G.00/2–1061)

4 See footnotes 4 and 5, Document 9.

5 Richard Bissell, Deputy Director for Operations, CIA.

28. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 28. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, February 14, 1961, 10 p.m.

2201. Subject: Congo. In conversation with Stevenson this noon SYG said he had had three different approaches from Afro-Asians yesterday. General consensus developed, especially with Morocco, at end of day was that following program needed: 1. Full-scale investigation of death of Lumumba2 and his companions. SYG commented that until such UN investigation had been held issue would never die down.

2. Clear endorsement of UN responsibility to protect civilians. SYG in response to question said such provision would be supported by Afro-Asians.

3. UN intervention "by peaceful means" to prevent clash between armed units. SYG said he had explained to Afro-Asians why UN intervention could not be by forceful means.

4. Target should remain same as in original program, i.e., army should be gotten out of politics.

5. There must be some formulation re getting Belgians out. He said Afro-Asians had referred to "Belgian combat formations." He told them there were no such formations in Congo. SYG specifically told Stevenson he could even accept fact that Belgian Government was not behind Belgian nationals in Congo. He had pointed out to Afro-Asians problem was individual foreign nationals serving in Congo military units. He told them he had no means to enforce their withdrawal. Anything he did on this point would therefore have to be by negotiation. He thought they were beginning to see this.

SYG was asked whether he thought new mandate was necessary for these points. He replied he did not think it was but what he needed was maximum support of Afro-Asians. He did not exclude res at this point, however, as he wanted to ascertain Afro-Asian reaction coming from further discussion this afternoon. Late this evening he could give us advice on whether res necessary or not. He thought Nigerians would press hard for one.

SYG seemed unconcerned about Soviet announcement their refusal to recognize him any longer,3 noting primarily that it would make Sov veto any res highly likely. In order to avoid certain Sov veto on any res which authorized SYG to do things he suggested that any provisions in res simply "urge" or "call for" without referring to SYG.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–1461. Confidential; Priority.

2 See Document 6.

3 A February 14 Soviet statement declared that the Soviet Union would no longer recognize Hammarskjöld as a U.N. officer and that it was prepared to give all possible help and support to the Gizenga government. For text, see U.N. doc. S/4704; extracts are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 765–766.

29. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 29. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom1

Washington, February 15, 1961, 6:57 p.m.

3946. Following based on uncleared Mem/Con.2

Secretary called in Caccia Feb. 15 for brief review Congo situation. In light Soviet declaration and recognition by UAR, Ghana and others of Stanleyville regime, Sec said we may be faced with situation on ground in Congo involving elements of UNOC acting independently of UN command and also direct intervention by Soviets on their own or through UAR or other power in attempting airlift to Stanleyville, adding that Sudan may not continue withstand combined USSR–UAR pressure.

We are considering, and Sec hoped HMG will be considering, on contingency basis what we would do if above events occurred and UN lost control of situation. In face of outright defiance of UN, Sec thought that SYG could conceivably ask other powers for assistance including possibly UK and US. We were examining what response we might make to such a request and Sec wondered what UK military forces, including aircraft, were available in area. We were also considering a means of providing the SYG with good military advice. Pointing out that we had already approached Sudan urging her to stand firm on transit issue,3 Sec said we were also approaching UAR and other states likely to recognize Gizenga warning them of the grave view we would take of any intervention on the latter's behalf.4 We were also enlisting through the Indian Ambassador here his government's assistance in pointing out to UAR and other neutrals danger of operating outside UN framework or in defiance of UN.5 He hoped that HMG would urgently consider parallel diplomatic approaches. Finally expressed hope we would continue closely to concert our views in this dangerous period.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–1561. Secret; Priority. Drafted and approved by Wallner and cleared by Swank and Mau. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, New Delhi, Paris, and USUN.

2 Not found.

3 Telegram 421 to Khartoum, February 14, so instructed the Embassy. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–1461)

4 Telegram 1593 to Cairo, February 15, instructed the Embassy to set forth U.S. views to Nasser. (Ibid., 770G.00/2–661)

5 Telegram 2211 to New Delhi, February 16, summarized a telephone conversation the previous day between Rusk and Indian Ambassador Chagla. (Ibid., 770G.00/2–1661)

30. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 30. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, February 15, 1961, 7:42 p.m.

1845. Although main focus U.S. diplomatic activity re Congo remains centered on UN, Department believes certain objectives must be sought in Léopoldville if there is any chance avoiding major crisis in wake Lumumba's death. While Department fully realizes following steps which GOC might take will be repugnant to them, you should make effort impress upon them their responsibility make some effort alleviate present situation. Steps we have in mind which Kasavubu and Ileo should take immediately are: 1. Regret death Lumumba and to extent they properly can disavow his murder. We realize this may be extremely difficult since Lumumba was turned over to Tshombe by central authorities. If this cannot be done, GOC should at least not let itself be put in position of supporting or even condoning political assassination.

2. Mend their fences with ONUC. This, too, will not be easy, given long bill of complaints against Dayal. But Dayal will not be there forever and future prospects Congo seem to require putting aside past differences and working as closely as possible with UN.

3. Broadly-based government. Ileo cabinet consists almost entirely representatives Equateur and Léopoldville provinces. It is extremely difficult for US to take position in UN or elsewhere that such a government represents Congolese people as a whole. Prior death Lumumba we were taking position this was welcome first step but present situation seems to require more.

We gather from your messages that Points 2 and 3 are in fact under way but it might be useful if you could tell GOC you have specific instructions on these particular matters. In making approach you should stress our conviction Congolese leaders must face up to fact situation has reached point where personal, tribal and regional allegiances must be put aside if there is to be any hope for future.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–1561. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Ferguson, cleared by Wallner, and approved by Penfield. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, and Elisabethville.

31. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate in Elisabethville 31. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate in Elisabethville1

Washington, February 16, 1961, 5:15 p.m.

432. In view assassination Lumumba and intransigent position Tshombe, with respect any efforts affect cooperation Léopoldville Government, Department believes Canup should probably now be recalled.2 Katanga is now malodorous politically and withdrawing Canup may be useful way emphasize our disapproval. We are being widely accused supporting Tshombe which we, of course, have never done but it may be advisable give some tangible proof that this is not the case. Arrival French jet planes procured by American company and brought in by American-owned airline may very well take place despite our efforts to stop it3 and US may again become tarred with the Tshombe brush. Furthermore Tshombe's recruiting efforts in such places as South Africa can only be deplored and withdrawal our principal officer serve to focus attention on our mdistaste for maneuvers.

In any event, Canup's personal relations with Tshombe have deteriorated to such an extent that clearly he can exert no influence and it seems appropriate leave Consulate with skeleton staff and with junior officer in charge.

While Department realizes Tshombe may interpret Canup's recall as bowing to his demands, this may be overcome if we deliver stiff note, preferably signed by Ambassador Timberlake, expressing full confidence in Canup and informing Tshombe that on no occasion did he act except in accordance explicit instructions from Department.

Report views soonest.4

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–1661. Confidential. Drafted by Ferguson, cleared by Wallner, and approved by Penfield. Also sent to Brussels, Léopoldville, and USUN.

2 Tshombe had requested Canup's recall in a January 20 letter to Rusk. (Ibid., 123–Canup, William C.) The Department's initial reaction was to withdraw him, but when Canup argued that this would give Tshombe the impression that he had won a victory over the Consulate and that the U.S. position would be stronger if he remained, at least temporarily, the Department deferred to his judgment. (Telegrams 391 and 399 to Elisabethville, February 4 and 7; ibid., 770G.00/2–461 and 770G.00/2–661, respectively; telegram 482 from Elisabethville, ibid.)

3 Reference is to the delivery of three French-manufactured jet training planes to Katanga by Seven Seas Airlines, an American corporation. According to a February 21 memorandum from Department of State Legal Adviser Abram Chayes to Rusk, prior to the transportation of the planes to Katanga, the Department urged the company not to deliver them but it declined to heed this appeal. Chayes recommended steps to prevent a repetition of the episode, which Rusk approved, and the initiation of sanctions against the company, which Rusk did not approve. (Ibid., 770G.5622/2–2161)

4 Canup replied in telegram 546, February 21, that his removal might lead to retaliatory action against the Consulate and possibly other Americans in Katanga. He recommended keeping the Consulate open to maintain a U.S. presence and to "indicate USG does not yield easily to white settler campaign to eliminate U.S. influence." Otherwise he thought the Department should close the Consulate and make a strong public statement of U.S. views. (Ibid., 770G.00/2–2161) In telegram 1797 from Léopoldville, February 24, Timberlake recommended leaving Canup in Elisabethville while putting pressure on Tshombe through Brussels. (Ibid., 770G.00/2–2461)

32. Memorandum by the Deputy Representative-Designate to the United Nations Security Council (Yost) 32. Memorandum by the Deputy Representative-Designate to the United Nations Security Council (Yost)1

Washington, February 17, 1961.

THE STAKES IN THE CONGO

It seems doubtful that the primary objective of the Soviet Union in the Congo at this time is actually to establish a Communist regime in all or part of its territory. While the Soviets would naturally seize any favorable opportunities to pave the way for this ultimate eventuality, they must know (1) that there is little physical possibility of providing their stooges with sufficient arms to achieve this objective at this time; (2) that if their intervention became large, the US could and would block it; (3) that a large Soviet intervention would frighten even their African allies, who in their own self-interest do not wish to see Africa communized. In any case, they are well aware that isolated they are helpless in Africa; only in association with African states are they formidable.

It is more probably the Soviet intention at this time to exploit the passions and anti-colonial sensibilities aroused in Africa by the Congo crisis and the death of Lumumba to further much broader and more serious objectives: (1) to strengthen their relative position and influence vis-a-vis the West in Africa as a whole, first among the nationalist Casablanca states, second among states with at present more moderate governments such as Nigeria, Tunisia and the Sudan and eventually even in the French Community States and the British territories; (2) to weaken materially African support for the UN in order either to "reform" or otherwise to destroy the usefulness of that organization.

If this assessment is correct, it will not be to the advantage of the US to take measures which, even though they might eliminate the immediate Communist threat in Orientale and Kivu, would be likely fatally to alienate a substantial number of African nations from the West and from the UN. A military conquest of the Orientale and Kivu by Mobutu, even if it is feasible and did not provoke military counteraction by the Casablanca states, would certainly result in the breakdown of the UN effort in the Congo through the withdrawal of all the Afro-Asian forces there and would contribute very substantially toward furthering the broad Soviet objectives mentioned above.

Were there no other way of preventing the establishment of a major Communist bridgehead in the Congo, we might have no alternative but to facilitate Mobutu's offensive. However, we are offered at the moment an opportunity to check all foreign intervention, including Communist and Casablanca, through strengthened UN action endorsed and enforced by Afro-Asian moderates, such as India, Nigeria and Tunisia, and even by some of the Casablanca states. The price is that this action be applied to our friends as well as to the Communists. This is an opportunity which, of course, involves risks but which, if rejected, may set flowing an anti-Western, anti-UN, pro-Soviet current in Africa which cannot be reversed for many years if at all.

Africa is much more emotional and unsophisticated than Europe and Asia and the game must be played there in a different way, as the Soviets have realized. It would ill serve the US and the West to save the Congo temporarily from Communism at the cost of vastly strengthening the Soviet position in much of the rest of Africa.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–1761. Secret. Sent to Rusk with a covering memorandum from Penfield endorsing Yost's views. An attached note from the Secretary's Special Assistant Charles E. Bohlen to Wallner commenting on Yost's memorandum stated that the issue was not the establishment of a Communist regime in the Congo but the establishment of a Soviet-oriented regime in Stanleyville which might spread to the rest of the country. He concluded: "If, by holding Mobutu [from a military offensive in Orientale], we can prevent foreign intervention and the resulting consolidation of Gizenga's position, I would entirely agree, and I certainly support reinforced U.N. action in the Congo."

33. Memorandum of Conversation 33. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, February 20, 1961, 11:01–11:40 a.m.

SUBJECT

Congo

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Ambassador Hervé Alphand, French Embassy

M. Claude Lebel, Minister, French Embassy

Mr. Robert H. McBride, WE

Ambassador Alphand said he wished to discuss the Congo situation and first to say that Paris agreed with the U.S. position regarding the urgent need to prevent the Sudanese from offering passage and transit rights to the UAR, the Soviets and others for materiel for the Gizenga regime. He said he thought our three Ambassadors in Khartoum were cooperating on this score. The Secretary said that the Sudanese were still holding firm so far as we knew but that they were under heavy pressures. He was glad that the three Western powers were working closely together.

Ambassador Alphand said that the French also agreed with the U.S. estimate of Soviet intentions in the Congo and their desire to dominate this area. He said the French did not believe that getting rid of Hammarskjöld was the main Soviet objective but rather the Soviets wish to gain a bridgehead in Central Africa. What they seek in New York, Ambassador Alphand continued, is a good compromise from their viewpoint. On the spot, he thought, there would not be so much direct Soviet intervention as UAR support for the Gizenga regime on behalf of the Soviets. The French feel that Gizenga is weak and that it is essential to prevent his reenforcement.

Ambassador Alphand then inquired as to the story in the New York Times of February 20 by Raymond as to U.S. military plans for the Congo. He wondered how this jibed with the U.S. position in New York that there should be no outside interference in the affairs of the Congo. The Secretary said the story was untrue. Ambassador Alphand thought that we should in fact use the U.N. as a flag and as cover for assistance to the legal Government of President Kasavubu. If this failed, it might be necessary to undertake direct aid to the Congolese Government. The French did not think that any new U.N. resolution was required to provide for U.N. assistance to Kasavubu. He continued saying he knew that Ambassador Stevenson was working to obtain a resolution but thought that maybe the results would be bad. The cessation of hostilities, according to Ambassador Alphand, would assist the Gizenga regime. Furthermore, the text which was being worked on was a bad one in that it contained no reference to the legal Government of the Congo. The French felt strongly it was better to have no resolution at all.

Ambassador Alphand said that Paris' view was that the three Western powers should work together and perhaps closely with some of the pro-Western Africans to assist Kasavubu, either through the U.N. or bilaterally. The Western powers must give the Soviets the idea that they cannot dominate the Congo. Ambassador Alphand thought that the President's press conference statement on the Congo2 had been extremely good and that it had been well-received in France. He thought it would be most unfortunate if the Soviets should think that they could obtain a compromise which would permit continued existence of the Gizenga regime.

Ambassador Alphand then added that France believed Kasavubu should receive assistance but not Tshombe. France was, however, willing and indeed desirous of seeing the Ileo Government broadened.

The Secretary then noted that we had really two Congo problems; one inside the Congo and one outside. Inside, it was true that Gizenga appeared to be fairly weak and there seemed to be a fair chance that his regime might collapse. Therefore, it was important for the U.N. to have the authority to stop any outside assistance which could prop up the Gizenga regime. Although it was possible that the Secretary General might already have this authority, this was not his view and he thought he needed a strengthened mandate through a new resolution. The Secretary regretted that inside the Congo there was so little independent moderate Congolese leadership. Ambassador Alphand then inquired as to our views on the eventual form of government of the Congo and as to whether we favored a confederation. The Secretary said that we would accept the loosest and most tenuous confederation or even be satisfied if we could say that meaningful discussions toward obtaining such a confederation were under way. He said we were trying to assist Kasavubu, and it was difficult to do so when he sent political prisoners off to Kasai where they were murdered.3

The Secretary continued saying that the problem outside the Congo was one of strong African nationalist views on this subject, whereas inside the Congo there was not even sufficient Congolese nationalism to overcome tribalism in that country.

The Secretary then discussed the UAR resolution in New York4 which he said had major weaknesses, particularly in its absence of any references to the Secretary General, its absence of recognition of the Congolese Government even though the U.N. has already seated the Kasavubu delegation, its absence of a ban on introducing arms as well as forces and the wording of the section on the U.N. use of force if necessary.5 The Secretary said there were other things we did not like about the resolution too but maybe we could pay this price if the specific points which he mentioned above were somehow taken care of. Ambassador Alphand asked what the Soviet reaction to this resolution might be. The Secretary thought that they were under some pressure not to veto if some substantial African and Asian support for the resolution developed. The Secretary commented that the resolution was also badly drafted. He thought if it were improved along the lines which we desired the Soviets probably would veto it. The Secretary thought it was very likely that no resolution would emanate from the Security Council session. Ambassador Alphand said that this was not only the French view but the French desire as well.

The Secretary thought that if a resolution could interdict outside assistance this would be helpful. Ambassador Alphand said that it might be necessary at a later date to envisage bilateral aid and that such a resolution along these lines might hamper us if such a bilateral program in effect became necessary. The Secretary said that in the event of a collapse of the U.N. effort to the degree which would require some bilateral effort, the resolution would have been overturned in any event by the situation. The French Ambassador said that for the time being the French position did favor a U.N. effort over a bilateral one but the French were wondering what would happen if the U.N. failed. The Secretary said this, of course, would depend on the situation existing at the time. Should suppliers from the other side be coming in in large quantities, we would of course be obliged to take steps, but at that time it would be important to show that we had made every effort to achieve a solution through the United Nations. The Secretary thought this was very important. Ambassador Alphand said he was not sure that Paris really understood this point. Ambassador Alphand said, however, it was important not to exclude the possibility of a bilateral program. The Secretary said he hoped we would not come to this point. Ambassador Alphand reiterated that Paris did not rule out expanding the U.N. mandate provided it was still thought that the U.N. had some chance of succeeding. However, he thought it was important secretly to prepare for bilateral programs.

The Secretary said that all we had done here so far was a staff review of the situation. We have forces in the United States in a high state of readiness but we would certainly deny publicly that we were making any preparations along the lines of those reported in the Raymond story. We did not have any forces on alert status but had had standby forces available for some time.

Ambassador Alphand said that perhaps at some time we would need to use Brazzaville as a staging area and also would want the support of our friends in the French Community. He thought a joint effort should be planned in advance. The Secretary said that there was the problem of leaks and that anything along these lines should be done most carefully. Ambassador Alphand said in effect then that we considered planning of this type too dangerous for the time being, particularly given present Sudanese firmness and the serious logistic problem facing the Soviets. Therefore, for the present time, the Secretary thought it would be better for each to think out these problems on his own. It would perhaps be better not to make any firm plans now and then it would be easier to deny stories of the Raymond type.

The Secretary said that he would want to be talking with the French in the next few days in order to discuss what Ambassador Thompson might say to the Soviets about the Congo when he returned to Moscow. Ambassador Alphand said he thought we should be very tough with the Soviets and tell them frankly we would not accept a Communist regime in the Congo. He added Khrushchev anyway was not in a good logistic position vis-a-vis the Congo. The Secretary agreed and said that sometimes he thought we were over pessimistic about our own position in the Congo since the Soviets were having troubles too.

Ambassador Alphand reiterated that the French would not recognize Tshombe or Kalonji. He said France had not been responsible for sending any planes to Katanga. The Secretary said he understood that the three French planes which were delivered had been flown by an American company with an office in Luxembourg.6 Ambassador Alphand said the French were also being tough with Col. Trinquier and were taking steps to prevent recruiting activities by the Katanga in Paris.

1 Source: Department of State, Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Confidential. Drafted by McBride and approved in S on March 5. The time of the meeting is taken from Rusk's appointment book. (Johnson Library)

2 At his press conference on February 15, Kennedy commented on the Soviet statement the previous day on the Congo. He stated: "I would conceive it to be the duty of the United States and, indeed, all members of the United Nations to defend the Charter of the United Nations by opposing any attempt by any government to intervene unilaterally in the Congo." For the transcript of the press conference, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 91–99.

3 Hammarskjöld informed the Security Council on February 20 of a report of the execution of six Lumumba supporters who had been sent to Bakwanga by the Léopoldville authorities. The text of his statement is printed in Public Papers of the Secretaries-General of the United Nations, vol. V, pp. 355–356.

4 Reference is to a draft Security Council resolution that Ceylon, the UAR, and Liberia had submitted on February 17; see Document 34.

5 In February 18 messages to Nehru, Balewa, and Liberian President William V.S. Tubman, Kennedy urged revision of the draft resolution. (All in Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–1861)

6 See footnote 2, Document 31.

34. Editorial Note 34. Editorial Note

At meetings of the U.N. Security Council February 20–21, the Council considered the draft resolution submitted on February 17 by Ceylon, Liberia, and the United Arab Republic. The operative portions of Part A read as follows: "1. Urges that the United Nations take immediately all appropriate measures to prevent the occurrence of civil war in the Congo, including arrangements for cease-fires, the halting of all military operations, the prevention of clashes, and the use of force, if necessary, in the last resort;

"2. Urges that measures be taken for the immediate withdrawal and evacuation from the Congo of all Belgian and other foreign military and paramilitary personnel and political advisers not under the United Nations Command, and mercenaries;

"3. Calls upon all States to take immediate and energetic measures to prevent the departure of such personnel for the Congo from their territories, and for the denial of transit and other facilities to them;

"4. Decides that an immediate and impartial investigation be held in order to ascertain the circumstances of the death of Mr. Lumumba and his colleagues and that the perpetrators of these crimes be punished;

"5. Reaffirms the Security Council resolutions of 14 July, 22 July and 9 August 1960 and the General Assembly resolution 1474 (ES–IV) of 20 September 1960 and reminds all States of their obligation under these resolutions."

The operative portions of Part B read as follows: "1. Urges the convening of the Parliament and the taking of necessary protective measures in that connexion;

"2. Urges that Congolese armed units and personnel should be reorganized and brought under discipline and control, and arrangements be made on impartial and equitable bases to that end and with a view to the elimination of any possibility of interference by such units and personnel in the political life of the Congo;

"3. Calls upon all States to extend their full co-operation and assistance and take such measures as may be necessary on their part, for the implementation of this resolution." (U.N. document S/4722, also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pages 782–784; the texts of the U.N. resolutions cited are ibid., 1960, pages 528, 538–539, 547–548, and 593–594)

U.S. Representative Adlai E. Stevenson stated that the United States would support the draft resolution although it would have preferred to see three points specifically included: the responsibility of the Secretary-General for implementing the resolution, recognition that the United Nations was in the Congo to assist and uphold its sovereignty and independence, and the prohibition of outside military assistance through supplies and material as well as through personnel. He conceded, however, that these points were implied in the draft resolution. Concerning the authorization for the possible use of force in Part A, operative paragraph 1, he stated: "It is our understanding that authorization to use force, as used in paragraph 1, only 'in the last resort' means that every effort will be made to accomplish the purposes of this paragraph by agreement among the contending elements in that divided country. Clearly this resolution means that force cannot be used until agreement has been sought by negotiation, conciliation, and all other peaceful measures."

For the complete text of Stevenson's statement, see ibid., 1961, pages 778–782.

The Council first voted on a draft resolution that the Soviet Union had submitted on February 15. It would have 1) condemned the actions of Belgium, which, it alleged, led to the murder of Lumumba and his colleagues; 2) called for sanctions to be applied to Belgium; 3) enjoined the U.N. Command to arrest Mobutu and Tshombe, disarm all armed forces under their control, and remove all Belgian troops and personnel from the Congo; 4) directed the end of the U.N. operation in the Congo within one month; and 5) deemed it essential to dismiss Secretary-General Hammarskjöld from his post. (U.N. document S/4706) The Council rejected it by 8 votes to 1 (the Soviet Union), with Ceylon and the United Arab Republic abstaining.

In the early hours of February 21, the Council adopted the Ceylon-Liberia– UAR draft resolution by a vote of 9 to 0, with France and the Soviet Union abstaining. The Council then considered another draft resolution proposed by Ceylon, Liberia, and the United Arab Republic on February 20, condemning the unlawful arrests, deportations, and assassinations of Congolese political leaders, calling upon the U.N. authorities to take steps to prevent the occurrence of such outrages, and calling for an impartial investigation. (U.N. document S/4733 and Rev. 1) This failed to pass because of disagreement over the preamble, which mentioned Léopoldville, Katanga, and South Kasai as the scenes of "atrocities and assassinations" but did not mention Stanleyville. An amendment to replace the words "Léopoldville, Katanga, and South Kasai" by "in various parts of the Congo" was vetoed by the Soviet Union. The draft resolution failed to receive enough votes for adoption, receiving 6 affirmative votes and 5 abstentions, including the United States. For records of the meeting, see U.N. documents S/PV.941 and 942.

35. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 35. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, February 22, 1961, 2 p.m.

2264. Re: Congo. SC vote yesterday giving UN more authority has bought us time in Congo. Am sure Dept realizes better than I how close we have been, and may still be, to collapse UN's position there. If reminder is needed, it has been supplied by cable sent by President Abboud of Sudan to Hammarskjöld distributed yesterday as UN document S/4731 (pouched Dept) warning that Sudan cannot continue indefinitely in current circumstances cooperate with UN.

Sudan and Nigeria together hold some of main keys to UN—and our own—success in Congo. Both have been seriously shaken by recent events. We are indebted to President Abboud and Prime Minister Balewa for firm and steadfast way they have stood by UN in face of tremendous pressures to contrary. But we cannot count on them forever.

If SYG moves promptly, energetically and intelligently to implement SC's latest resolution much can be done restore UN's standing in Congo and thereby justify support our African friends have given it.

We must, however, anticipate trouble from Dayal while he remains in Congo, and, unless we take position of leadership, from other sources as well.

I fear greatest threat to successful outcome in Congo comes from our friends.

Kasavubu, who owes what international standing he has to U.S. success in getting his delegation seated in GA, has gotten himself into position where his usefulness as source of stability and legality has been greatly weakened—at least for time being. We cannot afford for the present to be put in position of defending him internationally when his ultimate responsibility for recent executions is only too apparent. But neither can we afford continued deterioration Kasavubu's position, since he retains legal position as Chief of State essential to reconstruction in Congo along lines we favor. I believe we must find ways to increase degree of influence we exercise over Kasavubu and that we must give this highest priority. Unless he brings indiscriminate killings to end and cooperates more closely with UN I am afraid his position—and ours—will crumble.

Tshombe is most serious problem in current circumstances. If as seems likely we cannot gain any control over him either directly or through Belgians, we must be prepared to oppose him firmly, and to uphold with equal firmness efforts SYG may have to make to bring Katanga into cooperation with UN.

At root of Kasavubu and Tshombe problems are Belgian and French organizations and individuals responsive in varying degrees to Belgian and French Govts.

I have no illusions that it will be easy get to roots of obvious Belgian and French ambivalence toward U.S. and UN role in Congo. I know it involves great complex of emotional, political, and economic problems. But if we cannot come to terms with problem and specifically convince Belgian Govt it must take action in accord with UN res we will face another crisis shortly and further loss of confidence in SYG with consequences probably fatal to UN operation in Congo. Energetic action on our part to back UN in carrying out new mandate, especially through our diplomatic support in capitals and in Congo, seems from here to be essential to prevent further deterioration, and to movement toward constructive solution.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–2261. Confidential.

36. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 36. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, February 22, 1961, 4:40 p.m.

1886. Paris pass USRO. Ambassador should inform Kasavubu and Ileo at earliest opportunity that while SC resolution sponsored by UAR, Ceylon and Liberia just passed was not entirely satisfactory from our point view, we convinced UN mandate needed strengthening if UN to be of any use in Congo, threat to world peace avoided, and UN itself preserved as a useful instrument for settlement international disputes. As background should explain necessity obtaining reasonably broad African support if any constructive resolution not to be vetoed by Soviets. We believe resolution can be interpreted usefully from our viewpoint in terms future UNOC activities on basis statements made by US and other representatives in SC. We feel GOC can live with this resolution. You may inform them confidentially, we had certain reservations about resolution since it had no explicit reference to authority SYG, to consultation with GOC and to prohibition outside material in addition personnel assistance (which would have constituted sanction against UAR assistance Gizenga). To get desired strengthening of UN mandate in sufficient time however we needed SC resolution and any explicit reference to consultation with GOC would probably have been unacceptable UAR and Ceylon, particularly since news Bakwanga executions arrived New York at most inopportune time.2 Further any explicit reference authority SYG might have induced Soviet veto. Re material aid, Stevenson made clear in speech explaining US vote that material aid was to be excluded, that the UN was in Congo to assist GOC maintain sovereignty independence Congo, that although use force authorized as last resort, solution was to be negotiated, not imposed, and that the authority of SYG carry out resolution was to be recognized. No member objected any these caveats. Also should note operative section resolution explicity reaffirms previous SC and GA resolutions, all which remain valid, affirming UNOC role based on cooperation with GOC; thus principle GOC sovereignty in effect re-affirmed.

You should assure Kasavubu and Ileo USG continues recognize them as legal central government and all others as dissidents, will do all possible prevent build-up Gizenga and will work for practical recognition by UNOC of GOC sovereignty in conduct future operations Congo. It important however that GOC not relax efforts achieve political reconciliation all Congolese leaders and parties.

Should emphasize however that reprehensible acts like Bakwanga executions make it extremely difficult for friends GOC render support. Our understanding is prisoners were sent South Kasai during Mobutu regime, not Ileo, however present GOC should be advised in strongest terms not turn over any prisoners to splinter governments. We realize, of course, execution Songolo3 and other anti-Lumumbistes equally reprehensible and Songolo was mentioned in earlier Stevenson speech.4 You should suggest to Kasavubu and Ileo it would be helpful if they write privately SYG express willingness consult with him on implementation new SC res. This would assist establishing point with SYG that they consider UN must consult GOC in new program, and would assist us in effecting removal Dayal.

Other addressees may draw on above presentation at discretion in talks with local officials.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–2261. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Woodruff; cleared by Sisco and in draft by Ferguson, United Nations Adviser for African Affairs Donald Dumont, and Jerome Lavallee of the Bureau of African Affairs; and approved by Penfield. Repeated to Paris, Elisabethville, Brussels, USUN, Brazzaville, Yaounde, Abidjan, Tananarive, and Dar es Salaam for Williams, who was visiting several African countries.

2 A February 23 memorandum for the files by Wallner states that Lebel asked him on February 21 why the United States had supported the resolution after Rusk had assured Alphand on February 20 of U.S. opposition unless the resolution was amended. Wallner told him that the report of the Kasai executions had radically changed the atmosphere in the Security Council and that Stevenson had therefore requested and obtained authorization to proceed differently. (Ibid., 332.70G/2–2361)

3 The execution of Alphonse Songolo, a member of the Congolese Parliament, and 14 other prisoners in Stanleyville was reported on February 22.

4 In the Security Council on February 15; for extracts, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 766–771.

37. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 37. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, February 23, 1961, 4:35 p.m.

1631. Department anticipates that one major result of present Security Council meeting will be general consensus that all Belgian military and para-military personnel and political advisers must be withdrawn from the Congo, including Katanga. Becoming increasingly clear US will be expected exert pressure on Belgians to take necessary steps to ensure removal these personnel; in fact, our influence with Afro-Asians on Congo will in large part only be effective to extent we demonstrate to them our success with Belgians, particularly since Belgium made scapegoat for Congo's ills in large part of world. So long as we appear tolerate presence Belgian military in Katanga (and elsewhere) our denunciations of Bloc aid will fall on deaf ears of most Afro-Asians. If we are to succeed in efforts keep Communists out of Congo we must take steps to place ourselves in unassailable position vis-a-vis Afro-Asians. Ineluctably this will give us serious problems with Belgians and will place yet another strain on NATO.

Department when consulting with Belgians on new US ideas on Congo problem, has pointed out repeatedly implications our approach held for Belgian military, para-military and political personnel. However, Belgians continue maintain Belgians in Congo employed by Congolese, not by Belgium, and express doubts re UN capability replace Belgians. Therefore, US efforts with Belgium to obtain withdrawal personnel from Congo could produce serious strains US-Belgian relations similar to last summer's experience, with serious results possible for NATO alliance as whole. Likelihood these adverse developments increased by fact Belgium beginning become involved in national election campaign. If particular attention not paid this problem now with Belgium, outgoing government might find it expedient launch anti-American campaign in defense its policies.

Accordingly, Department believes it highly desirable begin consulting closely with Belgians in Washington, New York and Brussels since manner in which problem handled with Belgium fully as important as substance of problem itself. Following position which designed to approach Belgians in most constructive light, should be taken with Belgians by addresses posts: 1. US fully cognizant past Belgian contribution to Congo and continues recognize essential role in Congolese economy which Belgian civilian technicians must play for some time in future if paralysis of Congolese economy to be avoided.

2. President has clearly stated US intention preventing Communist takeover in Congo and US continues full support of UN role there as best means achieve this objective.

3. However, success UN effort in Congo depends today in large measure on Afro-Asian support, which virtually impossible obtain on wide scale without withdrawal all Belgian military, para-military and political personnel from Congo, including Katanga which seems have become touchstone of West's good intentions in Africa.

4. US therefore desires consult with Belgians as early as possible to ensure they fully understand our position as well as ensure they have ample opportunity work out any differences with us.

5. In our view, is in long-term Belgian economic interest to withdraw these personnel in order to preserve Belgian civilian role in Congo. As Secretary has pointed out to Belgian Ambassador here, would be extremely helpful particularly if at least some of individual Belgian adventurers who not cooperative with UN could be removed rapidly. US particularly convinced that Belgian initiative this matter will ease problem with Belgium's critics as well as make it easier for Belgium's friends take helpful stance.

6. As Secretary also has stated to Scheyven, US envisages withdrawal those Belgian military, para-military and political personnel in organized units to be accomplished in consultation with Congolese authorities. US hopes Belgium will do what it can to encourage cooperation Congolese in this regard, and US for its part will encourage both SYG and Congolese cooperate this matter. Attitude SYG as recently reported by USUN would seem give reason hope for success this effort.

7. US will also make efforts in UN and elsewhere to point out Belgian role in Congo essential if economic chaos to be avoided; US efforts would include urging UN develop better relations with Belgians in Congo, pointing out that there are several different categories of Belgians in Congo and that for most part these Belgians (e.g., civilian employees of business enterprises, small businessmen and landowners, professional people) carrying on constructive role essential to Congolese economic life.

In addition above presentation, in response specific request from Belgian Embassy, Department plans give Embassy following views as to how new Security Council resolution's provisions relating withdrawal Belgian military and para-military personnel will be implemented (addressees should use with Belgians as appropriate): (a) Belgians should seek SYG's views on implementation resolution's provisions on Belgian personnel, since SYG charged with this task;

(b) In U.S. view, Belgians should take immediate steps to withdraw military, paramilitary and political personnel over which they exercise direct control and should take all possible steps see that individual adventurers and "freebooters" are rapidly withdrawn;

(c) As Secretary told Scheyven on February 19,2 those Belgian military and paramilitary personnel in organized units in Congo, including Katanga, should be withdrawn through consultations between SYG and appropriate Congolese authorities to ensure their withdrawal compensated for by alternative personnel arrangements acceptable to UN and Congolese. In this connection, Belgians should urge such consultations on SYG, pointing out personnel not under Belgian control; US would be glad support this point with SYG. By "alternative personnel arrangements" US specifically envisages that withdrawal these Belgian personnel must be carried out in carefully planned way in connection with UN steps to gain control of, regroup and discipline Congolese military units (para B(2) of SC resolution). US fully agrees with Belgians that withdrawal Belgian personnel must not lead to breakdown in order which could lead to large-scale exodus Belgian civilians.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–2361. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Chadbourn and Robert H. Miller of the Office of Western European Affairs; cleared by Wallner, Penfield, and Kohler; and approved and signed by Rusk. Also sent to USUN and repeated to Léopoldville and Paris.

2 A memorandum of the conversation, drafted by Miller, is ibid., Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330.

38. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 38. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, February 24, 1961, 9 p.m.

2274. Subject: Congo; Department telegram 1525.2

1. Stevenson called on SYG this morning to present Dept's views contained reftel. SYG referred to long meetings of Congo Advisory Committee which have been held since last res passed by SC. (Ritchie-Canada has offered to give Plimpton full account of these meetings tomorrow morning.) SYG said he now had extensive mandate which he described as "open ended" as to what might be done and "indefinite" as to who should carry it out. He had been going over res carefully with CAC members to make them understand problems of carrying out res and, though asking their advice, make them take some responsibility for implementation. He said Afro-Asians were very restless under strain of long AC meetings and his insistence that they must be involved with (and by implication responsible for) his decisions.

2. SYG illustrated by referring to operative para 1 of SC res authorizing use of force. He said under this para SC "passed the buck" to SYG as to when force was to be used. SYG had told AC in these circumstances he would have to refer every occasion for use of force to SC for decision which would of course mean no action would be taken. AC had to be willing to provide advice on when force might be used if they expected SYG to act without referral to SC.

3. Among members of AC there was no unity on interpretation of res; SYG said he had presented his views to them as follows: UN forces had been volunteered by member states on certain conditions; in cases of Tunisia, Ethiopia and Sudan each had said troops must not become parties to internal conflicts. In SYG's view such conditions had to be honored. This did not mean that soldiers could not fight under any circumstances; it did mean they could use force only under certain conditions, i.e., only if they were attacked. If they initiated combat they would thereby become parties to internal conflict. SYG could not be certain what limits of res were, but he did know what limitations were on use of troops as stipulated by contributing govts.

4. In short, SYG commented to us, interpretation he had given CAC was essentially same interpretation on use of troops he had given last Aug. Troops could take position to keep apart contending forces. They could use force to hold such positions against attack; they could not initiate fighting to remove local forces.

5. SYG said Jha (India) after hearing his interpretation had commented that SYG did not seem to see increased power that had been given by new res. SYG said he had made Jha and others present realize that res, whatever else it may have done, did not change his legal position as far as use of troops was concerned.

7. In response to question from Stevenson, SYG said he was trying to get AC to take responsibility as group for decision in implementation of res. Only way he could act was by some agreement among Africans which would offset Sov pressure. CAC meetings on res was on way to get support and understanding for what he had to do. He said an example of problem he faced was Mali whose rep no longer attending AC meetings. Maiga (Mali) came to first meeting and charged that SYG only using CAC to take responsibility in advance for his decisions. SYG said he replied that Maiga unwilling to give advice but would be anxious to criticize whatever was done under res.

8. Turning to specific measures SYG called attention to note verbale (ourtel 2271)3 he had sent to Belgians "for the record".4 He commented to Stevenson: "The real story, of course, is your pressure." SYG referred to proposal in note that senior UN official be stationed in Belgium to consult on withdrawal of Belgian personnel.

9. Stevenson suggested to SYG desirability of phasing out Belgians by replacing them with UN personnel. SYG said that CAC had accepted without any protest his idea of UN official to deal with Belgian Govt in making arrangements but he had not yet brought them to consider problems involved such as need for phasing out instead of complete and immediate withdrawal. He said this medicine must be given to them slowly. As for consultations with Congolese, he said de facto consultations would be carried out.

10. SYG then summarized his estimation of problem of Belgian withdrawal. In Léopoldville area he said all Belgian military officers and personnel could leave overnight without any serious impact on law and order. As for political advisers, these too could leave immediately without any damage being done since their advice had only hurt UN effort. SYG said he, of course, drew distinction between foregoing classifications and civilian technicians who were needed in Congo. In Kasai he said withdrawal of Belgian military personnel would be harmful to Kalonji's political fortunes but would not affect law and order. Bunche5 observed withdrawal from Kasai might in fact make area more quiet.

12. SYG said Katanga was key problem. Gendarmerie would be nothing without Belgian personnel and Tshombe would collapse without gendarmerie. SYG said his military experts believe UN should put six battalions into Katanga to maintain law and order since gendarmerie would be of no use following withdrawal of Belgians.

13. Stevenson asked SYG about UN replacing Belgian officers for gendarmerie and using it as law and order force. SYG was not favorable to idea though he did say UN might and could replace some Belgian officers in gendarmerie. He was insistent that UN troops must take responsibility for law and order directly and implied gendarmerie as main support for Tshombe was part of political problem of Katanga. It could not therefore be left in Tshombe's hands as effective force staffed with UN officers. SYG expressed opinion Tshombe would approach Léopoldville for reconciliation only when he could no longer rely on gendarmerie to maintain himself.

14. As for problem of political advisers in Katanga, SYG commented that no difficulty would result from their immediate withdrawal (except for Tshombe).

15. SYG then turned to military implications of new mandate. He said his advisers estimate 25 battalions (23,000 men) are necessary to maintain law and order, of which 6 will be in Katanga. This is on assumption troops would be used as SYG interprets his mandate; i.e., UN forces do not initiate use of force. UN forces would be responsible both for maintenance of law and order and prevention of civil war.

16. In short run, to stop civil war, UN would act to prevent troop movements. This, his advisers tell him, can be done with 19 battalions, which is size of present force if Moroccans and Indonesians stay (SYG said on Wed. he sent renewed urgent appeal to Morocco and Indonesia to leave their troops in Congo). In addition to 19 battalions for short-run, SYG is putting to Africans need for 5–6 battalions within next 2 weeks to be ready for Katanga.

17. In response to Stevenson's question, SYG said he thought he would get Indian troops and had also sent letter to present contributors asking for additional battalion. He thought he might get single battalions from Ethiopia, Tunisia, Nigeria, Ivory Coast and Madagascar. He did not feel he could ask for troops from Pakistan since it was member of military pact.

18. Stevenson then asked about techniques for carrying out UN operation and offered US assistance in providing equipment to to increase mobility of UN forces. He suggested to SYG idea of joint patrols in which Congolese and UN forces worked together. SYG said he had tried to bring this about last fall and felt it would be possible when Léopoldville and Stanleyville regimes had "merged." This SYG considers definite possibility.

19. Stevenson then noted close consultation which would be necessary between UN and Congolese authorities and noted absence of communications between Dayal and Congolese. SYG said he would have to have effective means deal with Kasavubu and for that reason he might have special rep in Léopoldville specifically on problem of Belgian withdrawal. When Stevenson suggested desirability of replacing Dayal since current contract about ended, SYG said Dayal would have to stay until "we are around corner" of present crisis. (Considering SYG's strong concern for holding together Afro-Asians, he may have this in mind in not replacing Dayal.) SYG gave no indication he had in mind replacing Dayal at end of his present contract; rather, that it would depend on UN action becoming stabilized.

20. In response to Stevenson's suggestions of possible candidates, SYG reviewed his efforts to find replacement for Dayal. He said PM Abboud (Sudan) had refused to allow Adeel (Sudan) take job. SYG said he then had asked Pachachi (Iraq UN Rep) to take job but Kassim (Iraq) had refused. SYG said Pachachi had been strong and constant supporter for UN effort in Congo from beginning and was independent, intelligent and able man. SYG said Burmese be very desirable but unlikely that Burmese Govt would make anyone available. As for Abbas (ECA Executive Secretary) he did not feel he could ask him to take job in view Abboud's refusal to allow Adeel take position. Re Sule (Nigeria), SYG and Bunche did not feel he was sufficiently strong to take such heavy responsibility. Iyasu (Ethiopia) appealed to SYG, but both he and Bunche noted this would mean two generals in charge of UN operations in Congo. SYG emphasized he would appoint Bourguiba, Jr. "within the hour" if his father would ever release him.

21. At end of conversation SYG turned to problem of Belgians. He said in view of compromising Belgian actions last summer re troop withdrawals, he hoped Belgians would issue statement soon saying they would abide SC resolution. He expressed hope US would make known its views supporting Belgian withdrawals in Paris as well as Brussels in order to prevent Belgian reliance on French assistance in face of UN and presumably US pressure.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–2461. Confidential.

2 Telegram 1525, February 22, set forth U.S. views on the Congo, which Stevenson was to discuss with Hammarskjöld. They included: 1) the U.S. belief that Dayal's successor should be selected and announced as soon as possible; 2) the recommendation that Hammarskjöld initiate discussions with the Belgians and Congolese looking toward phasing out all Belgian military or political advisers, with U.N. personnel replacing Belgian military advisers; and 3) suggestions for strengthening U.N. military forces and offers of U.S. assistance with communications and transportation. (Ibid., 770G.00/2–2261)

3 Telegram 2271, February 24, transmitted the text of a February 22 note verbale from Hammarskjöld to the Belgian Representative to the United Nations. (Ibid., 770G.00/2–2461) The text of the note verbale is printed in U.N. doc. S/4752 and in Public Papers of the Secretaries-General, vol. V, pp. 368–369.

4 For texts of letters dated February 24 sent by Hammarskjöld to a number of African countries, see U.N. doc. S/4752 and Public Papers of the Secretaries-General, vol. V, pp. 377–379. A text with variations for individual countries indicated is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 784–786.

5 U.N. Under Secretary for Special Political Affairs Ralph J. Bunche.

39. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 39. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, March 1, 1961, 9:11 p.m.

1709. Following based on uncleared memorandum conversation:2 Belgian Ambassador called on Secretary to discuss Congo March 1. His presentation followed largely lines Belgian reply to SYG letter re implementation SC resolution.3 He characterized SYG letter as "harsh" and said some elements Belgian Government wished ignore it. However decision finally made send "cooperative" answer. Scheyven stressed UN prestige low in Belgium and whole affair might become political football during electoral campaign. In recapitulating Belgian reply to SYG, which Belgians have now published, Scheyven stressed point that Belgian advisers should remain until UN replacements available and not withdraw immediately thereby causing chaos in Congo.

Scheyven also expressed distress at SYG letter to Kasavubu of February 274 which he alleged equated Kasavubu Government with Gizenga regime. He likewise made lengthy presentation Belgian position that takeover by Gizenga in Congo might lead to communization Central Africa.

Secretary thought most helpful step Belgians could take from our viewpoint was to effect some departures promptly and give considerable publicity thereto. He added it was obviously not our position that result UN effort should be to aid Gizenga.

Scheyven expressed some indignation that in Belgian view UN efforts had prevented Mobutu from advancing towards Stanleyville. He also claimed Dayal had deliberately suppressed reporting Gizenga massacre political prisoners until after SC debate while reporting Kasai murders immediately, thus inflaming SC atmosphere and "thereby causing US drop its amendments". Secretary inquired as to Belgian source re murders in Stanleyville and Dayal's firm knowledge of them. Scheyven said French Consul Stanleyville was source. Further with regard to SC resolution, Scheyven said Soviets had not vetoed it because it advanced their ends.

Finally in response to Secretary's query, Scheyven said their information, also from French Consul, was to effect eight Belgian soldier prisoners in Stanleyville were still alive.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–161. Secret. Drafted by McBride, cleared by Easum, and approved by Cleveland. Also sent to USUN and repeated to Léopoldville and Paris.

2 Drafted by McBride. (Ibid.)

3 Regarding Hammarskjöld's February 22 note verbale, see footnote 2, Document 38. The Belgian Representative replied in two notes verbales of February 27. (U.N. doc. S/4752, Annex II)

4 This letter is ibid., Annex IV; also printed in Public Papers of the Secretaries-General, vol. V, pp. 371–376.

40. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 40. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, March 2, 1961, 5 p.m.

1832. I am extremely concerned over explosive atmosphere developing here between UN and Congolese. A spark could touch it off at any minute.

As Department is aware there has for some time been serious antipathy between Dayal and GOC. The talk and resolution at SC about forcibly disarming ANC quickly produced charged atmosphere. ANC began digging trenches and generally fortifying military camps for defense. UNOC reacted by becoming more jumpy and declared alert. This followed by incident at resort lake Sunday, beating up of Canadians and disarming 22 Tunisians (Embtels 1802 and 1806)2

Today Adoula called "UN Congo policy bankrupt" as Congolese take a "we will die for our country" attitude. UN appears to be tensely expecting an incident that will permit them to wade in by force. As I have said several times before, I believe UN troops here would win any actual battle between them and ANC. I am convinced however that that would greatly complicate problem rather than solve it. I believe troops not involved and not actually disarmed would break up into units which would seek retaliate by attacks on isolated UN personnel in particular and probably on European population indiscriminately. This would expose people, particularly outside areas where people might be concentrated for protection, and in interior country. It could set off conditions much worse than those experienced last July and August. In fact situation similar to that following arrival Belgian paratroopers in Leopoldville but this time UN troops involved rather than expected eliminate problem on arrival.

I feel immediate and heroic effort must be made reduce tension before some untoward incident can touch it off.

With this situation in mind I saw Bomboko in his hospital room 1 p.m. while other Embassy officers are contacting other GOC officials urging calm and discipline to prevent bloodshed and the very thing they fear.3

Bomboko is fully aware of dangers in situation and has done and will continue to do his best to put lid on ANC and avoid incidents. Embassy officer is seeing para commander this afternoon at Bomboko's request to urge their confinement to barracks or dispatch to surrounding country on maneuvers to prevent possible conflict. I asked Bomboko whether mixed patrols might help solve problem to which he replied impossible in army or gendarmerie but perhaps could be successful with police. He cited breakdown within hours of similar effort on part Belgian para troops last July.

I told Bomboko had asked General MacEoin to discuss problem this evening at which time I propose ask him to do what is possible to reduce tensions. In my opinion MacEoin is level headed and anxious avoid open conflict as much as we are.

On other hand, as in case Tunisian broadcast at Lac de Ma valley Dayal capable giving direct orders to military units without going through MacEoin.

Finally I am satisfied that SYG and his staff in NY have been conditioned by Dayal's reporting to point where any incident can be deemed "final straw" and that they will genuinely believe the time has come for "display of force". What I feel they do not understand is that such display may well spell disaster for UN effort in Congo.4

Timberlake

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–261. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to Brussels, Paris, USUN, London, and Tunis.

2 Both dated February 27. (Ibid., 770G.00/2–2761)

3 Telegram 1949 to Léopoldville, March 3, commended Timberlake's approach to Bomboko and instructed him to approach Adoula and Dayal if he had not already done so and "impress on both the grave view US would take of UN–ANC relationship getting out of hand." (Ibid., 770G.00/3–261) Timberlake reported in telegram 1850, March 4, that he had made a demarche to Dayal. (Ibid., 770G.00/3–461)

4 In a March 3 telephone conversation, Rusk asked Stevenson to show this telegram to Hammarskjöld, stating that he thought it was "terribly disturbing in terms of the likelihood of a blow-up between Congolese and UN troops." He thought it was the best thing they could show Hammarskjöld about Dayal. He suggested that Stevenson tell Hammarskjöld that Rusk had called and was "very much disturbed" and had asked Stevenson to show Hammarskjöld the telegram. (Notes by Phyllis Bernau of telephone conversation, March 3, 8:51 a.m.; Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192) Dayal quotes a telegram from Hammarskjöld that apparently concerns this message in Mission for Hammarskjöld, pp. 224–225.

41. Editorial Note 41. Editorial Note

President Kennedy and a number of his advisers, including Secretary of State Rusk, Secretary of Defense McNamara, Director of Central Intelligence Dulles, and the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs McGeorge Bundy, discussed the Congo at a meeting at the White House from 3:15 to 5:15 p.m. on March 3. A March 3 memorandum from Department of State Counselor George C. McGhee to Rusk summarized the meeting's conclusions as follows: "In the discussions with the President today on the Congo, it was agreed that: "(1) The Department and Mr. Stevenson were to continue their efforts to have Mr. Dayal replaced as UN Representative in the Congo;

"(2) The CIA was to expedite its 'silver bullets' program in the Congo." (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

Notes of the meeting by JCS Chairman General Lemnitzer add little to this, but indicate that, after discussion of Laos, the President said they should move on to their "next legacy." Rusk then reviewed the situation in the Congo, speaking critically of Dayal and stating that information was lacking on Gizenga. Dulles stated that the Congolese were unanimous on one point: they would not disarm. (National Defense University, Lemnitzer Papers)

42. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 42. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, March 4, 1961, noon.

1845. For Secretary and Stevenson from Williams.2 There are three challenges in the Congo to which I feel we must direct our immediate attention with understanding and vigor. First the strengthening of the lawful government of Kasavubu. Until there is a broad nationally based government no political solution in the Congo will be forthcoming. I see no base for beginning other than the Kasavubu government which I believe has started to make some determined efforts in this direction and with encouragement may well do more. For example, every form of public recognition will be important. As a starter I suggested to Foreign Minister Bomboko who reacted favorably that the Kasavubu government acquire and follow the advice of some internationally qualified public relations expert not only to put the best face on government action but to advise on government action so as to develop a favorable world opinion. Believe Edward Murrow3 could suggest international experts from small countries from whom Congolese could pick one. Believe ways and means can be found to finance without making American agent.

Second the stabilizing of the military situation. I think we must cut the Gordian knot sometime and recognize that the Kasavubu army is the army of the country and that the other forces are not. The other part of this picture is of course that many parts of Kasavubu's army still need discipline. If proper relations with UN achieved I believe the UN can do much in this area.

Third, the averting of a run-away inflation which is not too far around the corner and which could erupt into military and civil disorder if it gets too bad. There have been numerous studies and recommendations in this field. (Embtels 1611,4 1733, 1734,5 1745,6 1775,7 1794, 1795,8 18379 and Embassy Airgram G–200.10 )

Finally, cutting across all these challenges and basic to the solution of each is the immediate removal of Dayal and the appointment of a successor who can and will work with the Congolese. In Washington and New York Dayal looks like a cloud no bigger than a man's hand. Here he is a thunderhead that escapes no one's attention. The foreign press here volunteered unanimously the idea that the big trouble in the Congo is Dayal. In press conference usual question is "do you think Dayal is neutral." American businessmen I met with said the root of our problem is Dayal. It is my observation that Dayal aggravates the tension here rather than mitigates it.

In my contacts with Congolese officials I was confronted with Dayal on each occasion. Kasavubu said he could and would work with UN but Dayal was impossible. I was invited to a special meeting of the cabinet and of three or four subjects brought to my attention expressions regarding Dayal were the most vehement. Finally I met with Foreign Minister Bomboko in hospital who talked for one hour and quarter almost entirely on the impossibility of working with Dayal. No Congolese anti-UN and all cite instances of cooperation in fields other than political and military. All praise and would like to work with Ralph Bunche.11

With all the evidence in there is one thing in the Congo about which there is no confusion here. That is Dayal must go if the UN is to assist the Congo to move with any sureness or speed toward stability. All of this is not to say that the Congolese make no mistakes because they do. However I firmly believe speedy removal of Dayal, appointment of suitable and sympathetic successor and encouragement in fields indicated would start resolution of Congo problem. Important asset is UN conciliation commission. Its report should be made public and commission should be kept alive for further action. Commission has won respect GOC officials and its recommendations were well received here. It is broadly based Afro-Asian group which should carry weight. However, since it refused knuckle under to Dayal, he has played it down. We should endeavor play it up.

Timberlake

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–461. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Brussels, USUN, and Lagos.

2 Assistant Secretary Williams visited Léopoldville February 27–March 4 in the course of a visit to several African countries.

3 USIA Director Edward R. Murrow.

4 Dated January 26. (Department of State, Central Files, 870G.01/1–2661)

5 Both dated February 14. (Both ibid., 770G.00/2– 1461)

6 Dated February 16. (Ibid., 343.170G/2–1661)

7 Dated February 21. (Ibid., 770G.00/2–2161)

8 Both dated February 24. (Ibid., 770G.13/2–2461 and 870G.49/2–2461)

9 Dated March 3. (Ibid., 870G.49/3–361)

10 Dated February 16. (Ibid., 870G.10/2–1661)

11 Bunche had preceded Dayal as Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the Congo July–September 1960.

43. Editorial Note 43. Editorial Note

Fighting broke out on March 3 and 4 at Banana and Matadi between Congolese soldiers and elements of the U.N. forces. Ambassador Timberlake reported in telegram 1853, March 4, that he had been in constant touch that afternoon with Foreign Minister Bomboko and Special Representative Dayal trying to arrange a cease-fire at Matadi. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–461) In telegram 1858, March 6, he reported a meeting with Bomboko and Major General Sean McKeown Commander of the U.N. Force in the Congo, to try to reduce the tension level. (Ibid., 770G.00/3–661)

On March 5, at 8:10 p.m. Greenwich time, the Embassy in Léopoldville communicated by voice radio with the Commander of U.S. Naval Task Force 88, then proceeding from Luanda to Capetown, and conveyed Ambassador Timberlake's recommendation that the task force should reverse course and proceed slowly north because of the developments in the Congo. The commander did so but informed the Commander in Chief, Atlantic Forces (CINCLANT) and the Chief of Naval Operations of his action and requested confirmation or instructions. At 10:30 p.m. Greenwich time, CINCLANT instructed him to proceed. (Notes and chronology prepared in the White House, attached to a memorandum from Kennedy to Rusk and McNamara, March 5; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

News of the task force's diversion appeared the next day in The New York Times. A memorandum from President Kennedy to Rusk and McNamara, March 6, reads as follows: "Did Ambassador Timberlake notify the Department before he requested the Admiral to turn around with his ships? Did the Admiral notify the Navy Department before he acceded to the request? If neither Department was informed before action was taken, is this because of faulty communications or because of the procedures that were followed in this case. In view of the importance that this decision has been given it seems that we should take action in the future to have an opportunity to review these decisions before they are finalized." (Rusk's copy of the memorandum from Kennedy cited above, originally dated March 5 but corrected to March 6; Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, White House Correspondence 1/61– 11/63)

A March 7 memorandum from Acting Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Penfield to Secretary Rusk outlined the sequence of events concerning the task force's diversion. It states that the CNO duty officer had informed Penfield by telephone on March 5 of Timberlake's request and had told him that Secretary of Defense McNamara was telephoning Rusk. Penfield replied that he thought the request should be met, provided that Rusk approved. (Ibid., Central Files, 770.5811/ 3–761) According to notes of a telephone conversation between Rusk and McNamara at 3:35 p.m. on March 5, they agreed that it was best to "take the cue from the man on the spot." (Ibid., Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192)

Timberlake cabled on March 7 in response to a request for further information that he had advised the task force commander by radio that he saw no reason why the ships should not resume their southward course. (Telegram 1951 to Léopoldville, March 6, and telegram 1866 from Léopoldville, March 7; ibid., Central Files, 770.5811/3–661 and 770.5811/3–761) Penfield's memorandum to Rusk states that he had recommended that the Navy instruct the task force to resume course and that it had done so. In a telephone conversation on March 7, McNamara told Rusk that the handling of the situation had been "sloppy," in that neither the initial diversion of the task force nor its return to course had been cleared with the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and that instructions had been issued that no orders should be accepted except through the Chiefs. (Ibid., Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192)

Kennedy's memorandum to Rusk and McNamara was subsequently numbered National Security Action Memorandum No. 26. Rusk's copy (cited above) bears a handwritten notation that the Secretary had discussed it with the President on March 23.

The task force, called Solant Amity, is described in a briefing paper with that title, undated but evidently prepared in January or February 1961, as a small Navy/Marine force in the South Atlantic/Indian Ocean area with the twofold purpose of providing a military capability for use in local emergency situations requiring the protection of U.S. citizens or for assistance in local natural disasters and making a good will cruise to show the flag in African countries. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Williams Records, Trips File, Gov. Williams AFW Book) It had been visiting West African ports since late November 1960. Two of the five ships had been diverted in January to bring emergency food supplies to the Congo and transport Guinean troops from the Congo. Documentation concerning Solant Amity is in Department of State, Central File 770.5411.

44. Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency 44. Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1

Washington, undated.

DEATH OF PATRICE LUMUMBA

Though no single report is so definitive or complete that it can be accepted as an official version of Lumumba's death,2 there is sufficient information on hand that recurs through the welter of reporting on the subject to permit advancing the following: a. Patrice Lumumba, Maurice Mpolo, Minister of Sports and Youth in the Lumumba cabinet and Joseph Okito, former acting president of the Congolese Senate, were flown from Moanda to Elisabethville on January 17. Immediately prior to the flight they were moved by truck and small aircraft from their military prison quarters in Thysville to Moanda—a seaside resort town which does not have a UN garrison. From the delay in reception in Elisabethville it is apparent that Katanga authorities were not expecting this cargo at that particular time, though there were inconclusive conversations on the subject between Leopold- ville and Elisabethville authorities in early January when fears developed that the Léopoldville authorities could no longer trust the Thysville garrison.

b. All three prisoners died shortly after their arrival in Katanga. There are conflicting reports about how death was met and when, but the report of one of our most reliable Elisabethville sources that the trio were executed on January 17 within hours after arrival stands as the most credible. Confirmation is to be found in a report from a long-time Léopoldville asset directly quoting Fernand Kazadi, Commission General for National Defense, who claims to have been present at the execution. A further report tending to confirm the execution came to one of our staff agents in Léopoldville from Albert Kalonji's representatives in Brazzaville on February 9. Above references could be expanded, and though further reporting differs considerably in details, it all points toward execution of the trio within hours of arrival in Elisabethville. It is interesting to note that news of the execution was very tightly held and rumors did not get into wide circulation until early February. Of further note is the fact that a variety of Belgian liaison sources in the Congo who could be expected to have pertinent information never provided any relevant information on the fate of Lumumba.

c. The announcement of the Katanga Government on February 10 regarding the escape of Lumumba and subsequent death at the hands of tribal enemies never gained general acceptance in Congolese circles. Katanga President Tshombe's unwillingness to cooperate with the UN investigative team and paucity of evidence made available to the press by the Katanga Interior Minister made such a poor case for the escape story that their actions had a reverse effect and served to convince interested parties the escape story was a thinly veiled fraud to cover up a political murder.

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Congressional Affairs, Review Staff Files. Secret. The memorandum, unsigned and undated, is filed with a March 7 covering note to Dulles, which reads as follows: "You were asking that the Division get together in a memorandum our best estimate of the actual facts and circumstances surrounding the death of Patrice Lumumba. This memorandum is attached and I am not sure whether you intended to send it to the President or not. FMC" The note was initialed by Dulles, but the document bears no indication that it was sent to the President. It is filed with a routing slip of June 19, 1975, which states that it was located in an AF/DDP (Africa Division of the Directorate of Plans) file.

2 See Document 6.

45. Memorandum of Conversation 45. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, March 8, 1961, 4:20–5:18 p.m.

SUBJECT

Summary Record of Conversation—Visit of President Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana2

PARTICIPANTS

U.S. The President

The Secretary of State

Mr. J.K. Penfield, Acting Asst. Secretary, AF

Ghana President Kwame Nkrumah

Hon. A.E.A. Ofori-Atta, Min. of Justice

Hon. Tawiah Adamafio, Min. for Establishment

The bulk of the conversation consisted of a monologue on the Congo and related topics by President Nkrumah, punctuated by occasional questions by the President and the Secretary. President Nkrumah seemed to go out of his way to minimize his differences of view with the United States position. For instance, on his proposal to withdraw diplomatic missions from Léopoldville he said, "why not give it a try? Let them get out for just a month and see if it doesn't make a difference" (at this point Mr. Adamafio made his only contribution to the conversation, murmuring, "three months").

Mr. Nkrumah's comments were somewhat rambling and at times repetitious, but he concentrated on two phases of the situation, restoration of law and order, with emphasis on removal of the Belgians, and isolation of the Congo from all outside influences except the UN.

On the first, he expressed the conviction that the indiscipline and terrible excesses of the "Force Publique" could quickly and easily be controlled if Belgian military and para-military personnel were removed and the UN made "just a show of force". He illustrated his point by asserting that the Ghanaian troops in the Kasai had stopped the Gizenga forces at Luluabourg and had then persuaded all the forces there to lay down their arms. He at first maintained that even in Katanga removal of the Belgians should not be too difficult but did not contest the President's explanation of the limitations on United States ability to influence our European allies, Belgium, Portugal or the French on Algeria.

On the UN role, President Nkrumah played down his Afro-Asian ideas and emphasized his support of the UN. He expressed approval of the February 21 Security Council resolution and said he had made it clear he did not want his UN speech on March 7 to be used as a pretext for reopening a Congo debate. He felt that practically all Afro-Asian states supported Hammarskjöld and said he had told Mr. Gromyko in New York that the Soviets should give up their campaign to force him out. He agreed with the President's expression of hope that more general support of the Secretary General would be manifested because if the United States was too far out in front in backing him there was a tendency in some quarters to pin a U.S. label on him. President Nkrumah implied that his support of the UN has been consistent. He said, for instance, that he had stood alone at the Casablanca Conference against withdrawal of troops from the UN force and had finally succeeded in forcing a compromise under which the participants agreed to await developments for a month before making a decision on withdrawing their contingents. He expressed approval of the work of the CAC and disapproval of a Security Council meeting in the Congo until the situation there has considerably improved. He was very relaxed about U.S. activities in the Congo and said he saw no objection to U.S. planes and ships operating there as long as they were under UN command.

On the internal political situation President Nkrumah said he had little hope for constructive results from the Tananarive Conference3 because the Congolese participating could not take any meaningful decisions which would stick. He expressed some contempt for Gizenga's abilities and suitability as a leader but said he is no Communist. He made no comments on other Congolese politicians except a rather casual remark that Kamitatu is a genuine nationalist who might emerge as a real leader. He mentioned elections and the reconvening of Parliament as necessary steps in Congolese political development but appeared very flexible on details, placing his emphasis on the principle that the Congolese themselves should be free to work things out in their own way.

In summary, the two Presidents found themselves in agreement on three principal points on the Congo, (1) removal of Belgian military and para-military personnel, (2) neutralization of Congolese military forces and insulation of the Congo against outside influences and military supplies, and (3) freedom for the Congolese to work out their own political development. On the last point the Secretary called attention to our own history to illustrate the importance we attach to the principle that government must be based on consent of the governed. In addition to examples from our early history he cited our important role in assisting Indonesian independence and President Roosevelt's heavy pressure on Churchill, even while we were allies in a world war, in regard to India. There should be no doubt, therefore, in any reasonable mind, that the U.S. would always be basically, and in the long run effectively, on the side of anti-colonialism and independence, whether the problem is Portugal and Angola or France and Algeria or any other.

President Nkrumah exhibited no desire to talk about U.S.-Ghana bilateral relations and at one point turned off the Secretary's attempt to bring up the Volta project. President Nkrumah did, however, make the point that the U.S. should broaden its view of Africa and look at the continent as a whole, a subject which he said he had raised when he was here in 1958.4 The President took this opportunity to explain the difficulties we face in Africa. He cited the resentment inspired in "colonialist" circles by Governor Williams' alleged statement on "Africa for the Africans" in Nairobi5 and pointed out that despite this, Governor Williams had been given an unfriendly reception by the press in Lagos. The President also expressed his surprise and puzzlement over receipt of a recent personal message from Sekou Toure accusing him of complicity in Lumumba's murder.6 President Nkrumah seemed sympathetic but offered no very specific advice or comment.

President Nkrumah also made a particular plea to avoid confusing Communism and nationalism in Africa. He said he was told in New York yesterday by an East African who has recently been making speeches in the United States that whenever the speaker mentioned him (Nkrumah) or Sekou Toure favorably, he was accused by his audience of being a Communist. President Nkrumah emphatically insisted that there is not a single organized Communist party in sub-Saharan Africa. He explained that Ghana practices its own form of socialism which is in reality a mixed economy. To illustrate his problems he said the Government has for some years been subsidizing five British gold mines in Ghana. He could not continue this but neither could he permit the mines to close because of the unemployment problems which would be created. In the end, therefore, the Government had bought up the shares.

On the subject of aid, President Nkrumah's only substantive comment was that aid from the East is much more speedy and simple than that from the West. He gave as an example his efforts to get transportation for Ghanian troops to the Congo last summer. When he had exhausted all other means he appealed to the Soviet Ambassador and in three days Soviet planes were at his disposal in Accra.7

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Ghana. Secret. Drafted by Penfield on March 9 and sent to the White House for approval under cover of a March 13 memorandum from Department of State Executive Secretary Lucius D. Battle to Ralph A. Dungan of the NSC Staff. The time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is taken from the President's appointment book. (Kennedy Library)

2 Nkrumah made an informal visit to Washington following a visit to the United Nations in New York. He set forth his proposals on the Congo in an address before the General Assembly on March 7. (U.N. doc. A/PV.961) Additional documention relating to his visit is scheduled for publication in volume XXI.

3 Kasavubu, Ileo, Tshombe, Kalonji, and other Congolese Government representatives and provincial authorities met March 8–12 at Tananarive, Malagasy Republic. Gizenga was invited but did not attend.

4 For documentation on Nkrumah's visit to the United States July 23–26, 1958, see Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. XIV, pp. 645–652.

5 Information concerning Williams' arrival statement in Nairobi and the controversy it engendered is scheduled for publication in volume XXI.

6 A February 14 telegram from Guinean President Sekou Toure to Kennedy, referring to Lumumba's murder, stated, "This unspeakable crime destroys the hope that African nationalism had placed in your government, which was unwilling to use its authority to prevent the liquidation of legality in the Republic of the Congo." (Filed with a February 18 memorandum from Stoessel to Dungan; Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–1461)

7 A March 17 memorandum from Battle to Dungan stated that, according to U.N. records, the United States and United Kingdom had airlifted 1,842 of 2,192 troops, 159,281 of 196,639 pounds of stores and equipment, and all of the 55 vehicles transported from Ghana to the Congo in July 1960. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Ghana)

46. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 46. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, March 9, 1961, 8 p.m.

1971. Dept fully concurs in views expressed by Ambassador Stevenson in USUN tel 2404 to Dept rptd Léopoldville 1970.2 You requested convey substance this message at highest available level as US position. In so doing you should indicate US believes departure of Dayal 3 should be seized on by GOC immediately as opportunity to reestablish harmonious relationships with UN. This would dramatize importance of having UN operation in Congo in hands of reps with whom GOC will deal and would highlight fact that major obstacle to past cooperation has been Dayal. In this connection we consider it essential GOC drop conditions which it has attached to returning to UN key installations such as Matadi which are obviously necessary to successful operation of UN command. You may indicate in US view, best way of assuring Dayal will not return to Congo is for GOC to prove by concrete actions difference in relationship which can exist when Dayal removed from scene.

You may also indicate we greatly encouraged by forthcoming letter of Kasavubu to SYG re retraining program for Congolese forces. US regards this as constructive step and hopes GOC will continue take actions in same spirit.4

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–861. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Buffum, cleared by Wallner and Ferguson, and approved by Penfield. Repeated to USUN.

2 Referring to press reports that the Acting Congolese Prime Minister had demanded the establishment of joint Congo and U.N. controls on the movement of U.N. forces, telegram 2404 from USUN, March 8, urged that Timberlake be instructed to try to persuade the Congolese to suspend or modify their demands and cooperate with the United Nations. (Ibid.)

3 Stevenson reported in telegram 2373, March 6, that Hammarskjöld had told him the previous evening that he intended to recall Dayal to New York and send Mekki Abbas of the Sudan to the Congo as Acting Representative for the next few weeks, after which he would name a new representative. (Ibid., 304.11/3–661)

4 Timberlake responded in telegram 1888, March 10, that for some months the major part of his time had been devoted to "preventing or watering down ultimata to the U.N." but that "alas, they do not consult us in advance." (Ibid., 770G.00/3–1061)

47. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 47. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State1

Moscow, March 10, 1961, 4 p.m.

2145. Congo. When I brought up subject of Congo, Khrushchev remarked US knew USSR considered UN guilty of Lumumba's death and Hammarskjöld personally responsible and accordingly thought it necessary reorganize UN. I then covered points Deptel 1403.2

Khrushchev replied they considered Kasavubu had sent Lumumba to Katanga, that Tshombe had killed him with Hammarskjöld's connivance, and all three men guilty and should be tried. He said international organization must be organization for peace, but UN has been used to oppress peoples and help colonialists retain colonies. He said USSR cannot support organization which assists colonialists, who are not only Belgians but also those who oppose struggle for liberation. He said USSR would not recognize Hammarskjöld and would ignore him. I replied we were not always satisfied with UN decisions either but for different reasons. We thought it wise to keep cold war out of Africa and we still think it possible achieve unified and independent Congo, although it would take time.

Khrushchev replied that in Congo Parliament had been elected, govt created, and this govt should have been supported. When it had asked UN for assistance, UN had sent troops and aid, but had arrested Lumumba, and Hammarskjöld had gone to Katanga instead of seeing Lumumba.3

I interjected to point out that when Hammarskjöld was in Katanga, Lumumba had already been dismissed by Kasavubu.4 Khrushchev answered Kasavubu did not have right to dismiss Lumumba since only Parliament had that competence. He asked how socialist states could support a policy of assistance to those who betray own people. He said policy of UN is policy of colonialists and that USSR would struggle against this policy with all its means. He said US and USSR had different positions on this question and prospects were not exactly bright. He said US has been banner of democratic bourgeois freedom but now unfortunately it has shown it does not support popular movements. He said he did not know what policy President would follow, but in fact policy of US in UN has not undergone any change. He said our positions are completely contradictory.

I acknowledged we seemed be very far apart on this question.

Later in our discussions Khrushchev again brought up question of changing UN machinery to prevent what has happened in Congo from occurring again. He said perhaps in future US would have minority position in UN like Soviet position at present time. He said UN is not parliament where decisions are made by majority. He said decision to provide veto for major powers had been wise one, because if major powers not in agreement decision could be imposed only by war. Referring to his proposal for three UN secretaries—"yours," "ours," and "neutrals"—he asked is that really bad? He said better to take no decision if one side is opposed.

I said I thought it was possible to have objectivity in Secretariat which would be loyal to organization rather than to any country. I said we had been disappointed in some UN decisions and had thought Hammarskjöld had supported other side. I said we accepted idea of organization not tied politically to any one. Such organization would be most important in event of any complete disarmament, since veto power would paralyze organization.

Khrushchev replied UN one-sided organization for US at present and they did not want UN to become organization for USSR, but desired truly international organ. If our side had Secretary-General, he asked, could you rely on us? He then said perhaps there is different way to prevent any side from suffering harm to its interests.

I agreed we must preserve veto right in Security Council, but pointed out Secretariat does not make policy, only executes it. I said if organization could not act because of lack agreement among three secretaries, organization would lose its value. I said for example suppose Secretariat were given some specific task such as supervising carrying out of an agreement on disarmament. If one side decided to cheat it could block inspection. Khrushchev got point but answered that such inspection would be the right of all. He then said that had there been three UN secretaries, perhaps in Congo there would be new govt, but one legally established, and Lumumba would still be alive. UN had become instrument not for peace but for inflaming of passions. I replied we did not agree on facts, yet we thought there is hope for settlement in Congo since nothing in situation there is basic to US or Soviet interests.

Khrushchev said you have your Belgian allies. I replied we did not claim Belgians have always acted well and we would be prepared bring pressure on them. Khrushchev at this point said it was clear we were in full disagreement on Congo and changed subject.

Comment: Noteworthy that throughout discussion Khrushchev referred to internal Congo situation only in terms of past and refrained from any mention of possible patterns for settlement there. He seemed particularly bitter about Tshombe, whom he characterized as stooge of Belgian mining monopoly.

Thompson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–1061. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution.

2 Telegram 1403 to Moscow set forth U.S. views on the Congo, which the Ambassador should cover in an upcoming conversation with Khrushchev: 1) all military and para-military assistance to the Congo should be provided through the United Nations, and the United States would do its best to see that no other aid was provided to any faction in the Congo from any source; 2) the United Nations offered the best hope of an acceptable solution to the Congo problem, but if it did not succeed, the United States would have to review its position; 3) Kasavubu's dismissal of Lumumba was legal, but a successor government would need Parliamentary approval and the Parliament should therefore meet at an early date; 4) Hammarskjöld had full U.S. confidence and support; and 5) all political prisoners should be released once the United Nations could guarantee their personal safety. (Ibid., 770G.00/2–2861)

3 Reference is to Hammarskjöld's visit to the Congo August 11–15, 1960. He did not see Prime Minister Lumumba but accompanied the first U.N. troops into Elisabethville on August 12.

4 Kasavubu dismissed Lumumba on September 5, 1960.

48. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 48. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, March 12, 1961, 2 p.m.

1894. Department pass to military concerned. Carlucci2 returned from Stanleyville last night: 1. Although situation Orientale outside Stanleyville has deteriorated practically into chaos, Lundula,3 aided by Gizenga has performed miracle in keeping order in Stanleyville following Lumumba death. Lumumba, Gizenga Chief Cabinet said Army so excited it almost turned against authorities when they exercised control. At least 3,000 of 8,800 soldiers on payroll now reasonably responsive orders of Lundula. Only serious incidents were arrest one European and wife yesterday and shooting Songolo group. Latter done by Salumu who then forced into hiding. He is now back. Authorities proudly and correctly point to fact that no one in UN camp at Stanleyville and that they have never attacked UN.

2. There are four centers political power. (A) Lundula who now worshiped by Europeans and is almost too moderate and reasonable for Stanleyville.

(B) Gizenga and PSA group who have inherited going machine. Danger is that they "foreigners" to Stanleyville and over period time their position could weaken.

(C) Gbenye,4 Minister Interior in Gizenga Government and heir to Lumumba [as MNC?] President. Gbenye has support MNC youth group which has been chief trouble-making element. Gbenye is a potentially dangerous vindictive stupid racist.

(D) Provincial government which according Manzikala "has had enough of this central government and their friends who promise aid which never comes." Whereas other three elements still work harmoniously Manzikala is struggling to get out from under. Trouble is he lacks strength and greatly lost face when Gizenga stopped him from proceeding Tananarive.

3. Financial situation now critical. Provincial government can not pay March salaries and Lundula will have difficult time paying troops. Far from producing change in political orientation continuance of blockade more likely result in downfall of moderates like Lundula and Manzikala and lead Stanleyville into chaos which will take years to repair. Chief sufferers will be Europeans.

4. Although they do not like UN and told Embassy Officer UN has deceived us by not using our money through entire Congo, Gizenga and company have decided as matter of policy to cooperate with UN. Gizenga recognizes authority chief state and told Embassy Officer he only wished Kasavubu would act as chief state for entire country and stop starving own people. While he might be willing attend conference on what he considers "neutral" territory (not Tananarive) Gizenga stated solution can come only through Parliament. He gave word of honor he would attend session if security assured, and if voted out, he would take position in opposition.

5. Reputable source reports parachute drops of ammunition at Komba on February 17 at 2200; and a landing at Banalia of a DC–3, possibly with UN markings, at 1600 on February 28. Cargo probably ammunition. Rumors of three Russians training army unconfirmed.

6. Despite above, which amounts to very little aid, authorities have made clear to bloc journalists they could not ensure their security, they have chased out one Greek Communist and jailed another, have placed extremist Kashamura under house arrest, and released moderate Weregemere. Three Yugoslav journalists presently in Stanleyville are discouraged and wish depart. All authorities Stanleyville claim no foreign influence exists in Stanleyville and that, in contrast to Kasavubu and Tshombe they are truly neutral. Lubuma offered take Embassy Officer on tour military camp to prove no foreign instructors present.

7. Most amazing change is attitude toward US. Carlucci who three weeks ago was labeled a spy was given red carpet treatment. Lubuma rushed to greet him and talked for four hours, Gizenga saw him privately for over hour and organized reception his house attended by General Lundula, six key members Gizenga Government and two members provincial Government. Courtesy was overwhelming although frank three hour discussion did include criticism US policy. All emphasized they not Communists and appealed for US understanding and aid. Even Gbenye asked for help.

8. Obvious inference is that entire group has become disillusioned with Russian promises which never materialized. Recognition was not even followed by Russian delegation and so far no country has sent Embassy recognizing Gizenga Government. Thus they emphasize that they are honest, clean living neutrals who trying restore order and will accept aid from anyone. Danger exists Russia might step up aid since UN withdrawing troops from Paulis and Bunia thus leaving major airfields unguarded.

9. This appears to be opportunity which should be siezed immediately. Probably three weeks exist before present picture changes. Need for medical supplies urgent. I intend ask Léopoldville authorities make offer supply medicine and we may have to back them up with stocks and transport. I will also take up plan with Abbas today.5 If GOC here makes public announcement they sending up medical supplies this could stimulate breakthrough on unifying country. In this connection believe we should start now to get one aircraft and medical supplies ready to bring to Léopoldville under UN auspieces. Thus while we do work GOC here will get credit. This should be done this week if possible.

Carlucci will proceed Stanleyville in advance to ensure security of aircraft and cargo.

Timberlake

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–1261. Limited Official Use; Niact. Repeated to Brussels and USUN.

2 Second Secretary and Consul at the Embassy in Léopoldville Frank C. Carlucci III.

3 Victor Lundula, commander of the armed forces in Orientale and Kivu.

4 Christophe Gbenye.

5 Timberlake reported in telegram 1895, March 12, that he had discussed this with Abbas and McKeown, both of whom favored the idea. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–1261)/

49. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 49. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, March 13, 1961, 8 p.m.

2447. Verbatim text. Congo. Following is text SYG letter to Stevenson 12 March; request instructions re reply:

"We are now facing a crucial and, indeed, in some respects a more dangerous phase in the Congo operation. The new resolution is some four weeks old and, while everything has been done to speed up its implementation, we have been hampered by a temporary weakening of the military force which is now gradually being overcome by reinforcements.

In good or bad faith, reactions to the SC resolution of 20/21 February have been very negative in the Congo. This explains much of the considerable difficulties we have been running into at the time of our greatest military weakness. The resolution has been interpreted as requesting the disarming by force of the ANC, the occupying of the territory and the putting of the country under UN trusteeship. It is most regrettable that such grave misinterpretations and misrepresentations in many cases have carried the highest authority, as shown by documents circulated to the SC. Naturally, we have done whatever we could to straighten out these misrepresentations, but without any mass media at our disposal and being suspected by the authorities we have not so far managed to turn opinion in the right direction. It has been difficult to escape the impression that other influences, hostile to the UN and its operation, have taken advantage of the situation to kindle the fires of misunderstanding, suspicion and fear.

This is the situation I wish to bring to your urgent attention. We shall continue to do our utmost, in direct contacts, in official communications, and in such other ways as may be available to us, to explain over and over the purpose of the UN and the substance of the new resolution. We shall underscore once more that the UN neither would, nor could, establish itself as some kind of administering authority; that we only seek to get the army out of the political sphere and turn it into an effective, non-political national instrument for the maintenance of law and order; that we wish to provide a general framework of peace within which the Congolese could find their own solution to their problems; and that our guiding principle is to give full substance and weight to their independence and integrity while safeguarding international peace and security.

However, I would, through you, wish to appeal to your government to give urgent instructions to their representatives in Léopoldville to use energetically all their influence in the same direction, in support of the UN, and therefore ultimately in the best interest of the Congolese themselves. I am certain that if the voice of your country would be added to other voices, speaking for reason, giving a true evaluation of the UN purposes, it would carry considerable weight. I trust that along with the support your government has kindly given to the UN in its present effort, and especially its support for the SC resolution of 20/21 February, it may also wish to help the organization in the way I suggest.

An acute case in point is the arrival of the Indian re-inforcements. Rash words have been said in the Congo about these re-inforcements, the significance of which both for the maintenance of our force and for the total political balance is obvious to you. Were latent anti-Asian feelings of the kind we find in many places in Africa, combined with the misunderstandings of the resolution, with the present wave of hostilities against the UN and with the vain belief that this is a moment at which the Congo might afford a break with the UN, to lead to incidents at, or around, the arrival of the Indian re-inforcements, this might obviously have the gravest consequences, both politically and militarily. We do what we can to prepare the ground, and we have no evidence of any hostile plans, but we feel that all influence should be exerted to ease the transition and to get the force re-established at its necessary strength without obstacles or incidents, whatever their origin or direction, but in particular without incidents which would create open friction between the Congolese and important Afro-Asian countries.

I am certain that you will fully appreciate my motives in making this informal demarche through you to your government, and I know that I can count on your personal support."2

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–1361. Confidential; Priority.

2 Telegram 1770 to USUN, March 21, suggested that Stevenson reply either orally or in writing that the United States would continue its support for U.N. operations in the Congo and that it agreed with Hammarskjöld's view of the U.N. purpose in the Congo. Stevenson should point out orally to Hammarskjöld that the United States had sought to reinforce U.N. actions "through every diplomatic means at its disposal," but there could be no substitute for direct relations between Congolese officials and U.N. officials who enjoyed their trust and confidence. (Ibid.)

50. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 50. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, March 16, 1961, 5:34 p.m.

1997. It occurs to Department recent developments, including Dayal's absence,2 Tananarive Conference3 and better attitude on part Gizenga and his followers, give us opportunity take certain steps which might further improve atmosphere. These would include: 1. GOC should be as forthcoming as possible in its negotiations with UN on return of Matadi and Banana.

2. Kasavubu should publicly reiterate his offer to accept a UN training program for the Congolese.

3. Kasavubu might publicly appeal to the leadership of Orientale and Kivu (if any) to send representative next round-table conference. He might be able enhance his position as chief of state by offering meet privately with rebel leadership in advance of next conference. If rebel leaders fear their physical safety, he could request UN sponsorship and protection.

4. GOC should publicly offer send non-strategic supplies such as food and medical equipment to Orientale as foreshadowed urtel 1877.4

5. McEoin should be encouraged urgently enter negotiations with General Lundula to secure agreement bring his forces under UN control. Financial lever may be useful in bringing present leadership to terms.

6. Pursuant SC February 21 resolution we must support UN opposition to Mobutu's reported offensive. We realize these reported offensives may be journalistic embellishments but they attract great attention here and do not help case of GOC in UN.

7. Withdrawal of Belgian advisors should be accelerated and be well publicized from your end.

8. Kasavubu's cooperation should be sought re inducing Congolese public opinion accept Indian troops although we agree of course heavy concentration these troops in Léopoldville most undesirable and possibly Kasavubu should be assured we are using our influence to avoid this if possible. FYI. If tension increases in Léopoldville, we would explore with SYG possibility bringing Indian troops into Luluabourg instead of Léopoldville and deploying them from there. In view Tshombe's reaction reported Elisabethville Tel 6245 use of Kamina this purpose appears unwise but should be kept in mind if situation changes. Same could apply to Stanleyville. End FYI. (Sending you separately SYG aide-memoire on Congolese acceptance Indian troops6 and hope you will do what you can along lines he suggests.)

9. Kasavubu might be told US welcomes results Tananarive Conference and congratulates Congolese on success of this important first step. From our point of view, however, Congolese case would be considerably stronger if they would in future omit critical statements regarding Security Council Resolution7 and emphasize their efforts induce all Congolese leaders take part in new confederation.

Department transmits foregoing merely as general guidelines and you should feel free use your discretion in discussing them with Kasavubu, Ileo, Abbas, and Belgians. Your comments would be appreciated.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.49/3–1661. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Ferguson and Buffum, cleared by Wallner, and approved by Penfield. Repeated to USUN and Brussels.

2 Dayal was in New York.

3 Kasavubu, Ileo, Tshombe, Kalonji, and other Congolese Government representatives and provincial authorities met March 8–12 at Tananarive, Malagasy Republic. The communique, which they issued on March 12, announced that the Congo would form a confederation of states with Kasavubu as President. For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 796–797.

4 Dated March 8. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–861)

5 Telegram 624, March 16, reported a conversation with Georges Dumontet, the new U.N. representative in Katanga. Tshombe had given Dumontet a note containing a statement that if U.S. aircraft transported Indian troops to the Congo, the Katangan government would recommend to the U.S. Consul at Elisabethville the evacuation of American families from Katanga. (Ibid., 332.70G/3–1661)

6 Telegram 1991 to Léopoldville, March 14, repeated telegram 2447 from USUN (Document 49), which transmitted Hammarskjöld's letter. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–1461)

7 Resolution No. 5 adopted by the Tananarive Conference called the February 21 Security Council resolution "inapplicable and unacceptable." Telegram 2038 from Léopoldville, March 18, transmitted the texts of the conference resolutions. (Ibid., 770G.00/3–1861)

51. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 51. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, March 22, 1961, 4 p.m.

2573. Congo. SYG called heads US, UK and French Delegations to urgent meeting on Congo this morning. Gist of his presentation was that UN forces will run out of supplies if Matadi is not reopened within approximately one week, that uninterrupted transit through Matadi can be assured only by presence small UN force in port area, that efforts by Abbas to obtain permission for re-entry have been wholly without result and that unless favorable decision can be obtained within next few days SYG sees no alternative but to bring whole question UN presence in Congo once more before SC.

SYG fears that there is concerted policy on part of Léopoldville authorities to "strangle" UN effort in Congo. He cites not only Matadi situation, but Mobutu's recent closure Coquilhatville airport to UN forces, Ileo's threat to oppose by force reinforcement of UN contingent at Kitona as well as indications of forthcoming ANC efforts to take over Ndjili and Kamina. He feels that those concerned are now confronted by three alternatives: (1) either a rapid change in present policy of Congolese authorities or (2) accumulating series of UN defeats ending in early liquidation of UN effort in Congo or (3) military action by UN. Latter he does not in fact consider to be feasible since neither Indians nor African states contributing troops are prepared to use force. If outcome is, however, either alternative (2) or (3) he believes that Soviets would gain their objectives in the Congo and that present policy of Congolese authorities is therefore, in fact, serving Soviet objectives.

He proposed that, if there is no favorable reply from Kasavubu to Abbas within next day or two, McKeown inform Congolese military authorities that he is proceeding with adequate force to safeguard UN installation at Matadi in accordance with prior agreements granting UN freedom of movement. If this movement is opposed, McKeown would not in fact use force, but SYG would bring matter immediately before SC. Latter would then have to take decision between alternatives (2) or (3). SYG believes Western powers have strong interest in keeping question out of SC at this time and hopes they will therefore exert their influence with Kasavubu to insure that McKeown movement can go forward peacefully. He considers it impossible that February 21 SC resolution can be implemented if Léopoldville authorities continue to carry out their present policy. In reply to query from Stevenson, SYG said he suspects Congolese believe they can, with Belgian military and financial help, get along without UN and can thereby recover control of Orientale by force.

Berard (France) agreed that Matadi should be opened to UN, that GOC would agree to joint use of port and that GOF will use its influence in this sense. Berard asked that SYG delay any drastic action for at least two or three days to allow time for representations to be made to GOC.

Brigadier Rikhye, who was present, pointed out that UN has under its control at Kitona sufficient arms and ammunition, formerly belonging to Force Publique, to equip two battalions and that Congolese authorities claim this equipment as a result of an agreement with Belgians. They also claim right to control former Force Publique hangar at Ndjili airport which is absolutely essential to UN operation there. In reply to query, Rikhye said 700 Indian troops have already arrived by air and 400 more expected by April 1. GOI has agreed to remainder coming by sea but they will not leave Bombay until UN position at Matadi is restored. In subsequent briefing meeting with Wieschhoff (Secretariat), latter said that SYG is fully aware that it is unlikely seven votes could be obtained in SC for any further affirmative directives concerning Congo operation but Dag is fed up with bearing full responsibility himself.

In response to query Wieschhoff said that Dayal case is on way to solution, that Dayal will go back to Congo but only for one week.2 Since SYG has been unable to find satisfactory single successor, he proposes to install triumvirate consisting of a Burmese already in UN employ (as Chairman) and two Africans. However, Wieschhoff pointed out that Abbas is getting no further with Congolese authorities than did Dayal and that if GOC wishes to strengthen its case against Dayal it must at least cooperate with Abbas. Wieschhoff's estimate was that, unless Congolese change their present policy, UN would be forced out of Congo within four weeks.

Subsequently UK suggested that three Western governments should consult urgently in Washington on this matter. Consensus of the three Ambassadors here was that strong representations to Kasavubu must be promptly made. We are most certainly of this opinion. Further comment follows in separate telegram.3

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–2261. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Léopoldville, London, Paris, and Brussels.

2 The New York Times reported on March 20 that Hammarskjöld had asked Dayal to remain in the Congo for another 2 or 3 months. Stevenson discussed the matter with Hammarskjöld that day, stressing the President's conviction that Dayal's return to the Congo would jeopardize the success of the U.N. operation. Hammarskjöld told him he was thinking of keeping Dayal in New York until April 1 and having him return to the Congo briefly until about May 1. (Telegram 2557 from USUN, March 20; ibid., 770G.00/3–2061) Stevenson reported the conversation to Cleveland by telephone, and Cleveland telephoned the gist of it to Kennedy. (Memorandum from Cleveland to Bowles, March 20; ibid., 332.70G/3–2061)

3 Telegram 2580 from USUN, March 22, declared that the "extreme gravity" of the situation could hardly be overstated and recommended U.S. efforts to urge the Congolese authorities to cooperate with the U.N. forces, specifically by authorizing their immediate return to Matadi under the joint arrangements proposed by Abbas. (Ibid., 770G.00/3–2261)

52. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 52. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, March 24, 1961, 10:13 p.m.

1825. For Stevenson from Bowles. Re Congo. Following my conversation with Hoffman2 and your talk with Cleveland 3 I have reviewed carefully with all interested offices what could most usefully be done to alleviate grave situation posed by continued impasse between UN and GOC on control of major Congolese facilities such as Matadi. We share your view that confrontation between UN and GOC, especially if it involves armed clash, would involve serious risk of UN withdrawal from Congo which would damage reputation of UN, US and GOC in eyes of most Afro-Asians and constitute victory for Soviets.

As you know, we have asked Timberlake do everything he can to comply with SYG request for assistance in developing cooperative GOC attitude,4 and he has consistently sought to do so. You may wish assure SYG US has on almost daily basis and at all levels been seeking impress on Congolese authorities crucial need they cooperate fully with UN. This message also serves as reaffirmation instructions to Emb Léopoldville to continue pursue its efforts vigorously to secure GOC cooperation with UN, in particular by working out acceptable agreement re use Matadi under joint arrangements.

We are encouraged by Léopoldville's report of Ileo's comment that he thought solution could be found to permit UN return to Matadi.5 We also gratified to note from USUN telegrams that Cordier has indicated UN planning move more slowly than originally indicated in seeking regain Matadi.6 In our view it would be most unwise if UN took precipitate action in moving troops to Matadi, and we believe SYG should be urged to seek solution of this problem through negotiations with GOC rather than through attempted troop movement, prior to reaching agreement.7

2. We recognize that continued presence of Belgian military and political advisors in Congo complicates problem. To extent you consider it helpful, you authorized tell SYG that we have repeatedly indicated to GOB through diplomatic channels both in Brussels and in Washington that we consider it imperative Belgium comply with Feb 21 resolution. You may also assure him we will continue our efforts to encourage Belgians to comply and to carry out faithfully any agreement reached with Sahbani.8

3. In examining major ingredients of Congo problem, it apparent to us that one of greatest deficiencies is lack of strong UN executive authority in Congo. SYG is aware we are convinced mutual contacts and confidence between UN and GOC is prerequisite to successful discharge UN mission in Congo. Atmosphere in Léopoldville has clearly improved with arrival of Abbas; this is good first step. However it now imperative this be capitalized on quickly by designating new permanent rep in Congo. Further suggestions as to candidates we would like to see considered made separately.

Bowles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–2461. Secret. Drafted by Buffum; cleared by Williams, Wallner (in draft), and Deputy Executive Secretary William H. Brubeck; and approved by Bowles. Also sent to Léopoldville.

2 Presumably Managing Director of the United Nations Special Fund Paul G. Hoffman; no record of the conversation has been found.

3 This may refer to their March 20 telephone conversation (see footnote 1, Document 51) or to a subsequent but unrecorded conversation.

4 Telegram 2022 to Léopoldville, March 22, made this request. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–2261)

5 Reported in telegram 2071 from Léopoldville, March 22. (Ibid.)

6 Telegram 2595 from USUN, March 23, reported conversations with Executive Assistant to the Secretary-General Andrew W. Cordier. (Ibid., 770G.00/3–2361)

7 Telegram 2625 from USUN, March 25, reported that Yost had accompanied French and British representatives in an informal approach to Hammarskjöld urging the restoration of a joint U.N.-Congolese presence at Matadi and arguing that a U.N. ultimatum or drastic action would be counterproductive in achieving this. (Ibid., 770G.00/3–2561) An earlier telegram to USUN advising against a tripartite approach had not been received in time. (Telegram 1802 to USUN, March 23; ibid., 770G.00/3–2261)

8 Taieb Sahbani of Tunisia went to Belgium on March 20 as Hammarskjöld's representative to develop arrangements for the implementation of the February 21 Security Council resolution.

53. Editorial Note 53. Editorial Note

Consul William C. Canup reported in telegram 655 from Elisabethville, March 27, that he had been informed by a newspaper correspondent that Seven Seas Airlines was transporting arms to Katangan forces in north Katanga. (Department of State, Central Files, 470G.118/3–2761) He reported in telegram 660, March 28, "Seven Seas Airlines involvement in transport of munitions to Katangan forces advancing on Manono has become serious concern here and may shortly become public knowledge." U.N. representative Dumontet had told Canup that day that he was convinced Seven Seas was carrying munitions from Elisabethville to Katangan forces and that he expected soon to have evidence that it was bringing munitions into Katanga from abroad. (Ibid., 470G.118/3–2861)

A memorandum of a telephone conversation between Acting Secretary of State Chester Bowles and Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs Harlan Cleveland at 7:10 p.m. on March 29 reads in part as follows: "Mr. Cleveland called to make two quick reports. The first was concerning the Seven Seas. Mr. Cleveland said the Department of Commerce really got off the ground when he called Martin, Under Secretary for Transportation. They have issued an order which cancels all Seven Seas export licenses and they are doing up a transportation order which cannot be signed and sealed until tomorrow morning. Mr. Cleveland said that when he called Mr. Martin at noon today, Mr. Martin said he had never heard of the subject. He was very much impressed and at 5:00 he called and said that it was all set. [2 lines of source text not declassified] We sent word back that we would talk to them about it. Mr. Bowles said the U.S. cannot play two policies and that is what we are doing." (Ibid., Secretary's Staff Meetings: Lot 66 D 147, Chester Bowles' Telcons. Clarence D. Martin, Jr., was Under Secretary of Transportation.)

On March 30, the Department of State announced that the Department of Commerce had the previous day issued an amendment to Transportation Order T–1 prohibiting the transportation of certain military and paramilitary items by U.S.-registered vessels or aircraft from any point of origin to destinations in the Congo, except under special authority or license, to be granted only when the shipment was to be made at U.N. request or with U.N. approval. The announcement reiterated U.S. support for the U.N. position that no military or paramilitary assistance should be sent to the Congo except through the United Nations. (American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, page 801)

54. Memorandum of Conversation Between Prime Minister Nehru and Secretary of State Rusk 54. Memorandum of Conversation Between Prime Minister Nehru and Secretary of State Rusk1

New Delhi, March 30, 1961.

SUBJECT

Congo

During our conversation the Prime Minister expressed his concern about the United Nations effort in the Congo. He was distressed about the attitude of various Congolese leaders toward the UN and expressed himself in strong terms about Belgian military and political personnel, as distinct from Belgian technical personnel and private citizens engaged in economic and other pursuits. He was distressed about the facts [attacks] on Mr. Dayal and hinted that some of these attacks were coming from U.S. sources.

I expressed great appreciation for India's strong support of the UN effort in the Congo and reaffirmed our own view that it was important that the UN succeed in its effort there. I told him that we very much hoped that UN and Congolese forces would not come to direct military clashes but that patience and negotiation should develop a cooperation between the UN and Congolese authorities which would open the way for the retraining of Congolese forces and the restoration of law and order in the country. As for Mr. Dayal, I reminded him of the extreme difficulty of the situation in which Mr. Dayal and others had found themselves. The principal source of difficulty had been an uncertain UN mandate, under which the Secretary General had not felt himself able to adopt clear UN policies in the Congo and to give his civilian and military representatives clear guidelines about UN objectives. I pointed out that it was always unsatisfactory to employ armed forces without being clear about their mission. I told him of Ralph Bunche's comment that he had learned in the Congo that "you cannot describe anarchy, you can only experience it." I said that it was not surprising that tempers had worn thin, given the frustrations, the dangers, the uncertainties, the inadequate information, the lack of clear policy, the ineptness of the Congolese and all the other factors with which the UN and other representatives in the Congo have been working. I was quite sure that on all sides, impatience and frustration had led to remarks which might have been later regretted. I told Mr. Nehru that I did not know what his judgment was about Mr. Dayal—whether he felt that Mr. Dayal's patience had been exhausted and that he might wish to suggest someone else; if so, we would have no objection to an Indian in that responsible position.2

Mr. Nehru did not pursue the point but our Charge, Mr. Maffitt, commented afterward that he thought Mr. Nehru had got the point, without my leveling charges against Dayal directly, that the latter's own performance and sharp tongue had led to difficulties.

I explained to Mr. Nehru our attitude toward the Belgians and said that we were doing everything we could in Brussels to get the irresponsible Belgians out of the Congo. I pointed out that there seemed to be a gap in authority between Brussels and their representatives in the Congo and that it has not been easy for Brussels to obtain the actual removal of some of the more troublesome Belgian elements. I believe that we and Mr. Nehru see the Belgian problem in the same broad terms, although he might prefer more sweeping removals and thinks of Belgian influence as a fatal contamination of such Congolese leaders as Tshombe, Kasavubu and Ileo.

I was interested that, as he and I left his office to go to luncheon, Mr. Nehru told the waiting press that we had discussed Laos and the Congo and were in "general agreement."

Dean Rusk3

1 Source: Department of State, Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Dictated by Rusk, according to a handwritten notation by Swank. Except for the reference to Minister-Counselor Edward P. Maffitt, the source text does not indicate others who may have been present. Secretary Rusk visited New Delhi briefly on his return from a visit to Bangkok, where he attended the SEATO Council Meeting March 27–29.

2 Hammarskjöld told Stevenson in a March 27 letter that he could not remove Dayal at that time because it would encourage further lack of cooperation from the Congolese authorities, he would appear to be yielding to U.S. pressure, and it would embarrass Nehru and might lead to the reversal of his decision to send Indian troops to the Congo. (Filed with a March 31 memorandum from Cleveland to Rusk; ibid., Central Files, 325.70G/3–3161)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

55. Memorandum of Conversation 55. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, April 4, 1961, 10:55 a.m.–1:10 p.m.

SUBJECT

The Congo

PARTICIPANTS

U.K. Lord Home, Foreign Secretary2

Ambassador Caccia

Sir Frederick Hoyer Millar, Permanent Under Secretary, Foreign Office

Lord Hood, Minister, British Embassy

The Honorable Peter Ramsbotham, Head, Planning and Coordination Section, Foreign Office

Mr. R. T. D. Ledward, Counselor, British Embassy

Mr. C. D. Wiggin, First Secretary, British Embassy

Mr. A. C. I. Samuel, Private Secretary to the Foreign Secretary

U.S. The Secretary; The Under Secretary; Ambassador Bruce; Messrs. Kohler and White, EUR; Mr. Steeves, FE; Messrs. Burdett and Swihart, BNA

Referring to press stories of a crisis between Tshombe and the United Nations, the Secretary suggested a word on the Congo. He said the latest tickers reported an agreement had been reached on control of the Elisabethville airport.3 From the longer range point of view, he thought it desirable to give the Tananarive group a chance to work out its affairs. Relations between this group and the United Nations could hardly be worse. Dayal had not shown the statesmanship the situation called for. Nehru, however, seemed committed to supporting Dayal. It was difficult to do anything. He inquired whether Lord Home saw any possibility of mediation between the United Nations and the Congolese.

Lord Home commented that the United Kingdom had been sending a message once a week to Nehru urging that Dayal be removed. They had also been sending their Ambassador in Léopoldville instructions to urge moderation on the Congolese. The United Kingdom had been reluctant to support the last United Nations resolution for fear the United Nations might use it to impose its will on Katanga. If the United Nations did so, Tshombe would declare his independence. He possesses three-quarters of the wealth of the Congo and could get away with it. General Alexander, who commanded the Ghanaian troops, said that if the soldiers were given a chance they could work things out. Dayal was always interfering. Hammarskjöld was sending a contingent of Nigerian police to Matadi. This was a useful move. According to Lord Home's latest information, Hammarskjöld had a three-step plan: first, to dispatch the police; secondly, to try to bring the Congolese leaders together; and thirdly, to deal with Katanga. Katanga was the most difficult problem.

The Secretary remarked that the big problem was that Nehru seemed to be pursuing a separate Indian policy rather than merging his effort with the United Nations effort. This was extremely dangerous. It could blow up the United Nations effort. Lord Home agreed.

The Secretary said he had been uneasy at the dispatch to the Congo of the brigade of Indian troops. He feared that the troops would back Indian policy rather than the United Nations. He asked whether it was possible to cool Nehru off. Lord Home replied that Nehru was obsessed by the Belgian presence. He did not know if there was anything the United States Ambassador could do. The British had failed. He emphasized that we must not allow Indian troops to start fighting with Katanga. The Secretary asked who had ordered the Gurkhas to Katanga. He thought this unwise. Lord Home said it must have been General McEoin.

Lord Home pointed out that Nehru is prepared reluctantly to regard Kasavubu as the Head of State. The rest of the Congolese he considers mere brigands responsible for the murder of Lumumba. Nehru thinks that, as in the case of Western opposition to Lumumba, the West is now again backing the wrong horse. Nehru theorizes that there must be a national will in the Congo and that this is bound to win in the end.

The Secretary said that he had talked with Nehru a bit about the Congo. Nehru felt keenly the attacks on Dayal and had stressed the need for patience. The Secretary asked Nehru if Dayal's patience was exhausted. Nehru did not reply. Nehru's statement as reported in the New York Times indicated Nehru's position on Dayal is frozen.

The Under Secretary described a recent conversation with Dayal,4 in which he had almost convinced Dayal that he should withdraw. Subsequent press reports criticizing Dayal had induced him to change his mind. The Under Secretary described Dayal as near a nervous breakdown.

Lord Home asked how much longer the United States and the United Kingdom were going to keep on paying the bill without calling the tune a little more. The Secretary said he was worried about that. He asked whether Lord Home thought there was any chance that the French would pay. When we asked France we received in return only a glassy stare. Lord Home said the French policy seemed to be "do nothing, pay nothing, say nothing."

The Under Secretary commented that, if the Indian troop contingent had not been dispatched, other troop units might have been pulled out. He asked whether Nehru could be persuaded to send some responsible person, in whom he had confidence, to the Congo for several weeks in order to get a first-hand account.

Lord Home described the outburst which Nehru indulged in this week with the British Ambassador regarding the Belgians in the Congo. Nehru kept referring to twenty thousand Belgians. The Secretary thought this must have been temporary impetuousness. Nehru had been more reasonable in talking with him.

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Director of the Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs William C. Burdett, Jr., and approved in S on April 11. The time of the meeting is taken from the Secretary's appointment book. (Johnson Library) Other topics discussed were recorded in separate memoranda of conversation. (Ibid.) Those present not previously identified include Ambassador to the United Kingdom David K.E. Bruce, Deputy Assistant Secretary for European Affairs Ivan B. White, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs John M. Steeves, and Officer in Charge of United Kingdom and Ireland Affairs James W. Swihart.

2 Lord Home and Prime Minister Macmillan visited Washington April 4 –8.

3 U.N. forces in Katanga were reinforced in early April by the arrival of the first troops of the Indian contingent. Telegram 690 from Elisabethville, April 4, reported that U.N. forces had occupied the Elisabethville airport before dawn and that at least 1,000 persons, some armed with machetes, had demonstrated in the center of Elisabethville until Tshombe announced an agreement for joint U.N.-Katanga control of the airport. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–461)

4 Bowles had lunch with Dayal on March 27. He summarized the conversation briefly in a March 29 cable to Rusk. (Tosec 54 to New Delhi, March 29; ibid., 110.11–RU/3–2961)

56. Editorial Note 56. Editorial Note

In a meeting on April 6, Secretary Rusk and Lord Home briefly discussed the Congo. Swihart's memorandum of the conversation reads in part as follows: "The Secretary thought we ought to ask Hammarskjöld what UN policy is and ought to be in the Congo. He will respond probably that he can't tell us. We might then help him to work out a policy. Lord Home thought this was a good idea and that we should ask the Secretary General to clarify his objectives. Sir Frederick thought we ought also to give indications what the UN should not be prepared to do. The Secretary suggested that Sir Patrick Dean and Ambassador Stevenson go to see Hammarskjöld jointly and put the question to him. It would be useful for Hammarskjöld to think this one through." (Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366)

No record of such a joint demarche has been found, but see Document 58 and footnote 2 thereto.

57. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 57. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, April 6, 1961, 6 p.m.

2141. Abbas yesterday presented Nigerian Police compromise proposal on Matadi2 to Kasavubu requesting reply by noon April 7. Following discussion last night with Abbas I saw Kasavubu for over an hour today. I can assure Department and USUN I left no stone unturned, no argument unsaid, in effort convince Kasavubu accept latest compromise.

While Kasavubu did not reject Abbas proposal out of hand "in interests of good diplomacy", he clearly gave me impression at outset of conversation he had no intention allowing any non-civilian UN force, including Nigerian Police, in Matadi. He particularly irked by UN deadline and initially took position Matadi population will react violently to return any UN military or Police. Launching bitter attack on UN he accused them of coming to Congo to help but only causing trouble. They bypassed his Government at every step and even supported secession of Katanga by sending letters directly to Tshombe on Tananarive conference.3 If UN persisted in bypassing Government and creating trouble both UN and Congolese would go their separate ways. In fact it might be good thing if UN troops withdrew.

I told him refusal to compromise on Matadi presented danger that entire UN mission might withdraw. Aside from resulting in departure of badly needed technicians this would leave Congo wide open to vagaries of cold war, an outcome which I was sure Kasavubu wished avoid. Far from promoting Katanga secession UN was now facing angry demonstrators in Katanga because of its insistence on unified Congo. Since Kasavubu showed little awareness need maintain his posture in New York I particularly emphasized need make conciliatory gesture to avoid a new SC meeting on Congo which would provoke renewed attacks on his policies. Only by compromising could he allow his friends at UN to defend him and avoid disaster for his country and himself.

To his claim that he was always bailing UN out of difficult situations resulting from failure to consult his Government I replied that Abbas had brought about a change in this policy and had consistently consulted with him and his Ministers. Now he, Kasavubu, had a unique opportunity to develop close working relationships and avoid future incidents. At one point he came near to agreeing, with the reservation that if Nigerians went to Matadi and caused any incidents this would be the end of any relations with UN. His people, who would watch Nigerians closely, would feel that the Chief of State had betrayed them. I replied that all leaders have to take certain risks. His real responsibility to his people was to avoid a prolonged dispute with UN which would result from adamant position on Matadi. He could best serve them by accepting a compromise and working in harmony with UN.

Time and again whenever Kasavubu seemed on verge of accepting compromise he returned to Dayal. Even if he accepted a compromise Hammarskjöld would continue to ignore wishes of Congolese and send Dayal back. Everyone had told him to trust Dayal but Dayal had consistently deceived him. Now he wondered if he had any friends left in UN. I reiterated the assistance we had provided in seating his delegation, our gesture in sending food to Congo and our consistent efforts to prevent Dayal's return. Each time Dayal's name arose I emphasized that he should trust Abbas. The best way to insure that Dayal would not return was to show the world he could work out a compromise with Abbas. This would give his friends a talking point with SYG. In absence of an agreement on Matadi his friends would find it difficult to stand up to Communist onslaughts in UN.

If Nigerian Police were to enter Matadi, Kasavubu said, they must be under control of Congolese authorities. I replied this principle unacceptable to UN. How then, he wondered, could Congolese control situation. After all UN had allowed arms to come into Lisala and Katanga. I stated UN making strenuous efforts control arms flow into Katanga and Lisala affair was isolated incident instigated by UAR. His best assurance in matters of this nature was to develop working relationship with UN. Once again I emphasized that he now had a unique opportunity to do this. He could deal with Abbas and Nigerians were his best friends in Africa. I appealed to his stature as a leader and urged him to explain this by radio to Matadi population before Nigerians arrive.

While Kasavubu may not have been fully convinced by my arguments I believe I gave him food for thought. At least he came around from a flat refusal to conceding he would again take matter up with his Government. However, Friday, he said, was much too short a deadline. I believe if UN continues to talk about deadlines it will push Kasavubu into refusal, whereas by patient negotiation it may be able to convince him of need to compromise. Although I could not have presented a stronger case than I did today I will continue to support Abbas' efforts at all levels.

On other points I found Kasavubu amenable. He appreciated agreement for Cardoso 4 and has in mind accrediting him both to US and UN. He recognizes Bahizi shortcomings and plans appropriate action. He received favorably idea of an economic round table conference to discuss provincial needs in light of US offer supply surplus food through UN. He recognized possibilities this offered for political reconciliation, a principle which he seems to accept. I urged him to extend a formal invitation to the Orientale provincial government economic del which has been prepared to come to Léopoldville for several weeks.

I outlined danger of Communist shipments to Orientale through Sudan under Licross auspices. While, typically, he uninformed on proposal send barge containing PL 480 flour to Stanleyville he appreciated this useful gesture to forestall Communist moves through Licross. Providing Government and Mobutu agreed he saw no objection to sending barge.

Timberlake

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–661. Confidential; Priority. Received at 2:23 p.m. and repeated to Brussels, Elisabethville, and USUN.

2 This U.N. proposal was to send approximately 100 Nigerian police to Matadi to maintain order in lieu of U.N. troops. The text was transmitted in telegram 2714 from USUN (repeated to Léopoldville as 275), April 3. (Ibid., 770G.00/4–361) Telegram 2058 to Léopoldville, April 4, instructed Timberlake to support Abbas by urging Kasavubu to accept the proposal. (Ibid., 770G.00/4–461)

3 The reference is not clear. A March 2 message from Hammarskjöld to Tshombe concerned the implementation of the February 21 Security Council resolution. (U.N. doc. S/4752/Add.1; also printed in Public Papers of the Secretaries-General, vol. V, pp. 381–384)

4 Mario Cardoso was representing the Congolese Government at the United Nations. He opened the Congolese Embassy in Washington as Minister and Charge on June 28, 1962.

58. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 58. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, April 6, 1961, 8:21 p.m.

1937. For Stevenson from Secretary. Feel you should seek early opportunity have frank talk with SYG re our reaction his latest stand on Dayal. You should tell him we most disappointed he has thus far not felt able to agree to replace Dayal. We continue feel UN, Congo and India will all suffer result continuation Dayal in Léopoldville and that so much should not be sacrificed in interests one man. At very least we expect serious popular demonstration against his return, and later reactions may be more serious. More generally, we most interested rendering UN more effective Congo and re-establishing the original concept of UN partnership with GOC. We feel however partly as result either arrogance or apathy, which often characterize UN relations with Congolese, UN now being regarded as hostile (although ineffective) occupying force. We agree Congolese can be difficult deal with, but UN should be able demonstrate more maturity and more tolerance. The extent of anti-UN and anti-Indian feeling in Congo should be evident from current developments in Elisabethville. While we by no means siding with Tshombe in this matter, you should make clear we greatly concerned extent popular feeling against UN in Congo and the pressures to which Congo leaders subjected as result both popular opinion and CNA opposition UN.

In terms US policy, it most important SYG realize, while we will continue support UN efforts, our influence with GOC is limited, and unless more cooperative relationship developed between UN and GOC, we cannot assure SYG we will always be able take line he desires in our dealings with Kasavubu. To do so in face of increasing loss confidence in UN on part Congolese will in any case not produce result UN desires and will only compromise our own relations with Congolese.

Department fully concurs Léopoldville tel 2133 repeated you 7202 and suggests you draw thereon as appropriate. We convinced UN cannot expect make much headway Matadi question until Dayal removed and continue feel it would be disastrous for UN attempt use force this situation.

In connection approach re Dayal, feel perhaps more effective pressure might be generated if Afro-Asian dels made similar approach SYG. Suggest you approach selected dels at discretion to elicit their views Dayal and sound out possibility parallel approach SYG.

This supplements telephone conversation today.3

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 310/4–661. Confidential. Drafted by Woodruff; cleared by Ferguson, Wallner, Dumont, Penfield (in substance), Stoessel, and Williams; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, Paris, and London.

2 Dated April 4. (Ibid., 770G.00/4–461)

3 No record of this telephone conversation has been found. Telegram 2775 from USUN, April 7, reported a discussion of various aspects of the Congo situation among Stevenson, Yost, and Hammarskjöld on the evening of April 6. The telegram reported that Hammarskjöld felt that because Nehru had made a public statement concerning Dayal and because Hammarskjöld believed yielding to "pressure" on Dayal would weaken his own position, he had to send Dayal back to the Congo, perhaps with a deputy to handle most negotiations with the Congolese Government. (Ibid., 770G.00/4– 761)

59. Editorial Note 59. Editorial Note

The U.N General Assembly discussed the situation in the Congo at a number of sessions between March 21 and April 18. On March 21, Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko called for terminating U.N. operations in the Congo within one month and repeated the Soviet demand of the previous September for replacing Secretary-General Hammarskjöld with a three-person executive. Adlai E. Stevenson stated U.S. opposition to these demands in an address to the Assembly later that day. He urged that the Assembly proceed cautiously in order not to impede efforts underway in the Congo to produce conciliation and carry out the February 21 Security Council resolution. For text of his statement, see Department of State Bulletin, April 10, 1961, pages 532–534; an extract is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pages 799–800.

On April 15, the General Assembly voted on four draft resolutions. The first, sponsored by 21 countries, would have 1) called on the Belgian Government to comply with previous U.N. resolutions calling for the withdrawal of Belgian and other foreign military and paramilitary personnel not under the U.N. Command; 2) decided that all such personnel should be withdrawn within 21 days, "failing which necessary action should be taken in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations"; and 3) called upon all states to exert their influence and extend their cooperation to implement this. (U.N. document A/L.339 and Add. 1–5) In a statement before the Assembly on April 14, Stevenson stated that the United States would vote against the draft resolution. He noted that a representative of the Secretary-General was in Brussels negotiating with the Belgian Government for the implementation of the February 21 Security Council resolution and that the Belgian Government had indicated its willingness to comply with the resolution. He argued that a 21-day deadline with the hint of sanctions to follow would only make solution of the Congo problem more difficult. For text of his statement, see Department of State Bulletin, May 22, 1961, pages 781–784; extracts are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pages 802–806.

On April 15, the Assembly amended the draft resolution by voting to remove the phrases imposing a deadline and referring to possible sanctions. Operative paragraph 2 as amended decided that "all Belgian and other foreign military and paramilitary personnel and political advisers not under the United Nations Command, and mercenaries, shall be completely withdrawn and evacuated." The draft resolution as amended was adopted as Resolution 1599 (XV) by a vote of 61 to 5, with 33 abstentions, including the United States.

The second draft resolution, sponsored by 17 Asian and African countries, 1) reaffirmed previous U.N. resolutions, especially the February 21 Security Council resolution, 2) called on the Congolese authorities to resolve their problems by peaceful means; 3) declared that the Secretary-General should take steps to prevent the introduction of arms into the Congo except in conformity with U.N. resolutions; 4) urged the immediate release of all political leaders under detention; 5) urged the immediate convening of Parliament under U.N. protection; 6) decided to appoint a Commission of Conciliation; and 7) urged the Congolese authorities to cooperate fully in the implementation of the U.N. resolutions. (U.N. document A/L.340, Add. 1– 4, and Add.3/Corr.1) It was adopted as Resolution 1600 (XV) by a vote of 60 (including the United States) to 16, with 23 abstentions.

The third draft resolution, submitted by the Soviet Union, would have 1) declared that no actions leading to a violation of the unity, political independence, and territorial integrity of the Congo could be allowed; 2) deemed it necessary that Parliament should meet within 21 days; and 3) requested the U.N. Command to ensure the safety of the members of Parliament. (U.N. document A/L.341 and Corr.1) It was rejected by a vote of 29 to 53 (including the United States), with 17 abstentions.

The fourth draft resolution, proposed by Ceylon, Ghana, India, and Morocco, established a Commission of Investigation to examine the circumstances of the death of Lumumba and his colleagues in accordance with the February 21 Security Council resolution. (U.N. document A/L.347) It was adopted as Resolution 1601 (XV) by a vote of 45 to 3, with 49 abstentions (including the United States). The texts of the three resolutions adopted by the General Assembly on April 15 are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pages 806–809. For the records of the General Assembly debate, see U.N. documents A/PV. 965–987 passim.

Meanwhile, Committee V of the General Assembly was considering the question of financing the U.N. operations in the Congo. On April 20, the Committee approved a draft resolution, proposed originally by Pakistan and Tunisia and in revised form by Ghana, Liberia, Pakistan, and Tunisia, by a vote of 43 (including the United States) to 26, with 14 abstentions. (U.N. document A/4740) It was further amended and adopted by the General Assembly on April 21 as Resolution 1619 (XV) by a vote of 54 (including the United States) to 15, with 23 abstentions. The resolution appropriated $100 million for U.N. operations in the Congo between January 1 and October 21 and apportioned the expenses among the member states in accordance with the scale of assessment for the regular budget with special reductions for member states whose contributions were below a specified percentage of the regular budget. It also urged the permanent members of the Security Council and all other states who could do so to make voluntary contributions and called on Belgium, as a state "directly concerned" with the situation in the Congo, to do so. For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pages 816–817.

In a statement in Committee V on April 18, U.S. Representative Philip M. Klutznick announced that the United States was prepared to make a voluntary contribution of $15 million, provided that a resolution was adopted recognizing the binding obligation of all governments to pay their share of the cost. An extract of his statement is printed ibid., pages 810–815.

60. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 60. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, April 22, 1961, 1 a.m.

2968. Congo. SYG handed Yost today latest exchange of notes between Abbas and Kasavubu on Matadi. Texts being transmitted in separate telegram.2

Commenting on note from Kasavubu SYG expressed his appreciation for US support which he thought might have been responsible for improvement in Kasavubu's attitude. Latest note is far from providing complete solution but recognizes right of UN to have military force at Matadi and represents significant step forward. He hopes that US will continue to help in reaching reasonable settlement. He points out USS Blatchford is due in Matadi April 28 and he believes it of great importance that there be "sizeable number" Nigerian police there by that time. When queried as to meaning of "sizeable number" he said that it must be more than simply symbolic and suggested "around 30."

Encouraged by improved UN position in Congo generally SYG thinks it may be "over the hump." He expects another battalion of Ethiopian troops, as well as battalion made up of units of 4 French Community states (he mentioned Senegal, Ivory Coast and Upper Volta). UN position in northern Katanga is firmer and there seemed to be signs mercenaries may melt away and Belgian officers follow suit. He hopes next begin implement Gardiner-Nwokedi agreement with Kasavubu3 concerning personnel and to reaffirm principle freedom of movement, primarily through Matadi settlement.

If developments along these lines continue to be favorable for another 2 or 3 weeks he hopes to be in position to take step which will be of interest to us, that is, to suggest to Nehru that Dayal's mission has been accomplished and to ask that Nehru nominate another Indian to replace him. SYG believes that Nehru will approve only if Dayal's replacement is an Indian. In the meantime he proposes following tentative time-table. Abbas must leave in approximately one week. Gardiner would thereafter be temporarily in charge with title of deputy. He would be assisted for the moment by Narasimhan4 who would maintain Indian presence during interim, but who is much more flexible and diplomatic than Dayal. Dayal's return would be delayed to end first week May and would, if scenario SYG is working on is carried out, be very brief.

SYG concluded by urging fullest US support for UN desiderata with view to facilitating tactic explained above.

Yost also discussed with SYG briefly substance of Dept's 2084.5 SYG said reports from Dumontet are much less alarming than those we have received. He agrees Munongo is worse than Tshombe, but UN so far has had little luck in dealing with Tshombe. Gardiner offered UN officers to replace Belgians but got no response. However, SYG feels course of events will oblige Tshombe to be more conciliatory and hopes he will come around to working with UN. SYG on his side would be entirely happy to do so.

He mentioned incidentally he understands Tshombe is meeting Kasavubu at Coquilhatville next Monday.6 He also mentioned "top secret" report from Stanleyville that move is underway to work toward new government with Adoula replacing Ileo and Gizenga as his deputy. SYG has high respect for Adoula and thinks this might be workable solution.

Comment: This is first sign of yielding on Dayal and we believe, though proposal for Indian successor may not be too satisfactory, we should welcome break in log jam and offer assist insofar as possible in facilitating SYG's tactic. This, of course, would involve assisting him in strengthening UN position to point where he could plausibly make claim to Nehru that Dayal's mandate had been successfully carried out.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–2261. Secret; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Léopoldville.

2 Telegram 2967, April 22. (Ibid.)

3 Signed at Léopoldville on April 17 by Kasavubu and Bomboko and two representatives of the Secretary-General, Robert Gardiner of Ghana and Francis Nwokedi of Nigeria. Under this agreement, the Congo accepted the February 21 Security Council resolution and the United Nations undertook to provide assistance in its implementation, particularly with regard to the repatriation of foreign personnel, the recruitment and training of technicians, and the reorganization of the Congolese army. (U.N. doc. S/4807, Annex I; also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 809–810)

4 U.N. Under Secretary for Special Political Affairs C.V. Narasimhan.

5 Telegram 2084, April 20, expressed concern that Tshombe's position in Katanga might be threatened by Munongo and others more xenophobic and separatist than Tshombe, thus eliminating any possibility of a rapprochement between Katanga and Léopoldville. It suggested an approach to Tshombe offering U.N. assistance in replacing Belgians in the Katanga forces and providing specialists for advisory roles. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–761) Telegram 736 from Elisabethville, April 17, had reported a growing internal political struggle in Katanga and the "entry on scene of lightly cloaked British and French interests seeking permanent footholds." (Ibid., 770G.00/4–1761)

6 April 24. The Coquilhatville conference of Congolese leaders, convened by Kasavubu and including Ileo, Bomboko, and a number of provincial leaders, began on that date. Tshombe attended the opening of the conference; Gizenga did not attend.

61. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 61. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, April 26, 1961, 7 p.m.

2993. Congo.

1. Stevenson saw SYG yesterday afternoon to get his current estimation of Congo situation. SYG relatively optimistic about general outlook and presented his view of possible "next steps" by UN.

2. SYG said Congo problem now in "new phase" which was "most hopeful." He said as early as last Aug it had been clear that fundamental problem from viewpoint of Congolese was not Kasavubu vs. Lumumba but Leo vs. Katanga. (Sovs also saw basic problem revolving around Katanga, SYG noted. As long as this problem open, they did not attack SYG; when they felt it closed, attack came.) In this framework entrance of UN troops into Katanga was essential as foothold even though entrance last summer was little more than symbolic except at Kamina. Tshombe's desire to take control of all of Katanga was move that brought on UN counter-move, consisting of moving Indians to Kamina and incident at Kabalo.2

3. When Kasavubu realized UN was potential ally against Katanga he became more "interested" in UN. This, Hammarskjöld says, is explanation for Kasavubu's acceptance of Nwokedi-Gardiner agreement. (SYG said interesting incident occurred few days ago when Kasavubu and friends requested UN to stop shipment of arms on way to Tshombe—this while UN still being kept out of Matadi.) Strength of UN operation in north Katanga has brought new "tone" from Tshombe. He is faced with growing political opposition internally. His attempt to arrange follow-up meeting to hold his gains from Tananarive was unsuccessful; instead, Kasavubu set up Coquilhatville meeting.

4. SYG noted incidents at Coquilhatville conference emphasize Kasavubu's attempt to gain hegemony over Tshombe. Sendwe, for example, was present despite his bitter rivalry with Tshombe.3 Finally, Tshombe walked out since Kasavubu would not accept his conditions which were 1) Kasavubu repudiate his acceptance of latest SC res; 2) Kasavubu join in condemning Kabalo action by UN.

5. SYG now believes Gizenga and more especially his followers will take note that Kasavubu gaining upper hand over Tshombe and this will make even better chances for agreement between Leo and Stanleyville. SYG said UN now has confirmation of military agreement between Stanleyville and Leo forces.4 Lundula signed agreement for Stanleyville and Bombozo, commander of Thysville garrison, whom SYG described as "strongest man in Leo", signed for Leo.

6. SYG noted Matadi situation about settled as result of exchange of ltrs. Moreover, he said Mobutu had swung into UN line on Matadi. SYG concluded Abbas had done very good job despite certain lack of cooperation from Kasavubu which he had not revealed publicly but which had been reported in cables to SYG.

7. SYG said in accepting Nwokedi-Gardiner agreement Kasavubu had in effect agreed that foreign personnel listed in SC res should all leave Elisabethville. As for those in Leo, all should leave except those President (Kasavubu) personally decided should remain. This again emphasized Kasavubu's desire to get at Tshombe. (SYG noted while some in advisory comite had objected to such arrangement he had defended it and believed it was one UN would have to accept.)

8. SYG then turned to problem of Dayal. He said it was not desirable any longer from UN point of view that Dayal should remain since whatever facts of case might be, "others had their teeth so deep in him" they couldn't be pulled out. On other hand, Nehru had foolishly committed himself in public to Dayal remaining—thereby engaging his prestige. SYG said, however, since new political phase was opening in Congo, new pattern of activity had to develop. This would involve UN "keeping Kasavubu close and Tshombe low." In new circumstances question arose whether there should be just one over-all diplomatic representative of SYG. He said he was considering asking Dayal to propose new organization in Leo. It would consist of five top UN officials as follows: a) Linner for economic and technical assistance; b) McKeown, commander of force; c) Gardiner to handle negotiations with Kasavubu; d) if possible, Swede who helped train Ethiopian army to train Congolese forces; e) someone to assist Congolese in producing new constitution. (Hammarskjöld said he intended to suggest five or six men with name of Adrian Pelt at top of list. It would then be up to Kasavubu to request one.)

9. SYG said this led to question whether there was need for anything more than coordinator in addition to foregoing five. If UN had good relations with Kasavubu, which SYG seemed to assume, there did not seem to be any need for another senior official of high diplomatic rank to serve over five functional senior officials. What was needed would be coordinator or administrator rather than diplomat.

10. However, Hammarskjöld concluded, such arrangement could only be put into effect if Nehru convinced Dayal solidly backs it. He said Narasimhan and Rikhye (Indian members of Secretariat) favor such plan. SYG implied Dayal himself not yet fully aware of his thinking and must be led to it carefully. SYG has in mind Dayal going to Congo to put new organization into effect. He would announce his mission had been completed and new circumstances no longer made his presence necessary.

11. Both Hammarskjöld and Cordier emphasized Dayal has no desire to maintain his post in Leo but will not leave under fire. Therefore, plan Hammarskjöld now has in mind would have to be presented as Dayal's proposal based on view that UN over the hump and he no longer needed.

12. In response to Stevenson's questions at several points during conversation Hammarskjöld emphasized Abbas must go back to Addis Ababa. At no time did he suggest who might be "coordinator" he had in mind in addition to five functional heads of Congo operation.5

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4-2661.Secret;Priority.

2 On April 7 and 8, U.N. forces at Kabalo in northern Katanga successfully fought off attacks by Katangan forces, sinking a barge carrying Katangan soldiers and capturing a plane with 30 mercenaries. See U.N. docs. S/4790/Add.1 and S/4791.

3 Sendwe was at Coquilhatville as the leader of a delegation from the self-proclaimed province of Lualaba in northern Katanga. His delegation was seated after Tshombe's delegation left the conference on April 25.

4 Telegram 2212 from Léopoldville, April 18, transmitted the text of an ANC communiqué summarizing an agreement reportedly reached by military delegations from Léopoldville and Stanleyville providing for a cease-fire and the recognition of ANC authority by the troops of Orientale and Kivu. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.5/4–1861)

5 A memorandum from Cleveland to Bowles, April 26, stated that Stevenson had reported by telephone on his conversation with Hammarskjöld. Stevenson had informed Hammarskjöld that Ambassador Timberlake would soon be replaced. "This information was received, according to Ambassador Stevenson, with a broad smile; the Secretary-General expressed the hope that Ambassador Timberlake's successor would be a person with UN experience." (Ibid., 123–Timberlake, Clare Hitem) Stevenson and Bowles had discussed the question of reassigning Timberlake in a telephone conversation on April 24. Notes of the conversation include the comment, apparently by Stevenson, "We do not want Timberlake to be the price of Dayal." (Ibid., Secretary's Staff Meetings: Lot 66 D 147, Chester Bowles' Telcons)

62. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 62. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, April 28, 1961, 6 p.m.

2269. Deptel 2111.2 Problems here could scarcely be more complex or difficult to state coherently. Kasavubu is relatively weak, does not want real power and does not have important powers under constitution. For better or worse, he is only unchallenged institution functioning and he wants a Congolese solution with Western, not Communist help.

Ileo has been a weak Prime Minister, as we have often reported, and most unlikely to develop political muscle. For that reason and since he is broadly acceptable among many political factions, it has been argued that he might bring leaders together peacefully whereas stronger personality might widen breach. I have disagreed with such thesis and said in my telegram 1078 of November 1, 19603 that Adoula would be better choice. I still think so and believe he will, with luck, eventually be Prime Minister. He could dump Ileo tomorrow if he wished but they are personal friends and Adoula would not like to hurt Ileo. Furthermore, Adoula would risk losing support of number Ileo followers and finally he probably is content to let Ileo receive the slings and arrows until the situation improves and he can find way to ease Ileo out gracefully. We are on very close terms with Adoula and as sure as we reasonably can expect to be that foregoing is accurate.

We have for long time felt parliamentary solution necessary and have consistently advocated it. The old difficulties remain, however; neither Katanga nor South Kasai parliamentarians likely attend and progress this regard at Coquilhatville has been backward. Even Orientale and Kivu delegates not certain to attend even though Gizenga continues call for parliament.

Regarding Gizenga, we have, as Department aware, done everything we could think of to encourage rapprochement with GOC on assumption he can be brought around, as patriotic Congolese, through patient negotiation. I have never however been completely persuaded that Gizenga wants such a solution and have had current feeling he is stalling until bloc has found some way put him in saddle at Leopoldville. Meanwhile they support him in Stanleyville. On several occasions he has backed out of conversations at last minute and while seeming to stand for conditional agreement, has made no real move toward it. I think we must carefully consider whether he will ever bring Orientale and Kivu back into Congo except on his terms and whether time, aside from Communist propaganda, is not on his side.

The latter assumption, if correct, leads me to think other means necessary to settle Orientale and Kivu problem. There has always been possibility that Manzikala and others in provincial government, who do not like Gizenga, will become fed up and throw him out. They do not feel strong enough at moment and Lundula also does not feel he can or should use ANC for such purpose. Without ANC such attempt could scarcely succeed. Mobutu has been making real effort bring Orientale and Kivu ANC under central control but we do not believe he has yet had much success.

Along this line of thought, I am not at all sure that Gizenga would risk a parliamentary solution if it were proposed in near future, and if Katanga and Kasai representatives expected attend. Unless he sure that bribes which he is prepared to use lavishly will be translated into votes, he would probably not win vote confidence. Furthermore, votes can be bought both ways as he also knows. His popularity rating is not high and would not be decisive factor. He might in such case, as he has in others, decide at last moment use some excuse to keep provincial delegates away.

It seems to me that most profitable policy lies in bringing Katanga back into Congo. Realize we have tried hard and failed so far but must keep up efforts since economic effect would be most important and political effect would be electrifying. It would certainly rule out a separatist South Kasai and bring in deputies who would vote against Gizenga out of conviction. If that did not make Gizenga realize his game was up and bring him back, he would eventually be under pressure which I doubt he could long resist.

In other words I think our efforts so far have been along right lines although the working assumption regarding Gizenga may well be wrong, i.e. that he can be won over on legitimate and reasonable compromise.

I think key to obtaining support from Kamitatu is clear identification of eventual power center in Congo. He is opportunist who is working both sides of street and being kept in funds by Communists and in regular touch with Gizenga. He still thinks Gizenga will come out on top but is not by any means ready to cut ties with GOC. Kasongo4 is miffed with GOC because he thinks and says they have ignored him. Adoula has assured us he and others have done everything they could to bring him in but he sulks in UN camp at Léopoldville and has sent his wife and children to Stanleyville. Weregemere5 is more likely to rejoin fold since his experience on the other side has not been entirely happy.

Coquilhatville round table again points up great difficulty Congolese find in settling problems among themselves. It has so far produced nothing hopeful but has seen Tshombe take even more intransigent position which will probably produce some colorful rhetoric when he returns to Elisabethville. I think it will be long time before another round table will be generally attended if held in Congo.

Their army, shaky as it is, has been steadily developing coherence and expressing more and more its desire to pressure the politicians into agreement without dictating terms. That explains Tshombe's detention (not arrest) at Coquilhatville6 and seems to me so far hopeful sign. If UN can get on with reorganization and training and I believe it can be perhaps most effective instrument in unifying country. I have enough faith and confidence in Mobutu to think he would not use ANC to establish dictatorship for anyone including himself.

Timberlake

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–2861. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, Elisabethville, London, and Paris.

2 Telegram 2111, April 20, stated the Department's view that the reconvening of Parliament was necessary for progress to be made toward the peaceful reincorporation of Orientale and Kivu with the rest of the Congo and that Adoula seemed to be emerging as a leader who might be able to obtain some Lumumbist support for a moderate government and might well be a more effective Prime Minister than Ileo. It requested the Embassy's views on these points and on what steps might be taken to nudge the Léopoldville leaders in that direction. (Ibid., 770G.00/4–2061)

3 Printed in Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. XIV, pp. 561–562.

4 Joseph Kasongo, representative from Orientale and President of the Congolese Chamber of Representatives.

5 Christophe Weregemere, representative from Kivu in the Congolese Chamber of Representatives.

6 Tshombe was detained on April 26 by Congolese soldiers at the Coquilhatville airport, where he had gone with the intention of flying back to Elisabethville. He was subsequently placed under house arrest.

63. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State 63. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State1

Brussels, May 5, 1961, 7 p.m.

1882. Paris for Finletter. USUN for Stevenson. I paid courtesy call on Spaak2 this morning during course of which I stressed opportunity, with new governments in both Belgium and US, for strengthening the traditional ties of friendship and cooperation between the two countries. I mentioned my personal friendship with him of many years and said we wished to work very closely with new Belgian Government and would value their views on matters such as Congo, NATO, etc. Furthermore we would also like to feel able to discuss all matters of common interest with complete frankness.

Spaak said he fully agreed. While not wishing to criticize previous Belgian Government he felt that some misunderstandings had arisen between us through lack of close and intimate contact. With this in mind he proposed that I meet with him every Monday at 3 p.m. to discuss with frankness any matters which either of us wished to bring up. Such regular meetings would not preclude more frequent meetings when necessary, but he felt by having at least one intimate get-together each week we could keep in close step on any matters of common interest.

Spaak was obviously greatly pleased with Secretary's invitation to meet with him in Oslo (Deptel 2164)3 and indicated that he warmly welcomed this opportunity for a full and frank discussion on the Congo, which represented an extremely difficult problem for Belgium.

I said to Spaak that I believed basic objectives of US and Belgium re Congo were the same, in that we both desired to see a unified, stable Congo in which economic progress could be made and social and political stability restored and maintained. He also fully recognized the important contribution that Belgian civilian technicians were making and that Belgium had certain legitimate economic interests there. While our objectives were the same, there had been some differences between us in the past as to method or approach, but we felt such differences could be eliminated or minimized by close and frank exchange of views. I said that Spaak should frankly know that many members of the UN held Belgium responsible, perhaps unfairly, for all the evils and ills of the Congo, and, furthermore, there was a strong feeling among many UN members that Belgium was unwilling to cooperate with the UN. We believed that the new Belgian Government could make a much more effective presentation of Belgium's case. Also, anything that Belgium could do, such as speedily withdrawing Belgian military, para-military and political advisers would be very helpful in creating the impression that Belgium desired to cooperate with the UN.

Spaak said again that while not wishing to criticize the preceding Belgian Government, he felt that they had not always presented the Belgian case effectively. Insofar as he was concerned he believed strongly that Belgium should cooperate with the UN. In particular, he felt that the "political advisors" should be withdrawn as rapidly as possible and the sooner the better. In the past week, as he delved into Congo matters, he had discovered that the political advisors in egarble—Léopoldville?] and the political advisors in Elisabethville were frequently giving conflicting advice and were certainly not giving advice which corresponded with the views of the Belgian Government. This gave a most unfortunate impression of duality in Belgian policy. He therefore favored the speedy withdrawal of the political advisors.

He also favored the withdrawal of Belgian military personnel on a basis fully compatible with the recent agreement signed between the UN and Kasavubu;4 in other words, just as rapidly as the UN authorities and the Congolese central authority reached agreement on the withdrawal of Belgian military personnel. However, it was obviously important that all Belgian military personnel not be withdrawn at one fell swoop without having adequate replacement for them, as any such total withdrawal without appropriate provision for adequate replacement could lead to chaos within the Congolese armed forces. In his recent discussions with Sabhani he had made these points clear and stressed the desire of the new Belgian Government to cooperate fully and whole-heartedly with the UN and the Congolese.

Spaak then said that he felt it would be extremely useful for him to have a very frank talk with UN Secretary General Hammarskjöld so that the latter could hear first hand exactly where the Belgian Government stood. This might help to clear up some of the suspicion in the UN as to Belgium's motives. With this in mind he hoped to proceed to New York for such conversations. However, it was not possible to go there this month because of the Oslo NATO meeting, the King's visit to France and his responsibilities in connection with the organization of the work of the new Belgian Government, so he was planning to go in June. When he visited the UN in June he also wished to visit Washington to talk with the President and the Secretary, and he hoped most earnestly that they would be able to receive him. He planned to take this up when he sees the Secretary in Oslo on May 9. I said that while I did not know the President's exact schedule in June I felt sure that in principle the President and Secretary would be glad to see Spaak in Washington if a mutually convienient date could be arranged.

Comment: Catlett,5 who accompanied me in the call on Spaak, and I were favorably impressed by Spaak's very frank and forthcoming attitude in discussing the Congo, and by his obvious sincerity in wanting to work in the closest possible way with us on Congo and all other problems. With the fresh approach which Spaak is obviously bringing to the Congo problem there seems to be a real opportunity for us to work closely and constructively with the new Belgian Government. For our part, anything we can appropriately do to build up and enhance the prestige of Spaak and the new government should be helpful, particularly since a restoration of Belgium's international standing from its present low should serve to strengthen Spaak and Lefevre domestically and thus enable them better to do some of the difficult things that must be done in the coming period. In this connection I hope most earnestly that President and Secretary will be able to seek Spaak in June as I believe that such a meeting could have a very constructive impact on Belgian policy.6

MacArthur

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.55/5–561. Confidential. Repeated to Léopoldville, Paris Topol, and USUN.

2 Paul-Henri Spaak was Vice Premier and Foreign Minister in the new Belgian Government headed by Theodore Lefevre, which took office on April 25. For his recollections of the Congo problem, see Combats Inacheves: De l'Espoir aux Deceptions, pp. 242–268.

3 Telegram 2164, May 2, stated that Rusk would like to meet with Spaak during the forthcoming NATO Ministerial Meeting in Oslo to exchange views on the Congo and related matters. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.55/5–261) Rusk and Spaak discussed the Congo briefly at their meeting at Oslo on May 9; a memorandum of the conversation is ibid., Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330.

4 On April 29, the Coquilhatville conference had adopted a resolution approving the April 17 agreement between Kasavubu and Hammarskjöld and adopted two resolutions requesting that Kasavubu take steps under this agreement for the removal of all foreign personnel serving without his consent in Katanga, Orientale, or Kivu.

5 Embassy Counselor for Economic Affairs Don V. Catlett.

6 Telegram 2327 to Brussels, May 25, expressed agreement in principle to a June meeting between Kennedy and Spaak. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.55/5–561) Spaak did not, however, visit the United States in June.

64. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 64. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, May 10, 1961, 9:31 p.m.

2211. Re USUN's 3067.2 Department appreciates your timely and full reporting on SYG's views regarding current Congo developments. However, we continue to be perplexed by at least one aspect of current situation and there is apparent divergence on one important point between our analysis of situation and Hammarskjöld's.

It is not clear from your conversation with SYG whether and how he believes he can use imprisonment of Tshombe, UN's new relationship with central government, and Munongo's apparently more relaxed attitude towards UN to secure reintegration of Katanga into Congo. We assume this remains central objective for Hammarskjöld as it does for us, and we hope he is thinking of ways of providing appropriate replacements for Belgians in military and political advisory fields in Katanga. In further discussions with SYG on this subject, hope you can make clear our desire to cooperate with him to implement resolutions on unity and integrity of Congo and to elicit from him some concrete indication of his plans.

Major point of difference with his analysis relates to his estimate of Gizenga's situation. We do not believe Gizenga has lost strength in recent weeks. We consider him completely responsive at present to foreign direction; he has not made serious mistakes; Lundula's position has eroded vis-a-vis Gizenga; and one of latter's assets is that everyone underestimates his capabilities. We do not believe we can afford to let Orientale slip away from the Congo. Means must be found to bring Orientale within central government purview as well as Katanga. We have always understood Feb. 21 resolution should be implemented equitably throughout the Congo and we would like to know what plans he has developed to effect elimination of foreign advisers, mercenaries, etc. from eastern provinces.

Bowles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–961. Confidential. Drafted by Tron, cleared by Dumont, and approved by Cleveland. Repeated to Léopoldville and Elisabethville.

2 Telegram 3067, May 9, reported a conversation that day between Hammarskjöld and Yost. (Ibid.)

65. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State 65. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State1

Brussels, May 16, 1961, 8 p.m.

1917. Congo. In my May 16 meeting with Spaak2 he informed me he had received note from Foreign Minister Bomboko3 referring to agreement reached between UN and Kasavubu re withdrawal of Belgian mercenaries, political advisers, and military personnel. Bomboko note indicated that UN agreement applied to Katanga and that GOC desired withdrawal from Katanga of those Belgians in above categories who had assumed their positions after June 30, 1960.

Spaak said in line with policy of new Belgian Government to cooperate fully with both GOC and UN, he wished to give prompt and positive reply to Bomboko which would have effect of recognizing the right of Léopoldville to speak for Katanga in such matters. Accordingly, Spaak is drawing up an immediate list of such Belgians in Katanga who in GOB view could and should be withdrawn at once, and, after letting Katanga authorities see this list (a courtesy which Spaak considers important in order not alienate Katanga further from Léopoldville), he planned reply to Bomboko accepting the principles set forth in Bomboko's note and enclosing the list of Belgians who would be immediately withdrawn as a first step in responding to Bomboko request. Spaak said that this move on part of GOB would create adverse reaction for him and Lefevre from certain vocal elements in Belgium who would raise hue and cry that new government was abandoning Katanga, etc. However, Spaak and Lefevre were quite prepared to accept domestic consequences of above course of action as they believed it imperative to convince UN, Congo, and world that they desired to cooperate sincerely and fully with Congo and UN.

I replied to Spaak that although I had not seen Bomboko's note, course of action he had outlined seemed statesmanlike way to respond to GOC request. We recognize Spaak and Lefevre would be subject to criticism by certain Belgian elements and admired courage they showing in willingness to disregard such criticism. Spaak said he would be glad to have Foreign Office show Bomboko note to member Embassy staff [4 lines of source text not declassified].

Spaak then went on to say that after very careful study of the problem of Congo he was convinced that those Belgians who wanted to hang on in Congo and exercise predominant influence on the Congolese Government were following a path which was 100 percent wrong. [5 lines of source text not declassified] Spaak said he feels best way for Belgium to preserve her economic and other interests—"and she has some legitimate ones"—was for her to make clear to the Congolese Government that Belgium is not trying to control and fetter GOC freedom of action but wishes to see a free and independent Congo with which Belgium is willing to cooperate and be helpful on terms of equality and full recognition of Congolese sovereignty. Spaak said his philosophy would encounter heavy opposition from certain elements within Belgium who desired to hang on to their special position to bitter end. While he would have to act with skill and care he wished us to know these were principles which he had in mind as he tackled multiple and very complex aspects of Congo problem.

I said to Spaak I agreed wholeheartedly with his approach which I felt sure would be warmly welcomed by Washington.

[1 paragraph (2 lines of source text) not declassified]

MacArthur

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 855.0070G/5–1661. Confidential; Priority; Noforn. Repeated to Léopoldville, USUN, and Paris.

2 MacArthur reported in telegram 1914, May 16, that he had met with Spaak that day and discussed several subjects, reported in separate telegrams. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 1925 from Brussels, May 16, summarized the note. It stated that the Congolese Government wished the withdrawal as soon as possible of all foreign mercenaries and political and military advisers and they should be replaced with personnel who were competent and acceptable to the Congolese Government. It asked that Belgian technicians and private businessmen remain in order to avoid further dislocations and stated that any disagreement as to which category applied to a particular individual should be resolved by negotiations between the two governments. (Ibid.)

66. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Bowles to President Kennedy 66. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Bowles to President Kennedy1

Washington, May 20, 1961.

SUBJECT

Initial U.S. Contribution to UN Program of Financial Aid to the Government of the Congo

We have recently been making a major effort to stimulate a United Nations initiative to stabilize and rehabilitate the Congo economy, which is threatened by runaway inflation. At present the prospects for such an effort seem more promising than ever before: the United Nations on its side has begun to demonstrate an awareness of the needs of the economic situation, and a willingness to work co-operatively with the Kasavubu Government, which, on its side, seems to be prepared to undertake some of the difficult domestic measures an effective program will require. In addition, some of the European states have indicated greater willingness to contribute financially to such a program.

Our mission in New York has been discussing with the United Nations the elements that such a program should include; in a message received today our delegation indicates that it may prove desirable for the United States to make an immediate grant of $5 million for the purchase of United States commodities as a means of providing some measure of relief for the scarcity of goods in the Congo, and of facilitating negotiations between the United Nations and the Congo.

Under the provisions of the Mutual Security and Related Agencies Appropriation Act of 1961,2 the United States contribution to a United Nations program in any African country may not exceed 40 percent of the total contributions to the United Nations for such a program. Although approximately $9 million in contributions from other countries have been obtained by the United Nations Fund for the Congo, the United States contributions to date already substantially exceed the 40 percent limit. These contributions were made under the President's authority to waive the requirements of the Mutual Security Act and any act appropriating funds for use under the Mutual Security Act. The further contribution it is now proposed to make will require a further exercise of this waiver authority.

Your approval is sought for an immediate offer of an additional $5 million for this program, on the understanding that a formal determination authorizing this action will be promptly prepared for your signature and submitted in accordance with normal procedures.3

Chester Bowles4

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential.

2 P.L. 86–704, approved on September 2, 1960; 74 Stat. 776.

3 A May 29 memorandum from Budget Director David E. Bell to Bundy states that he discussed the additional $5 million for the Congo with the President on May 26 and that the President had approved the State Department memorandum. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

4 Printed from a copy that bears this stamped signature.

67. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 67. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, May 22, 1961, 7 p.m.

3169. Congo. Yost took Godley this afternoon to call on SYG. Hammarskjöld informed them Dayal would not be returning to Congo.2

Decisive actions which have convinced both SYG and Dayal that it would be impossible for latter to return were: (1) hostile and even abusive reception accorded Mekki Abbas when presenting SYG's letter announcing that return; and (2) subsequent demarche of Acting Foreign Minister to diplomatic corps in same sense.3 Hammarskjöld mentioned that message had been dispatched to Nehru, who had most reluctantly accepted situation. Fortunately, it was clear that he blamed Congolese and not UN for what had occurred.

(Wieschhoff (Secretariat) told us that SYG, Dayal himself and others had struggled with this question until 5 a.m. last Saturday before reaching decision. Dayal is today submitting resignation as special representative.4 Dean (UK) informs us that 2 messages were transmitted to Nehru, one from SYG and one from Dayal and Jha jointly. Nehru replied directly and only to Dayal, stating that under circumstances he should return to his national duties.)

In response to our query, SYG said Dayal would be replaced by U Hla Maung, now serving with Secretariat in Iraq. There will be no haste in dispatching him, however, and Linner will carry on in meantime.

SYG expressed strong hope there would be no public gloating on part of Congolese, since such action on their part would increase Indian bitterness.

Comment: Hammarskjöld was obviously sore and unhappy over what he considers outrageous Congolese behavior in this affair. He may, however, be somewhat relieved to have it over with and to have responsibility, in Nehru's eyes, clearly focused on GOC rather than UN.

It is hoped that Embassy Leo may be able persuade GOC to play this matter in very low key.

Plimpton

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–2261. Confidential; Priority; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Léopoldville.

2 Hammarskjöld had informed USUN a few days earlier that he intended to send Dayal back to the Congo for about a month. Telegram 3134 from USUN, May 17, reported that Stevenson and British Representative Sir Patrick Dean had made a joint demarche to Hammarskjöld arguing against this plan but that Hammarskjöld was firm in his intention to send Dayal back. (Ibid., 325.70G/5–1761)

3 Telegram 2348 from Léopoldville, May 20, reported that Acting Foreign Minister Julien Kasongo had summoned the representatives of nine Embassies to hear a statement prepared by the Cabinet Ministers at Coquilhatville concerning Dayal's proposed return. Kasongo stated that if Hammarskjöld persisted in this plan, future Congolese cooperation would be placed in question and all past agreements would be upset, and he urged the Embassy representatives to intervene with Hammarskjöld to prevent Dayal's return. (Ibid., 332.70G/5–2061)

4 Hammarskjöld announced on May 25 that Dayal was returning at his own request to his position as Indian High Commissioner to Pakistan. For text of the statement, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, p. 820.

68. Editorial Note 68. Editorial Note

On May 13, President Kasavubu announced at the Coquilhatville conference that he would convoke Parliament immediately after the conclusion of the conference, and he requested the assistance of the United Nations to assure the members' security. Between May 14 and May 28, the conference adopted 21 resolutions setting forth the principles for a new federal state with an increased number of provinces. The Congolese Government was directed to establish a commission to work with U.N. assistance to prepare a constitution according to those principles, to be ratified under democratic procedures. In the interim, the existing Parliament was to remain in existence.

The conference concluded on May 28. In his closing speech on that date, Kasavubu praised the resolutions of the conference but warned that they required ratification by Parliament. He did not indicate the date when Parliament would convene. For texts of the 21 resolutions, see Benoit Verhaegen, Congo 1961, pages 74–94; for text of Kasavubu's May 13 announcement, see ibid., page 392; for text of his May 28 speech, see ibid., pages 73–74.

69. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State 69. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State1

Brussels, June 5, 1961, 9 p.m.

2028. Paris for USRO. Congo. Embtel 1994,2 Deptel 1961 [2379].3 I discussed Congo further with Spaak this afternoon, particularly importance of early withdrawal of Belgian advisors and military in compliance with UN resolution. Spaak said private Belgian individuals and interests in Katanga which opposed his policy of withdrawal were bombarding him and members of the government and Parliament with telegrams and letters opposing withdrawal of Belgian military personnel, saying if such withdrawal occurred situation would disintegrate into chaos and become like that in Kivu. At same time, authorities in both Elisabethville and Léopoldville have been raising increasing difficulties and objection to withdrawal of many of advisors who were on original lists Spaak submitted. In addition to Katangans (reference telegrams), Kasavubu was now also saying that he wished to retain most of the twelve persons on the withdrawal list submitted by Spaak. (Dorsinville confirmed this to us this morning.) Spaak felt that Belgians who were on withdrawal list were to considerable extent responsible for these new difficulties.

Spaak went on to say despite foregoing he determined to withdraw advisors, mercenaries and military soonest and several advisors on way home. However real key to withdrawal of Belgian military and some of pol advisors lay with UN, which must provide replacements acceptable to GOC and Katangan authorities. He asked most earnestly that we press SYG to move more rapidly in providing acceptable replacements. I mentioned that Dumontet was now negotiating this matter with Munongo (Deptel 2379). Spaak replied that while he hoped this true, he understood Dumontet had now left Congo and GOB had no indication that UN was actively negotiating this matter with Munongo.

MacArthur

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 855.0070G/6–561. Confidential. Received at 5:41 p.m. and repeated to Léopoldville, Elisabethville, USUN, and Paris.

2 Telegram 1994 from Brussels, May 29, reported that Spaak had told MacArthur that Katangan authorities were raising problems at the prospect of withdrawal of Belgian military personnel, and the Belgian civilian population in Katanga was excited and concerned. Some Belgians were threatening a massive withdrawal of Belgian civilians, including technicians, if Belgian military personnel were withdrawn without dependable assurances that law and order would be maintained. (Ibid., 855.0070G/5– 2961)

3 Telegram 2379 to Brussels, June 2, stated that the Department understood the United Nations was developing plans for replacing Belgian military personnel and was negotiating arrangements with Munongo. It suggested that MacArthur mention this to Spaak, indicate that U.S. representatives had raised this point with Hammarskjöld and his staff more than once, and express gratification that Spaak was proceeding with the withdrawal of political advisers and mercenaries. (Ibid.)

70. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 70. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, June 5, 1961, 7:55 p.m.

2248. Agree your tentative assessment2 Gizenga will probably not attend parliament except on his own terms to which we agree GOC should not accede. Also agree your view GOC should press on with plans for parliament under Kasavubu auspices with fullest UN protection. This however leaves problem Gizenga-dominated separatist regime Orientale which we regard with increasing alarm view possibility Ghana shipment arms Stanleyville, arrival increasing number bloc and Casablanca Power ambassadors, continued viability Gizenga despite blockade and apparent reluctance Lundula break with Gizenga. We have given considerable thought to possibilities reducing Gizenga hold on Orientale and prospects this do not appear bright for near future.

Hence feel Gizenga membership in non-sensitive post in otherwise moderate cabinet with strong Prime Minister preferable continuance his present position in Orientale, and that Kasavubu should arrange offer him unspecified cabinet post. Implicit in condition would be authority central govt extended over Eastern provinces. Such offer would strengthen posture Kasavubu as conciliator and on assumption Gizenga will not attend Kasavubu parliament, gesture would be safe enough and at same time helpful GOC position internationally and internally.

Should this offer be made and accepted however, we feel Gizenga, lacking charisma Lumumba, would be less threat in non-sensitive cabinet job Léopoldville where he can be effectively watched and movements countered by other GOC leaders. Should he refuse offer, we believe GOC should press on with present plans and we will exert every effort strengthen GOC and reduce power Gizenga.

Press reports indicate GOC plans ask UN assistance draft constitution, and UN help supervise popular referendum. This to be encouraged. Reports also indicate Kasavubu may be thinking of enlarging Senate to ensure installation moderate government. Based your reporting would appear sufficient strength present parliament to ensure acceptance moderate government without change membership if more generally acceptable Prime Minister, such as Adoula, appointed, and support all Katanga elements can be swung behind him. Appears to us packing parliament would only weaken legal position Kasavubu and serve no useful purpose.

Request your comments on foregoing and suggest you also solicit views UK and French Ambassadors.3 Dept will also discuss matter with UK, French and Belgians here.

Bowles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–561. Secret. Drafted by Woodruff; cleared by Wallner, Deputy Director of the Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs Milton C. Rewinkel, and David Korn of the Executive Secretariat; and approved by Williams. Repeated to USUN and Brussels.

2 Timberlake sent this assessment in telegram 2363, May 24, which predicted that Gizenga would not make concessions and Léopoldville had nothing to lose by taking a hard line. If Gizenga did attend Parliament, Timberlake thought Léopoldville should not offer him a post in a moderate government. (Ibid., 770G.00/5–2461)

3 Timberlake sent a U.S.-U.K.-French assessment in telegram 2483, June 15, which concluded that Gizenga would probably attend the reconvened Parliament and would accept a position as Vice Prime Minister in an Adoula government but not a lesser position. If he did not attend, his position would be weakened and, in the long run, untenable unless he received massive foreign aid. (Ibid., 770G.00/6–1561)

71. Editorial Note 71. Editorial Note

A memorandum for President Kennedy from his Special Assistant for National Security Affairs, McGeorge Bundy, June 10, reads as follows: "As you requested last week, we are arranging a meeting at which all of our clandestine activities in support of political leaders and parties will be discussed with you. In particular, at that meeting, there will be presented a proposal for action in the Congo which has the support of the ambassador and our Department of State.

"Meanwhile, one small aspect of this Congo proposal has been presented with an urgency which has led me to approve it in your absence, on the basis of clear State Department concurrence. This is an expenditure of $23,000 in support of particular activities designed to strengthen the moderate camp in the Congo. Very much larger sums have been spent in the past in the same direction, through the same channels and without embarrassment, and in the light of reports that there is danger of the loss of an important moderate group if our action is delayed, I have in this instance not deferred special group approval pending your consideration." (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

No record of the meeting has been found.

72. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 72. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, June 13, 1961, 9 p.m.

3318. Congo. Deptel 2424.2 Yost read pertinent parts reference telegram to SYG 13 June. SYG declared himself in complete agreement saying "we could have written it ourselves".

SYG said since our last talk with him3 Sahbani had met with Spaak and reported Spaak taking more pragmatic approach. SYG said he and Sahbani of opinion UN should "go ahead" and see if Spaak protested. SYG believed this approach might be easier for Spaak, most of whose difficulties came in presenting problem palatably to Belgian public. SYG believed Spaak could accept more than he could commit himself to.

SYG said Spaak had been forthcoming on withdrawal of civilians. Spaak had written to Munongo and Bomboko encouraging them to discharge civilians. Both Munongo and Bomboko had answered to effect Spaak intervening in Congolese affairs. However, SYG was encouraged because Munongo had promised discharge not less than 100 civilians this week. If Munongo carried through this would start ball rolling and SYG believed Spaak would not object. Léopoldville, currently more difficult, would be unable play separate game and would have to follow suit. SYG said he did not believe in efficacy tripartite negotiations re withdrawals but proposed send Sahbani to Congo who with background of talks with GOS might be able speed withdrawal process.

SYG said UN in Katanga has been given orders to arrest two of "worst" Belgian advisers if they do not leave shortly. Brussels has ordered them leave Katanga and Munongo wants them out but they have been staying on. SYG admitted legal position UN would be somewhat curious but UN would be acting as agent of government (he did not specify whether he meant Belgian, Congolese or Katangan Government).

SYG said Gardiner had spoken Fri with Gizenga and colleagues. SYG believed as result this meeting Gizenga had submitted "good paper" containing 12 points. (Assume these were points contained our telegram 3295.)4

Gizenga also requested UN assistance to arrange meeting in Léopoldville to discuss modalities of Parliament. UN had immediately approached Kasavubu who agreed to meeting. Gizenga delegation arrived Léopoldville 12 June to meet with delegation which probably included Adoula. Meeting should have taken place 13 June but SYG had as yet no report.

SYG then conjectured on causes of Gizenga "climb down" from intransigent mid-May position to current appearance Stanleyville delegation in Léopoldville. SYG suggested this change indicated Gizenga had stopped listening to Soviet and Czech advisers who would surely have insisted he "stick to his guns", as he was their last and only hope in Congo. However, SYG commented, Gizenga "had not done it for our blue eyes". He thought UAR primary influence on Gizenga and noted UAR Ambassador to Stanleyville pro-UN as was Nasser. Nasser interest in Congo had always been preservation unity and he had supported Gizenga as strongest unifying force. Now with Kantanga separatism broken and increasing strength in Léopoldville, Nasser anxious get Congo "out of way for Angola". Other contributing factors to UAR position might be current USSR–UAR difficulties, lack of progress in persuading Sudan to permit transit and overflight, ineffectiveness of Ghana effort, frustration with Casablanca group and ChiCom offensive toward Orientale. (Emergence of Chinese would be equally displeasing to Gizenga who "considered them as bad as the Indians".) SYG believed UAR position and influential role brought element of stability into picture.

SYG said time threatened and stressed importance of making substantive progress because USSR would do utmost to upset situation. Fact that Stanleyville and Léopoldville had sat down together could represent concrete step even if Parliament not convened until later. He commented Gizenga's private views were more "advanced" than his publicized views. He believed USSR would try and say UN had betrayed Gizenga but in fact UN would not betray Gizenga by making public his private views. However Kasavubu must not overestimate his chances and at this point could afford to be generous.

Yost

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–1361. Confidential. Also sent to Elisabethville and Léopoldville and repeated to Brussels.

2 This telegram, June 9, instructed the Embassy in Brussels and USUN to continue their efforts to bring the discussion of the complex problem of Belgian withdrawals "down to a practical plane where prospects for solution can be found." (Ibid., 770G.00/6–661)

3 Reference is apparently to a June 6 meeting among Hammarskjöld, Yost, and Dean, reported in telegram 3271 from USUN, June 6. (Ibid.)

4 Telegram 3295, June 9, reported that Wieschhoff had informed USUN that Hammarskjöld had been indirectly in touch with Thomas Kanza, a representative of the Gizenga regime, in connection with the possibility of arranging a basis for a meeting of Parliament which Gizenga would attend. The telegram stated that Gizenga might be prepared to accept a post as Vice Prime Minister in an Adoula government. Gizenga was reportedly dissatisfied with the help he had been receiving from the Communists and ready to "cut loose from them and throw in his lot with real African nationalists." (Ibid., 770G.00/6–961)

73. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 73. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, June 17, 1961, 2:19 p.m.

2466. Believe highly effective efforts Yost and MacArthur have once more brought SYG's and Spaak's positions within manageable range (Brussels 2088;2 USUN 33183 ). As indicated Deptel to USUN 2424, sent Brussels 2428,4 Department welcomes SYG's and Spaak's realization pragmatic solution to withdrawal problem must be worked out on spot in Congo. In view SYG's previous strong opposition to formation tripartite groups, believe idea of formal group should not be pushed; rather SYG's willingness send Sahbani or suitable substitute to Congo should be encouraged. Also believe Spaak's proposal send high-level representative to bring Belgians in Katanga into line should be encouraged.5 As SYG's representative, Sahbani or suitable substitute should maintain necessary liaison with Congolese and with Belgian representative. Agree Embassy Brussels (Embtel 2107)6 tripartite consultations should not be subject conditions.

At same time in light Brussels 21007 and 2107, hope Spaak can be persuaded proceed soonest at least with withdrawal from Katanga initial group of Belgian military on assumption UN prepared deal with any potential internal security problem. In meantime, would hope further withdrawals would be facilitated if strong, high-level representative dispatched to deal with local Belgians. Most pressing need for strong representative GOB in Congo appears be to deal with Congolese resistance Spaak's plans for withdrawal. Belgium, backed up by UN representatives, should seek persuade Congolese in Léopoldville and Elisabethville that withdrawals must be accomplished in interests all concerned if this problem to be removed successfully from international focus. As requested Deptel 2428 to Brussels, Embassy Léopoldville and Consulate Elisabethville should do what they can to bring Congolese around to this point of view.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 855.0070G/6–1761. Confidential. Drafted by Robert H. Miller of the Office of Western European Affairs; cleared by Woodruff, Blue, and Sisco; and approved by Wallner. Also sent to USUN, Léopoldville, and Elisabethville.

2 Telegram 2088 from Brussels, June 13, reported a conversation the previous evening between MacArthur and Spaak. (Ibid., 855.0070G/6–1361)

3 Document 72.

4 See footnote 1, Document 72.

5 According to telegram 2088, MacArthur suggested that Spaak might send someone in whom he had confidence to take charge of negotiations in Katanga. Spaak replied he had been considering this, but it was difficult to find someone with the necessary qualities and rank; sending someone with ambassadorial rank would risk creating a very adverse reaction in Léopoldville.

6 Telegram 2107, June 15, reported a conversation that day among Assistant Secretary Cleveland, MacArthur, and Sahbani. Sahbani said he thought informal "technical" consultations among U.N., Congolese, and Belgian representatives in the Congo to discuss implementation of the February 21 resolution might be feasible, but not until after the departure of the 23 Belgians Spaak had nominated to leave plus some mercenaries. (Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/6–1561)

7 Telegram 2100, June 15, reported a June 14 conversation among Cleveland, MacArthur, and Spaak. (Ibid., 770G.00/6–1561)

74. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 74. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, June 20, 1961, 9:25 p.m.

2480. For Yost from Under Secretary. Believe moment propitious have general review of Congo situation with Secretary General both to assure he fully aware our views and to obtain more precise information on his plans.2 In discussion you should make following points: 1. We fully agree with SYG that utmost efforts must be made ensure success UN Congo operation. Such will be measured in terms restoration political and economic unity, internal security and economic health.

2. In order achieve these objectives Congo must have viable Government and must not become battlefield for cold war maneuvers. Majority Congo leaders are moderate and want to cooperate in building a viable country. US does not want Gizenga group to be deprived of possibility participating in new Government but if there is to be unity under constructive leadership this group must not be permitted impose its views on nation or be given disproportionate influence in whatever government formed. Congo under Lumumba was unstable and political strife resulted in civil war, separatism and foreign intervention. Gizenga in power would lead country in same direction.

3. SYG should therefore use his influence towards creation of government of moderate character in which members of Lumumba-Gizenga group would be represented, if the parliamentary majority so desires, without being able to exert overriding influence on basic policies of country.

4. High priority should be given to replacement of Belgian military and political personnel in Katanga by UN officers and advisors so as to avoid possibility breakdown internal security there. Belgian concern for safety its civilians Katanga can be relieved by demonstration of UN will and capacity. Believe UNOC in Katanga should assure local Belgians this respect at once. We will continue urge Spaak effect withdrawals. However, feel he has made significant progress this respect. This could be speeded up if SYG sent rep to Congo to conduct talks with Léopoldville and Katanga leaders separately with Belgian representatives brought in on consultative basis as necessary.

5. Retraining Congo army should be speeded up by preparation of workable plan and appointment of senior officer and staff to take charge program and work out details. The essential is to restore security by retraining Congolese army units as and where feasible and not wait for a political settlement between factions. We frankly under impression UN does not yet have practical program.

6. The US Government will assist UN obtain additional contributions for the economic aid programs. A senior official should be appointed to head up an economic stabilization program. He should be person considerable stature with good measure autonomy.

7. Kivu is essentially chaotic and hence should be feasible for UN to extend present intervention Bukavu and impose order generally in province. This would permit provincial authorities reintegrate the area with central government as they wish to do. Such action would make Gizenga more amenable negotiating with central government.

8. Hiring of teachers and technicians for Congo should be stepped up and no discrimination applied against Belgians and other Western personnel. In fact, Belgium is the only adequate source French speaking technicians and teachers with necessary qualifications and willingness serve in Congo.

9. Increased UN surveillance over Orientale airfields necessary. UN should refuse permission landing of planes whose mission is either bring military supplies or achieve political objectives contrary to pacification and unification of country. We believe that the UN should not permit Ghana Government to send planes civilian supplies to Stanleyville while Léopoldville is ready to supply any such needs to that area. We believe UN military should re-enter South Kasai as soon as feasible.

10. We recognize that SYG needs the support of Afro-Asians in Congo operations. We are persuaded all reasonable persons can concur in our basic policy which, in nutshell, is not to "win" Congo in cold war sense but to create viable independent nation.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–2061. Confidential. Drafted by Deputy Director of the newly-created Office of Central African Affairs Robert Eisenberg; cleared by Blue, Wallner, Williams, and Andre J. Navez of the Executive Secretariat; and approved by Bowles. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, London, Paris for USRO, and Elisabethville.

2 An agreement was signed on June 19 by representatives of Léopoldville and Stanleyville providing that Parliament should meet at the University of Lovanium outside Léopoldville, that during the session all members of Parliament should be housed in Lovanium and have no contacts with the outside world, and that the United Nations should take measures to ensure the security of the meeting. It also proposed that Parliament should open no later than June 25. For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 823–824.

75. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 75. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, June 22, 1961, 8 p.m.

3392. Paris for USRO. Congo. I spoke to SYG re Congo along lines Deptel 2480.2

Re Parliament, I urged that SYG use his efforts to assure Katanga representatives participated in interests obtaining moderate government in Congo emphasizing our apprehension Gizenga might be able obtain Parliament majority if Katangans absent. SYG said he felt Katanga people would come, if not on first day at least on second. He said UN was playing its cards to attain moderate political result, although every step in Congo was a risk. He felt Belgians would be using their influence on Katanga to attend Parliament meeting, and he had already encouraged Union Miniere in that direction also. He continued to seem hopeful about results of Parliament, apparently having in mind Adoula emerging as Prime Minister and Gizenga having some other post. He thought Lundula would also have to have post. Even if present efforts break-down, signing of agreement between Léopoldville and Stanleyville including large UN role was political milestone which broke previous direction toward splintering. He said Gizenga was weak and fact he had maintained consistent line in direction of Parliament for last two weeks indicated he getting solid push from outside. SYG thought this was UAR.

Re Belgian military and political personnel he said matters were improving in "messy" way. Sahbani was going to continue in Brussels until somewhat more progress had been made, but SYG indicated he would then be sent to Congo. SYG's plans for replacing Belgian officers in Katanga are to have mixture of Congolese, Senegalese, and Europeans. He has asked Senegal provide officers, which he plans use for this purpose. I said I understood UN plans for replacement would take three to four months. SYG said he thought this could be done much quicker but it would not be one for one replacement, as smaller number of officers needed when task of army was changed.

Re army training program SYG again stood firm on necessity UN moving simultaneously or cooperatively re Léopoldville and Stanleyville troops. He feels any other approach will subject UN to partisan charges. UN has program for pilot training project at Kamina but none yet for overall training. He says he has enough officers available and feels they can go into training program quickly when political situation is ripe. He has held up Kamina program because he feels that so far it would be accepted only by Léopoldville. This would cause difficulty both with Stanleyville and Elisabethville.

Re US economic aid, SYG said he would make up his mind this week to accept US-tied contribution. This was "bitter pill" to swallow but he knew reasons for it and knew what his decision had to be. We taking up rest of issue with De Seynes.

Re hiring of teachers, SYG confirmed UNESCO discriminating against hiring Belgians. He said this was not UN order but stemmed from position taken by Congolese. He said WHO had hired Belgian doctor and UN embarrassed by this and was trying get it accommodated in some way. SYG was frankly against UN agencies hiring Belgians before there had been further Belgian compliance on withdrawal its political and military advisors. Once that was done, attitude would be different. He said what is not possible in June may easily be possible in July or August.

On whole I found SYG thinking along same lines as we are, maneuvering effectively to produce as sound and moderate government as is possible under circumstances, pleased with Spaak's cooperation on withdrawal Belgians and feeling this issue well on road to solution, having long range objectives such as reorganization ANC clearly in mind but believing it necessary to move forward step-by-step until overriding political problems successfully dealt with.

Yost

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–2261. Confidential; Priority. Also sent to Léopoldville and Elisabethville and repeated to Brussels, London, and Paris.

2 Document 74.

76. Editorial Note 76. Editorial Note

Katangan President Moise Tshombe was released on June 22 after almost 2 months of house arrest, initially in Coquilhatville and subsequently in Léopoldville. At a press conference on June 22, he announced that he and General Mobutu had made a military pact and he would send the Katangan Conakat parliamentarians to Lovanium. (Telegram 2531 from Léopoldville, June 22; Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–2261)

On June 24, he and Katangan "Foreign Minister" Evariste Kimba (also released from house arrest) and Congolese Deputy Prime Minister Jean Bolikango, Foreign Minister Justin Bomboko, and other representatives of the Congolese central government, signed a protocol of agreement. It provided that Parliament should convene at Léopoldville as soon as possible and that a new government should be formed and remain in power until the adoption of a new Constitution within 3 months. It also provided that Katanga and the central government have a single currency, that the central government have sole responsibility for foreign relations, and that the military pact made by Tshombe and Mobutu be implemented. For text of the agreement, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pages 825–826.

Tshombe returned to Elisabethville on June 24. Telegram 989 from Elisabethville reported that in a radio message after his return, he made no reference to an independent Katanga but did not refer to the June 24 agreement or to the forthcoming session of Parliament. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–2661) See also Verhaegen, Congo 1961, pages 273–281.

77. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 77. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, June 27, 1961, 8:58 p.m.

2357. A. Léopoldville's 2550, rptd Brussels 1037, USUN 1020, Elisabethville 375.2 B. USUN's 3392, rptd Léopoldville 359, Elisabethville 21, Brussels 144, London 89, Paris 128.3

Press reports Tshombe speech Elisabethville do not appear augur well for South Katanga participation parliament and apart from numerical vote value, inability Léopoldville leaders secure Tshombe support may have bandwagon effect favoring Gizengists. Additional views all addressees will be welcome, however unless you perceive objections following actions should be taken now:

Leopoldville: Appears essential strong, generally acceptable formateur be appointed soonest. If in your view the man is Adoula, you should approach Kasavubu, Mobutu and other appropriate leaders urgently this basis. Mobutu would appear one of few Léopoldville leaders in whom Tshombe places degree confidence. You should suggest he obtain Tshombe agreement postpone constitutional issue until government formed so that neither Tshombe nor Léopoldville would have to yield at present. View fact Tshombe has alienated Consulate Elisabethville, we also wonder in what form US could make approach to Tshombe directly, or with help other Western power, in attempt convince him his interest lies in support of moderate Léopoldville front. Your views solicited this point, particularly whether Scott or Charpentier4 might usefully undertake such an approach.

Brussels: Welcome your approaches GOB and Societe Generale on Katanga problem,5 and hope Muller able exert effective pressure on those Katanga Belgians who still urge Tshombe along path separatism.6 You should urge Spaak give Muller maximum powers bring full weight GOB to bear on Belgians whose conduct and advice contrary to direction USG and GOB want see taken by Katanga and suggest as well that Muller be instructed make strong approach Tshombe elicit his cooperation Léopoldville. You should also informally inquire of Rothschild7 or Van den Bosch if Longerstaey views expressed reftel A8 represent Belgian party line, observing they somewhat at variance Belgian views expressed to Embassy Brussels and Department.

Elisabethville: Unless you consider possible results warrant, you should not approach Tshombe, however you should suggest to O'Brien9 and UK and French colleagues they attempt convince Tshombe that if he does not support Léopoldville moderates at this point, may well find central government dominated by Gizengists which would only exacerbate instability in Congo about which Tshombe has long complained. Would also increase isolation Tshombe and pressure on him since UN and whatever GOC eventually formed will not tolerate separate Katanga and if Tshombe plans renege completely on Léopoldville agreement, demonstration such bad faith will cost him dearly in international standing. We believe useful suggest to him that in interests political moderation Congo he should send parliamentarians to Léopoldville now and reserve constitutional question Katanga relationship to Congo for discussion at later date when can be undertaken without complication presently posed by Gizenga faction.

Paris and London: You should approach appropriate officials along above lines with suggestion they instruct representatives Elisabethville appropriately.

USUN: You should approach SYG urgently, express our gratification he working along lines indicated first para reftel B, and suggest, since presence Katanga reps parliament may be essential to goal we both seek, he instruct O'Brien, Nwokedi or both make strong approach Tshombe on above lines.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–2661. Secret. Drafted by Woodruff, cleared in draft by Wallner and Officer in Charge of Swiss-Benelux Affairs Galen L. Stone, and approved by Director of the Office of Central African Affairs Sheldon B. Vance. Also sent to Brussels, Paris, London, USUN, and Elisabethville and repeated to Khartoum by pouch.

2 In telegram 2550 from Léopoldville, June 26, Charge G. McMurtrie Godley commented that it was still necessary to exert all efforts to effect a firm rapprochement between the Elisabethville and Léopoldville authorities. (Ibid.)

3 Document 75.

4 Ian Scott, British Ambassador to the Congo, and Pierre-Albert Charpentier, French Ambassador to the Congo. For Scott's recollections of the Congo, see Tumbled House: The Congo at Independence.

5 Telegram 2123 from Brussels, June 20, reported a conversation between MacArthur and Spaak in which MacArthur urged speedy withdrawal from Katanga of a number of Belgian "advisers" and at least some Belgian "mercenaries." (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–2061) Telegram 2080 from Brussels, June 12, reported that MacArthur had been urging the Societe Generale, Union Miniere, and other private companies with interests in the Congo to use their influence with the Katanga authorities to encourage rapprochement with Léopoldville. (Ibid., 770G.00/6–1261) Telegram 2152 from Brussels, June 23, reported a conversation along these lines between MacArthur and Herman Robiliart, President of Union Miniere and a director of the Societe Generale. (Ibid., 770G.00/6–2361)

6 Telegram 2123 from Brussels reported that Spaak was sending Charles Muller of the Belgian Foreign Ministry to Katanga to see that Spaak's withdrawal policy was carried out. Muller was arrested by the Katangan authorities on July 7 and expelled from Katanga. Canup reported the incident in telegrams 34, 36, and 37 from Elisabethville, all July 8. (Ibid., 770G.00/7–861)

7 Robert Rothschild, Spaak's Chef de Cabinet.456

8 Telegram 2550 reported that Belgian Charge Longerstaey had expressed distrust of the U.N. officials in Léopoldville.

9 Conor Cruise O'Brien of Ireland had recently become U.N. representative in Elisabethville.

78. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 78. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, July 8, 1961, 5:25 p.m.

46. A)Brussels 5, rptd Léopoldville 3, Paris 3, USUN 3, Elisabethville 2, London 2.2

B) Paris Polto 10, Brussels Polto 1, Léopoldville Polto 1, USUN Polto 1, pouched London.3

C) Deptel action Léopoldville 29, info Brussels 47.4

Appears clear from Spaak reaction outlined urtel 5 that suggestion on rapid removal Belgian officers from Katanga as means applying pressure on Tshombe not easy for Spaak accept. Dept nevertheless seriously concerned that Belgium working at cross purposes with US in present difficult and delicate Congo situation and considers it crucial secure Belgian cooperation this matter (reftel C). Accordingly request you make new effort with Spaak, utilizing following major points as well as any others you consider might be effective.

1) Dept believes participation Katanga parliamentarians important to reduce risks Gizengists obtaining undesirable positions in new Govt. For this reason points two through seven should be made. Regarding possibility Gizenga domination parliament, you should draw on reftel C, pointing out we would certainly share Belgian concern at prospect government headed by Gizenga, but doubt this a real possibility. Inclusion Gizenga element in GOC however is price GOC will be obliged pay to reduce threat posed to Western position Central Africa by continuation separate Gizenga regime Orientale. This connection, you should suggest Spaak that Belgians Léopoldville like Longerstaey and Denis (advisor Kasavubu) might well be able play more useful role by facilitating resolution differences moderates and by persuading other Belgians desist encouraging indefinite postponement parliament and supporting plots similar that concocted by Mobutu.

2) Belgians and we should be clear on probable consequences of failure parliament meet promptly. This point also described reftel C. If Congo remains divided into three hostile segments, Gizenga will remain his Stanleyville redoubt where he very likely improve his domestic and international position. In absence of rapid, legal parliamentary solution, stature of Kasavubu will be diminished, there will be renewed pressure on Sudan and other moderate Africans and Asians support Gizenga, and Soviets and radical Africans may well push for new series of SC meetings. Belgians should be under no illusions as to our ability call tune in UN if Western-backed leaders can reasonably be blamed for failure take road of legality under parliament; it took considerable diplomatic pressure throughout world to secure seating of Kasavubu and adoption moderate resolutions, and there is no assurance we would be successful again.

3) As long as UN remains in Congo, there is no way of eliminating Gizenga and reintegrating Orientale by military operation, even if Mobutu and Tshombe should combine forces. UN troops would merely interpose themselves between hostile groups as required by existing mandate. Even if UN were not present, we have no faith in ability of Congolese mount operation of this sort.

4) Recent, relatively favorable course of events in Congo should not obscure fact world attention remains focussed on problem and that Western relations with majority of countries of world will be affected adversely if we appear to be standing in the way of national reconciliation in the Congo. The US, for its part, considers that it has a heavy stake in the success of the UN effort to bring the contending factions together.

5) It is against this background that we have suggested that the primary avenue open to us to influence Tshombe to cooperate would be to deprive him of independent military capability by withdrawing Belgian cadres. While we realize risks involved, we still think it might force Tshombe reconsider his pretensions to independence. There is no doubt in our mind that UN has will and capability ensure order in Katanga, and believe most serious risk would be possibility of clashes between Gurkhas and Katanga armed forces. It should be stressed to Spaak that we would not expect him to implement our suggestion without clear prior assurance from SYG of UN's readiness prevent disruption law and order. Re Spaak's apparent fear that step would further alienate Tshombe from Léopoldville, you might suggest Tshombe already appears have crossed this bridge. Moreover, Tshombe clearly becoming more and more liability for West unless brought back into Congo fold.

6) We would welcome any additional thoughts Spaak might have on reaching common objectives of bringing about Tshombe's cooperation with Léopoldville. In this connection, we recognize rapid Belgian withdrawal might not have immediate effect bringing Tshombe around, although believe this withdrawal would diminish considerably his independent military capability, one of his major sources of power. However, believe we should also explore other possibilities, e.g., are there any methods of pressure on Union Miniere that Belgian Government might utilize or threaten to utilize to ensure cooperation, including making clear to UMHK that cooperation must show itself concretely, such as paying taxes to Léopoldville instead of Katanga. Are there any means of pressure that Spaak thinks we should be utilizing?

7) In any event, should be made clear to Spaak that Belgium not moving fast enough on withdrawals and that, in present difficult political situation, unless Belgians make dramatic step to demonstrate their cooperation with UN and their willingness undermine Tshombe's position, they inevitably will bear large share of blame among UN members for failure present efforts toward national Congolese reconciliation. In context in which matter likely be raised in UN should present reconciliation efforts fail, US would find it difficult defend Belgium's role for reasons spelled out above. It should be made clear to Spaak that we believe that fact present political picture confused offers no valid excuse for postponing large and dramatic withdrawals Belgian officers.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–261. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Tron and Woodruff; cleared by Blue, Vance, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs J. Wayne Fredericks, and in draft by Sisco; and approved by Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs U. Alexis Johnson. Repeated to Léopoldville, Paris, London, USUN, and Elisabethville.

2 Telegram 5 from Brussels, July 2, reported that MacArthur had suggested immediate withdrawal of most Belgian officers from Katanga to reduce Tshombe's independent military capability and assure his cooperation with Léopoldville. Spaak said that reports he was receiving indicated the situation in the Congo was entirely unpredictable. Sudden Belgian withdrawal might lead to a final rupture between Léopoldville and Elisabethville and would risk chaos in Katanga and possible conflict between Katangan and U.N. forces. (Ibid., 770G.00/7–261) Telegram 2567 to Brussels, June 30, had instructed MacArthur to make this suggestion. (Ibid., 770G.00/6–3061)

3 Polto 10 from Paris, July 3, reported on a meeting of the NATO Ad Hoc Committee on Africa. Although the committee had generally agreed on the desirability of encouraging reconciliation between the Léopoldville government and Tshombe and delaying a meeting of the Congolese Parliament until the balance of forces was against a Gizenga victory, Rothschild had privately expressed doubt that Tshombe would agree to participate in the government or that Gizenga would participate unless he were given an important and sensitive post. (Ibid., 770G.00/7–361)

4 Telegram 29 to Léopoldville, July 8, stated the Department's view that the risk of an indefinite postponement of Parliament, if blame fell on the Léopoldville moderates, outweighed the risk of negotiations for establishment of a new government and a meeting of Parliament without the Conakats. It argued that even without the Conakats, a moderate government with Gizengists in non-sensitive ministries would be possible. If the Gizengists returned to Stanleyville, the onus for failure to achieve a parliamentary government would fall on them. It instructed the Embassy to continue to press for the earliest possible meeting of Parliament and to urge the Léopoldville group to unite on a cabinet slate under a strong Prime Minister, presumably Adoula. (Ibid., 770G.00/7–161)

79. Memorandum of Conversation 79. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, July 13, 1961, 2:45–3:45 p.m.

SUBJECT

Tripartite Consultations: The Congo

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary of State

Sir Harold Caccia, British Embassy

Lord Hood, Minister, British Embassy

Mr. Denis Greenhill, Counselor, British Embassy

Ambassador Herve Alphand, French Embassy

Mr. Claude Lebel, Minister, French Embassy

Mr. Pierre Pelen, Counselor, French Embassy

Mr. William R. Tyler, EUR

Mr. William L. Blue, WE

The Secretary asked which subject the Ambassadors would like to discuss next as the time was short.

The French Ambassador stated that he would like to comment on the Congo if it were agreeable. He said that his Government considered that there was grave risk in reconvening the parliament at Léopoldville without Tshombe, as Gizenga might well have a majority. [2 lines of source text not declassified] He said he knew this was not the view of the Secretary General who was holding up 12 and 1/2 million dollars because of pressures from extreme African groups. Therefore, the position of his Government was that we should: 1) not press Kasavubu to reconvene parliament; 2) ask the Secretary General not to press Kasavubu and authorize the use of the money already granted by the United States, as the need is great; and 3) continue pressure on Tshombe to come back into line in cooperating with the Léopoldville Government. He emphasized that it was the view of his Government that if such steps were not taken, Gizenga would win out. He asked for the views of the other participants.

The British Ambassador said that they see the same danger as the French if Gizenga should win out, but the difficulty was that too long a delay would allow Gizenga to claim that Kasavubu had gone back on his commitment concerning parliament. Gizenga might in turn secede and gain the support of the Soviet Union, Ghana and so forth. He added that the difficulty lay in this delicate balance of timing. He also noted that the Secretary General might not bow to our pressure for the release of the 12 and 1/2 million dollars.

The Secretary suggested that perhaps our experts here should get together immediately on the risks involved in calling a session of parliament immediately. He said it was the U.S. position that the risk of a Gizenga dominated government was small whereas there was considerable risk if the moderates were blamed for stalling on convening the parliament. He stressed that not only would this cause criticism from fellow Africans, but it would also bring about pressure from the Secretary General. He cited the additional danger of the Soviets giving stronger support to the Stanleyville regime. He added that the United States had been urging the Léopoldville leaders to set up a government and put the Gizenga group in as a minority; that it was certainly not our position that Gizenga should be the Prime Minister. He said we were also trying to get Tshombe to cooperate in the convening of parliament. He concluded with the statement that everything turns on the assessment of the risks involved.

The French Ambassador added that their information was based on a telegram from Léopoldville, dated the 10th, in which Bomboko and Ileo were quoted as being very discouraged. He said he doubted that our experts here in Washington, so far away from the situation, were in a position to judge. He wondered if it would not be best to have the Ambassadors there meet and give us their concerted views. [4 lines of source text not declassified] The Secretary then suggested that we ask our representatives in Léopoldville to meet and assess the various risks involved. Mr. Tyler said we would get a message out on this immediately.

The British Ambassador then said that perhaps this would be a good time to raise the question of the financing of the Congo operation. He asked if there were any possibility of having French help in this, as the U.N. was going steadily into debt. The French Ambassador said that he would report this question to Paris. The Secretary said that he would like to associate the U.S. with the British Ambassador's initiative, as he was having trouble with the Congress on this matter. He said that he had recently been somewhat belabored on this point in Congressional hearings.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–1361. Confidential. Drafted by Blue and approved in S on August 8. The time of the meeting is taken from the Secretary's appointment book. (Johnson Library) Other topics discussed were recorded in separate memoranda of conversation.

80. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Williams) to Secretary of State Rusk 80. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Williams) to Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, July 15, 1961.

SUBJECT

Note from the British Ambassador regarding the Convening of Parliament in the Congo

The British Embassy has given us the attached note to you from the British Ambassador,2 expressing the Foreign Secretary's fear that a meeting of Parliament without Katanga's participation or proper political preparation could result in a disaster. The Foreign Secretary refers to a report he has received from the British Ambassador in Léopoldville following a conversation with our Charge and the French Ambassador.

Mr. Godley, our Charge d'Affaires in Léopoldville, had a radio conversation with Mr. Vance, Director of the Office of Central African Affairs, on the night of July 14. Mr. Godley stated he had lunched with the British and French Ambassadors prior to the receipt of your telegram which had instructed him to assess, in collaboration with the French and British Ambassadors, the situation in the Congo, particularly whether or not Parliament should meet at this time.3 According to Godley, the conclusions of the luncheon meeting were inconclusive. Godley urged that the Department await the results of his more formal meeting with the two Ambassadors, scheduled for this morning.

Godley stated he regards the tactics which we have developed as the proper ones to follow. He believes that the present situation does not warrant the adoption of dilatory tactics at this time which would have their own dangers. He doubts Gizenga is strong enough to emerge as the dominant figure in the new government if the Léopoldville moderates adequately organize themselves. He therefore recommends that we permit the present situation to continue to develop and that we refrain from pushing the "panic button" too soon.

Godley is pressing the Léopoldville Congolese to agree, between themselves, on a strong formateur (such as Adoula) and a Cabinet slate according Gizengists only a minority position. He reports Kasavubu is consulting leaders with a view to an early designation of a formateur and that there is one report that he will designate Adoula early next week. Also, a steering committee has been organized by the moderates and they have agreed they could not serve under Gizenga as Prime Minister. Godley emphasizes all these arrangements could come apart and that he will watch for this possibility closely. If it becomes apparent that Gizenga is about to win control, Godley believes Kasavubu should then be urged to assume the role of pater familias, which he likes, and suspend activities until he can make another effort with Tshombe, to bring all his children into the meeting.

The arrival of Russian and Czech diplomats in Stanleyville makes clearer the danger the Communists will come to control a Gizenga enclave unless Gizenga can be brought into the Central Government. Nyerere told us last night he is persuaded Gizenga is the true nationalist in the Congo.4

The UN is pressing hard for Parliament and many parliamentarians have been brought into Léopoldville by UNOC. Godley believes we should not abandon hope the Léopoldville leaders will organize themselves and be able to defeat an effort to form a Gizenga Government. What we hope will be presented to Parliament is a Cabinet slate, previously agreed upon, controlled by the Léopoldville group but with a Gizengist minority. If we now talk of our fears of the consequences of Parliament with the Léopoldville group, Godley believes, it will distract them from organizing themselves. In fact, the UN's pressure for Parliament is a goad to them. It is also a goad to Tshombe, who is being pressed by the UN and the West to cooperate.

The British Embassy also told us this morning that the British Ambassador will see Kasavubu today. He will emphasize the difficulties which Kasavubu's friends can expect in the UNGA in September if no progress has been made towards overall settlement of the Congo political situation. The British Ambassador in Brussels is to see Spaak Monday to urge he bring all possible pressure to bear on Tshombe to cooperate.

Recommendation:

I recommend that we await the report of this morning's more formal meeting between Godley and the British and French Ambassadors in Léopoldville.5 When we have received that report, we will review our tactics and I may recommend you talk again with the British and French Ambassadors.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7– 1561. Confidential. Drafted by Vance and Officer in Charge of United Nations Congo Affairs Jerome Lavallee, concurred in by Tron, and initialed by Williams.

2 Not attached to the source text. The note, dated July 15, is ibid., Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204, UK Officials Correspondence with Secretary Rusk.

3 Telegram 54 to Léopoldville, July 13. (Ibid., Central Files, 770G.00/7–1361)

4 Prime Minister Nyerere of Tanganyika was visiting Washington. A memorandum of conversation between Nyerere and Rusk on July 14 is ibid., Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation. Documentation is scheduled for publication in volume XXI.

5 Telegram 111, July 15, transmitted the agreed assessment: 1) it was difficult for outsiders to assess or influence the political maneuvering then underway; 2) every reasonable effort should be made to induce the Conakats to attend Parliament; 3) the Congolese political leaders should agree on a governmental slate before Parliament opened; and 4) if Parliament failed to agree on a government or chose one which was not generally acceptable, there was danger of a military coup. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/ 7–1561)

81. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Secretary of State Rusk 81. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, July 15, 1961.

SUBJECT

Parliamentary Democracy in the Congo

A phone talk I have just had (after consultation with and in agreement with USUN) with Ralph Bunche of the UN Secretariat does nothing to decrease our uncertainty or allay our concern about the prospects for the Parliamentary session which is supposedly just about to get under way in the Congo.

Bunche says that the UN frankly doesn't know what is going to happen; they hope that a "government of reconciliation" will come out of it but they are in no position to predict it, let alone guarantee it. The parliamentarians have mostly not arrived (as of 5:30 p.m. Saturday); Stanleyville's contribution to the democratic process has still not put in an appearance. "Eight or nine" members from Kivu are already lodged in the Lovanium University buildings under UN protection; a group has come with Kalonji, but has refused to stay at the University, preferring to camp outside.

I asked Bunche why the UN had pressed so consistently for a meeting of Parliament, given the almost complete uncertainty about the probable outcome. He said they had almost insoluble problems in trying to build an effective government administration, with internal security force to match, under a government which the UN couldn't acknowledge formally because it had never been legitimated through the only applicable constitutional process, acceptance by the Parliament under the Loi Fondamentale.2 If things went badly and no "government of reconciliation" came into being, the UN would have to "use what force we have to try and retrieve the situation." In other words, their pressing for a meeting of Parliament had nothing to do with a judgment about the outcome of such a meeting, but was the result of a conviction that the present informal governmental arrangements were no longer tolerable. (A better argument, which he did not use, is that a further long hiatus in setting up a central government with some color of legitimacy would freeze the present separatist tendencies and set up the possibility of another Laos.)

The nose count of possible parliamentarians, to which I referred in our conversation earlier today, is attached in an analysis by AF (Tab A).3 You will note the estimate that in the Chamber of Deputies, 45 pro-Gizengists are ranged against 53 opposed to Gizenga, with the remainder dead or uncertain. A majority of the 137 members would be 69.

While Kasavubu has issued (on July 5) a decree convening the Legislative Chambers at Léopoldville on July 15th, it is clear that this does not mean the Parliament was ever expected to meet on the 15th. The same Kasavubu decree says that "the former Presidents of the Chambers shall agree upon the actual date of the first meeting of the Chambers." (Tab B).4

Given the state of confusion, which is good material for either an opera bouffe or a tragedy depending on events yet unknown and roles still unplayed, I see no alternative to doing what Godley has recommended from the field: sitting tight, watching developments with great care, and planning to scuttle the immediate parliamentary session if things don't seem to be going well from our point of view. One basis for doing this might be for Kasavubu to accuse Gizenga of bad faith in view of the arrival in Stanleyville (now confirmed) of eight Soviet diplomats and a ton of Russian luggage, not all of it caviar.

I asked Ralph Bunche to let USUN know of any developments that substantially change the present picture as he described it, and we have instructed USUN (Tab C)5 to keep in the very closest touch with the Secretariat personnel directly concerned with dealing with the Congo operation from day to day.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–1561. Confidential. Drafted and initialed by Cleveland.

2 The Loi Fondamentale was passed by the Belgian Chamber and Senate and signed by King Baudouin on May 19, 1960. For text, see Gerard-Libois and Verhaegen, Congo 1960, pp. 108–135.

3 The attachments are not printed. Tab A is a July 7 memorandum from Vance to Williams.

4 U.N. doc. S/4841/Add.3, July 6, contained the text of Kasavubu's order No. 41 convening Parliament on July 15.

5 Telegram 73 to USUN, July 14.

82. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State 82. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State1

Brussels, July 18, 1961, 4 p.m.

99. Paris pass USRO. Congo. Embtel 80.2 I discussed the Congo situation again with Spaak last evening prior his departure for Bonn this morning. He said he sent message to Tshombe (reference telegram) indicating why interests of Katanga could best be served by cooperating with Moderates in Léopoldville and why GOB opposed separatism. He also saw British Charge yesterday and urged British influence be exerted in same sense. While he thought it very useful for UN, British, French, ourselves and other like-minded people to urge Tshombe to send representatives to Parliament and cooperate with Congolese Moderates, Spaak said we must be extremely careful not to present him with ultimatum or appear to threaten him as he might react adversely. Spaak said he believes Tshombe having great difficulty with Munongo and other "reactionaries", and that while we should continue to urge Tshombe in right direction we should use skill and finesse. Spaak also continues feel (as does Godley in Léopoldville 104 to Department)3 that we should not at this juncture press for specific early date for convening Parliament.

Spaak saw Robiliart (Elisabethville 57 to Department)4 who has just returned from Katanga. While Robiliart assured Spaak Union Miniere was using its influence with Tshombe for moderation, Spaak said he told Robiliart this was contrary to information GOB had received, which was that Union Miniere was not effectively using its influence with Tshombe to get him to cooperate with Moderates and send representatives to Parliament. I told Spaak I was glad that he taking this stand with Robiliart and in strictest confidence told him I understood Alan Kirk5 also urging Union Miniere and Societe Generale to be constructive.

Spaak concluded by saying political atmosphere in Congo very murky but he hoping for best and will continue do all he can to get Tshombe cooperation with Moderates.

MacArthur

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–1861. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, USUN, Elisabethville, London, and Paris.

2 Telegram 80, July 14, reported a conversation the previous evening in which Spaak told MacArthur about his recent talks with Hammarskjöld at Geneva. Hammarskjöld had argued that it was necessary to give priority to uniting Léopoldville and Stanleyville before the United Nations met in September, or U.N. members would be split between those recognizing Gizenga at Stanleyville and those recognizing Kasavubu at Léopoldville. Spaak argued that a meeting of Parliament without Tshombe ran the risk of a Communist-dominated government. He thought Tshombe was the key to the problem, and he planned to send Tshombe a letter arguing the case for a unified Congo. (Ibid., 770G.00/7–1461)

3 In telegram 104 from Léopoldville, July 14, Godley stated that he had not pressed for a specific early date for convening Parliament since it might be interpreted as meddling in purely internal affairs. (Ibid., 770G.00/7–1461)

4 Telegram 57 from Elisabethville, July 13, reported a conversation with Robiliart of Union Miniere, who was visiting Katanga briefly. Canup asked Robiliart what he had done to convince Katangans their salvation lay in reintegration with the remainder of the Congo. He replied that he had seen Tshombe but had not raised the subject, but he had discussed it with several ministers. He indicated that the Katangans were "obsessed with fear that Katanga would become mired in Congolese political and economic chaos" and he did not expect any reconciliation. (Ibid., 770G.00/7–1361)

5 Retired Admiral Alan G. Kirk had served as Ambassador to Belgium, 1946–1949.

83. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 83. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, July 20, 1961, 4 p.m.

94. Reference: Deptel 54, sent Léopoldville 72.2 Convinced Struelens' request pointless, indicates bad faith and represents attempt to involve USG in intricate and dangerous maneuvers currently undertaken by Katangans to maintain their separatism. O'Brien assures me that Tshombe, under prodding of Tom Kibwe,3 refused during final meeting with Khiari to go to summit conference at Léopoldville4 and that Munongo lied to press in saying UNOC preventing summit in Léopoldville. O'Brien told me one hour ago UN prepared to escort Tshombe to meeting at Léopoldville at any moment. Tshombe's disappearance from scene (he officially ill) puzzling and leads to belief he may already be in Léopoldville or Brazzaville.

Munongo launched "new-look" Katangan policy at his morning press conference when he made public exchange of telegrams with Gizenga calling for solution to Congolese problem "in African manner". Munongo said Katangan delegation will visit Stanleyville and, since free world refuses to support Katanga, latter will not hesitate to accept aid from Soviets. Munongo added that "This is not mere blackmail threat".5

Katangan leaders attempting by every device to split prospective unity of Congo in order to save this province from forceful reintegration into central government system. In their desperation they becoming active menace to US and Western interests in Africa.

Canup

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2061. Secret; Niact. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to Brussels, USUN, Paris, and London.

2 Telegram 54 to Elisabethville (72 to Léopoldville), July 18, stated that Michel Struelens of the Katanga Information Service in New York had given a Department of State officer a message from Tshombe: Katanga was willing to participate in a summit conference anywhere in the Congo in order to establish an agenda for a parliamentary meeting and to discuss the composition of a government. Such a summit conference was an indispensable condition of Katangan attendance at a parliamentary session, and if the United Nations or Léopoldville authorities rejected this, Katanga would send a delegation to Stanleyville to contact Gizenga. The telegram requested the views of the Consulate and the Embassy as to the wisdom of discussing this with Léopoldville leaders. (Ibid., 770G.00/7–1861)

3 Jean-Baptiste Kibwe, Katangan "Vice President" and "Finance Minister."

4 For O'Brien's account of Khiary's meeting with Tshombe and other Katangan leaders, see To Katanga and Back: A UN Case History, pp. 186–187.

5 For an extract of this statement, see ibid., p. 191.

84. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 84. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, July 20, 1961, 6 p.m.

143. Had 30 minute talk with Kasavubu today. Apologized for taking his time but said I had received instructions to express Department's congratulations on strong leadership he had been giving country in solving current political crisis. Coquilhatville conference, June 19 agreement with Stanleyville were all gratifying developments. But now however Department was observing development which gave it serious concern for it might well place presidency itself in jeopardy. We saw in continued reluctance of Ileo to resign an indication that he might perhaps even seek vote of confidence, serious possibility that this would open way to parliamentarians from Stanleyville presenting exclusively Gizengist government. Without counter force such maneuver might well succeed. In this connection I told President we had most reliable information that one of first things Gizengist government would do would be to attack presidency and replace present incumbent. Such eventuality cause of great concern for President and we considered his continued presence in office essential to nation's development, et cetera. I told him I had been instructed to bring this matter to his attention urgently and that Department would appreciate his comments and indication of how he viewed situation at present.

Kasavubu replied that he was fully aware of Gizengist ambitions and that it placed him in extremely difficult position for he could not oblige Ileo to resign and was waiting for this action on Ileo's own initiative.

He was not optimistic that this would occur. He was however going Lovanium this afternoon to sound out political atmosphere personally and ascertain views various leaders now assembled there. In this connection he believed that first thing must be done was for suppliants to have their mandates validated and then proceed to election presidents of both chambers. I then drew upon Deptel 722 and pointed out that Struelens had told Department that Tshombe was willing to attend summit anywhere in Congo. I recognized that this was contrary to Munongo's statement of yesterday but that I had been instructed to inform President of fact that we had received such information from Tshombe. He showed interest in this; said Tshombe now ill, and then volunteered that he knew Tshombe was considering visiting Stanleyville which was absolutely ridiculous for there was no identity of views between Communist Stanleyville and theoretically anti-Communist Elisabethville.

I then reverted to what he said about future developments in Parliament and expressed my personal view that it would appear to be unfortunate that Parliament would convene prior to designation of formateur. We here in Léopoldville were impressed by monolithic character of Stanleyville and way in which Gizenga had named Gbenye his man here with full powers to traffic in portfolios and to promise everything to anyone who might vote with Stanleyville. On contrary, I pointed out, moderates were without clear indication of President's wishes and they were currently group of fine men but who were wallowing in indecision and who did not have leader designated by Chief State. This definitely reduced their negotiability and fact they did not have spokesman led them to be powerless before Stanleyville machinations. We knew, for example, that men like Sendwe and Bolikango had been promised moon by Gbenye whereas no one could speak with authority for moderates. Kasavubu said he agreed this was most unfortunate situation and wanted to do something about it but he was still faced with Ileo problem and could not demand his resignation. I then said I understood his problem but there were times in nations' history when leaders such as himself had to lower themselves to negotiate with parliamentarians and had to take risks that were not pleasant and below dignity of Chief State.

Julien Kasongo3 joined us half way through conversation and was directed by Kasavubu to take notes on information about Tshombe. He stayed on with President for a few moments; shortly after I returned to office he asked me to see him immediately. Kasongo confirmed that Kasavubu is going to Lovanium this afternoon and that he, Kasongo, will accompany him. He said President was not miffed by our chat this morning and that he always welcomed frank talk from Americans. I emphasized to Kasongo the necessity for immediate appointment of formateur with which Kasongo wholeheartedly agreed and said he would again speak to Kasavubu on this point. He agreed that formateur must be settled as soon as possible to permit moderates to politick and took note of my suggestion that Ileo might publicly submit his resignation which Kasavubu would not accept but merely note. This would permit them to bring pressure on Gizenga also to resign and would clear field for naming of formateur. We discussed how Ileo resignation might be brought about and agreed that it might be hastened by Kasavubu naming Adoula as formateur. During my discussion with President I never mentioned Adoula by name, nor did he, but I told Kasongo that USG could work easily with Adoula and believed he was politician commanding more respect than anyone else in Congo today.

I would not describe my conversation with Kasavubu as forthright as that which Linner had yesterday4 but it was first time I had seen him. He nevertheless opened up after my initial monologue and seemed willing to talk politics and did not take offense.

When I left President I found Mobutu in outer office and congratulated him on birth of son. General said he had not even had chance to see baby for he returned late last night and had been summoned first thing this morning by President. This is not correct for we know he arrived here at 6 p.m. but I assume he was closeted with Bomboko, Adoula, et cetera, who were in large meeting of moderates until well after midnight when they took off for Lovanium.

Have informed Linner of foregoing and British and French Ambassadors are calling just before noon and I shall advise them. Will also consult with them re Deptel 72 to see if they have any further suggestions or views.

Godley

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2061. Secret. Repeated to Brussels, Elisabethville, USUN, London, Paris, and Brazzaville.

2 See footnote 1, Document 83. Telegram 82 to Léopoldville, July 19, authorized Godley to discuss Tshombe's approach with the Léopoldville authorities. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–1961)

3 Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade Julien Kasongo.

4 Godley reported on Linner's conversation with Kasavubu in telegram 142 from Léopoldville, July 20. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2061)

85. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 85. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, July 22, 1961, 6:17 p.m.

100. For Charge.2 Now that parliamentarians have withdrawn to Lovanium without adequate organization in advance among moderate leaders and in absence Conakats, Dept wishes you be authorized in advance in your discretion to urge following action on Kasavubu should in your judgment pre-parliamentary palaver or parliamentary consideration of composition new government appear imminently to be headed for government with Gizenga as Prime Minister or to threaten position of Kasavubu. If you have time to consult with Dept, this would be preferable but may not prove feasible.

Unless you have other suggestions, which we would welcome, believe you should at that time urge Kasavubu and other moderates to consider devices which would gain time and yet not place upon Léopoldville leaders public blame for sabotaging parliament. Have in mind (1) arranging for challenge of those parliamentarians whose credentials are dubious; and (2) asking that parliament suspend consideration of new government for a few days while Kasavubu makes additional attempt induce Tshombe send his Conakats so that all the President's "family" may be present. He should be pressed not to suspend parliament but rather to ask them to turn for the few days necessary to consideration of some other problem such as new constitution.

We continue to regard as basic the stance of Léopoldville leaders vis-a-vis UN and Afro-Asian nations. Any dilatory tactics adopted should avoid those which would place Léopoldville moderates in position of opposing parliament. We wish to avoid being faced with a choice between Léopoldville moderates opposing parliamentary solution and a government with Gizenga as Prime Minister.

Foregoing points up importance you being able follow developments day to day at Lovanium and keep in close touch with both Linner and Kasavubu. Also important you endeavor keep Mobutu calm and inactive for time being.

Linner's views on Gizenga prospects would be valuable.

Your comments on foregoing requested urgently.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2261. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Vance; cleared by Fredericks, Tasca, and Cleveland; and approved by Johnson. Repeated to USUN.

2 This line originally read "For Charge from Secretary," but the words "from Secretary" were crossed out. Rusk's name was also originally typed in the space for the approval signature, but Johnson's name was substituted, and he initialed. This suggests that Rusk authorized the message but did not see the final text.

86. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 86. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, July 25, 1961, 9 a.m.

187. Deptel 1002 received 0850 July 24. Due priority traffic decryption not completed until 1800 same day.

Deeply appreciate latitude Department giving me. Discussed reference telegram in detail with Linner last night. Linner endeavoring see Kasavubu this morning. Will follow line set forth Embassy telegram 1783 re Gizengistic plying US support. If appropriate will cite facts mentioned by Carlucci to Kamitatu as reasons4 and will also tell President UN as well as US concerned re position of Presidency if Gizenga comes to power. May, depending on atmosphere, express UN fears that Gizenga-led government will result in military coup. After this introduction will discuss possible ways thwarting Gizenga and on basis Deptel 725 will again broach question of summit provided Conakat Deputies accompany Tshombe or Munongo (Conakat Deputies obviously today less of asset than they were prior Munongo's recent declarations).

Linner will be able spokesman for he deeply concerned re potential plot and thus we find UN policy and that of UN representative here identical but for possibly slightly different reasons.

Linner, myself and Embassy staff in complete agreement that it would be unwise for me at this moment to see Kasavubu. I have made strongest pitch possible, namely telling him we are convinced Presidency itself at stake in present crisis. Kasavubu presently busiest Congolese in country. I cannot see him discreetly. His national stature and independence of foreign pressures is one of our better assets. If for some unfathomable Bantu reasoning he himself considering naming Gizenga, there is nothing even our highest authorities could do to convince him otherwise. Notwithstanding foregoing I have repeated to Linner and Kasongo and word has been sent to Kondolo and Ndele6 that if there is anything I can do to help I am prepared to do so.

Have not mentioned it earlier but Kasavubu's statement Sunday calling upon Conakat and others to come Léopoldville resulted from suggestion I made to Kasongo late Friday afternoon which I followed up with evening chat with Linner who supported it Saturday morning when he saw Kasavubu. This I am convinced is most effective way to operate for moment. Everything may of course change depending on Linner's talk this morning with President and meeting I am having at 10:30 this morning with Kasongo. Mobutu is still remaining quiet.

Since dictating foregoing CAS has just returned from early morning meeting with Kondolo who states "the group" i.e., Nendaka,7 Ndele, Cardoso, Kasongo, himself continue to be convinced that Kasavubu will name Adoula as formateur.

Godley

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2561. Secret; Niact; Eyes Only.

2 Repeated to USUN. Document 85.

3 Telegram 178, July 24, reported Godley's meeting that morning with Linner, Khiari, and Gardiner, in which Khiari told Godley the Stanleyville group was alleging that the United States would welcome Gizenga as Prime Minister. Godley told Linner and Khiari to indicate, when Linner saw Kasavubu and when Khiari returned to Lovanium, that this was not true and that the United States would find it difficult to collaborate closely with a Gizenga-led government. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2461)

4 Telegram 178 also reported that Carlucci had met with Kamitatu, who was returning to Stanleyville to try to bring Gizenga to Léopoldville. He had told Kamitatu that Gizenga's detention and expulsion of Carlucci during the latter's visit to Stanleyville in June, his recent arrest of American missionaries, and his recent reception of Soviet and Soviet bloc diplomats did not endear him to the U.S. public. He had pointed out the importance of U.S. public opinion and its influence on Congress.

5 See footnote 1, Document 83.

6 Albert Ndele, President of the National Bank of the Congo.

7 Victor Nendaka, head of the Congolese Surete.

87. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 87. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, July 26, 1961, 9:59 p.m.

127. For Charge from Secretary. Deptel 100.2 I have become increasingly concerned at possibility Gizenga could emerge as Prime Minister in view of fact that, in absence of Tshombe's Conakat parliamentarians, the votes Léopoldville moderates may count as certain are very close to those of Gizenga, leaving control to fence sitters. Unless Kasavubu in next day or two appoints strong moderate formateur like Adoula or unless signs favorable to government controlled by moderates become considerably more clear in immediate future, believe you should urge Kasavubu to ask parliament to turn to matters other than new government while he calls meeting factional leaders for purpose attempt attain true national unity.

Fully appreciate fact that, pursuant instructions dating back over one month (Deptels 2357 and 2374),3 you have done your best persuade Kasavubu of importance he and associates agree on strong formateur and cabinet slate before meeting parliament. Also understand narrow limitations our influence on situation and possibility Congolese method sort out new government may be palaver presently on course. However, stakes so large, for reasons spelled out below, I wish you resort to delaying tactics along foregoing lines too soon rather than too late.

Kasavubu in his call for such a meeting of leaders should refer to the continued absence of Gizenga, Katangan Conakats, and other absentees. Kasavubu should stress his role as builder of national unity which would have great appeal both in Congo and in rest of Africa. You might also suggest he consider in addition calling for an African solution by seeking the advice and assistance of the Monrovia powers or in alternative asking for return of UN Conciliation Commission. In view Belgian fears of a parliamentary meeting without Conakats, you might wish enlist the aid of selected Belgian advisers in Léopoldville to persuade Kasavubu to call such a meeting of Congo leaders. You may have other suggestions along these lines, which we would welcome. Consultation with British and French Ambassadors would be desirable.

Any dilatory tactics adopted should, if possible, avoid those which would place Léopoldville moderates in position of appearing to oppose will of parliament; otherwise they run risk of becoming discredited in the eyes of the Afro-Asian nations. This would probably result in worsening UN–GOC relations and return to situation where it would be difficult to stabilize the Congo. In discussing reasons Gizenga-led government would be undesirable, you should stress following line. Gizenga would probably prove as disruptive an influence in Congo as Lumumba because he does not have the support of majority of the tribally divided Congolese. Congolese army around Léopoldville would probably attempt coup against a Gizenga-led government and Abako would be likely revive its dreams of independent Lower Congo Republic, joining Katanga and South Kasai in secession. On other hand, Gizenga as parliamentary-confirmed Prime Minister would have support of large majority of nations and UN would be under pressure recognize him thus placing US in extremely difficult position. A coup and inter factional fighting might involve direct clash with UNOC forces.

Your latest estimate of possibilities Gizenga-controlled government emerging in near future and report of your efforts persuade Kasavubu appoint Adoula formateur requested soonest.

For London and Paris: You should approach Foreign Ministries immediately informing them of foregoing instruction Léopoldville expressing hope, if such tactics considered necessary avoid establishment Gizenga government, they will join in supporting them. Brussels and USUN being instructed separately.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2661. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Vance, cleared by Buffum and in draft by Fredericks and Blue, and approved by Rusk. Also sent to London and Paris and repeated to Brussels and USUN.

2 Document 85.

3 Telegram 2357 is printed as Document 77. Telegram 2374, June 29, is not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–2961)

88. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 88. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, July 28, 1961, 11 a.m.

220. For Secretary. USUN, Brussels, London, Paris for Ambassador only. Deptel 127.2 Meeting with British and French Ambassadors reported Embtel 2103 occurred separately immediately on receipt reference telegram. They both requested we three meet together late yesterday afternoon after they had chance to consider problem. Both stated further reflection had confirmed their initial reaction and British Ambassador scribbled on piece of paper his views: "If Foreign Office were to ask for my view or advisability of similar approach by myself to Kasavubu I would advise against it because Kasavubu's speech today4 has committed him to going ahead with Parliament and formation of government. He therefore can hardly now go into reverse and put off Parliament pending 'summit' meeting without risking his own position unduly." French Ambassador associated himself with this statement. Both regretted disagreeing with your position and emphasized that they were speaking personally without any instructions.

Although I had already obtained negative reaction from Linner to presenting to Kasavubu information contained Deptel 119,5 I nevertheless saw him late last night after receiving on telecon authorization from Vance to discuss Deptel 127 with him. He also was categoric in expressing his personal view that in our place he would not make any demarche at this time.

Deeply regret inability to give you any prognostication re forthcoming developments. As you know Parliament has been cloistered in Lovanium for last week and UN has been most effective in prohibiting any contact with these men. Only information available is that given British and ourselves in great confidence by Linner who himself receives it second hand from his observers at Lovanium, Tunisian Khiari and anti-Nkrumah Ghanaian Gardiner. Some information comes to moderate elements Léopoldville via Kasavubu but even with his immediate advisers he is playing cards very close to chest.

Furthermore parliamentarians are most volatile. Gizengists unquestionably won first round by electing pro-Gizenga Kasongo6 as President lower house and packing house secretariat. With that victory we all assumed bandwagon psychosis would take over and would result in landslide for Gizenga in Senate. Only note of cheer at that moment was British Ambassador who noted closeness of vote and expressed some optimism. Between House and Senate vote UN spread word through its two observers at Lovanium of Gizenga's orders to execute three Kivu provincial officials. This resulted in reportedly healthy but still unknown majority for moderates in Senate. Senate traditionally more conservative than chamber but nevertheless, press reports notwithstanding, President definitely moderate and its secretariat controlled with men sharing his political views (many of these men may have been former Lumumbists but best information available here indicates they have changed).

As already indicated all people we have seen and all US political officers here believe it would be unwise for us to make demarche at this time to Kasavubu. Reasons are difficult to set forth, but, put bluntly, seem to be that such demarche has little chance of success in view position taken by Kasavubu yesterday in his excellent speech where he repeatedly emphasized urgency of getting on with parliamentary solution to crisis. Were we now to advocate dilatory tactics we would be asking him to repudiate his position of yesterday which was accepted by standing ovation, and uncommon reaction to Kasavubu's normally bland and boring orations. Furthermore, our advocating dilatory tactics would be reversal of line we were taking month or more ago when we were emphasizing necessity of getting on with parliamentary solution lest Gizenga consolidate his position in Stanleyville and lest USSR and Afro-Asian bloc be given strong club in forthcoming UNGA with which to hit UN policy and operations in Congo.

Finally and not mentioned by our western friends here but which I feel acutely and which I assume they do also is fact that demarche might well be counter-productive. At risk of being presumptuous I feel I must state that recently independent states certainly resent our telling them how to run their own internal affairs. They do not understand danger of Soviet penetration and are puzzled when we tell them Soviets will interfere in their internal affairs and yet at same time tell their Chiefs State when to call Parliament, whom to name as formateurs and what their foreign policy should be. Although well disposed to US, pressure from US to take positions they are reluctant to assume irritates them immensely and their irrational reactions frequently are against their best interests. French learned this the hard way in Guinea and have been rolling with punch ever since in Black Africa. We saw Sihanouk's reaction in Cambodia when we put heat on him in relatively minor matter and he turned to ChiCom and Soviet aid. In most recent moments here we have seen complete volte face of Katangese who, when under intense UN and other pressure, are now making noises toward Moscow.

Kasavubu I fear would resent at this time what he would consider our dabbling in his internal affairs. He himself might not make such a violent turn but once our demarche known it might be used by our adversaries here in most effective and nationalistic fashion.

In more constructive vein I would suggest that we continue work closely with young team of Congolese currently enjoying as much confidence as Kasavubu gives to anyone. We can plant ideas with them and if they like them they will submit them to President as their own. We should also of course continue work closely with Linner and use him and his African advisers, Khiari and Gardiner, to disseminate our thoughts and arguments where they would do most good. Most helpful immediate action that I can envisage would be brief message from you to Kasavubu to effect that you aware of his statesmanlike efforts to solve present crisis here and that you have read his speech and feel impelled to inform him that it is fine patriotic speech opening extremely important Parliamentary session. Even such message if published might be counter-productive for it would give adversaries chance to accuse him of being pawn of US. If however you were disposed to send such message to Kasavubu I would suggest I be authorized inform Ndele that I have received such message to be delivered at my discretion and that if he and other key members of moderate team thought it advantageous, I would then present it to President and inform him that he could publish it if he thought it advisable.

Fully appreciate extremely unfortunate reaction at home and damage to our prestige abroad at this critical time if Gizenga is named next PM. Nevertheless after much thought, am convinced that wisest though perhaps most frustrating course for US now to follow is to lie low in Congo.

Godley

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2861. Secret; Niact. Received at 9:55 a.m. and repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, and Paris.

2 Document 87. Godley commented further on telegram 127 in telegram 219, July 28. He stated that while the outlook was admittedly uncertain, he thought the risks of delay were greater than the risks of going ahead. He thought Gizenga's remaining in Stanleyville would hurt his cause and that the tide which had seemed to be running in his favor might be about to turn against him. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2861)

3 Telegram 210, July 27, reported that the Ambassadors thought a demarche to Kasavubu at that time would be unwise. (Ibid., 770G.00/7–2761)

4 Kasavubu addressed both chambers of Parliament on July 27. Extracts of his speech are printed in Verhaegen, Congo 1961, pp. 410 and 411.

5 Telegram 119 to Léopoldville, July 26, stated that Tshombe had sent a further communication through Struelens asking Rusk to obtain Léopoldville's agreement to a summit meeting preceding a Parliamentary session and to inform Léopoldville that Katanga desired to support "moderate leaders" and prevent the formation of an extremist-dominated government. Katanga wished to reach agreement with the moderate leaders on a framework of a federation or confederation within which Katanga would have a degree of political autonomy. Unless agreement was reached along these lines, Katanga would be forced to reconsider its position and seek assistance from any countries that would grant it. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2661)

6 Joseph Kasongo.

89. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 89. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, July 28, 1961, 5:14 p.m.

137. Katangan delegation composed of Henri Kambola, President Conakat Party, Jean-Marie Pweto, Vice President Katanga Assembly, Thomas Tshombe, brother Moise Tshombe, accompanied by Struelens, called on Director Office Central African Affairs this morning.2 After considerable discussion in low key of Katangan aspirations, Dept officer urged delegation consider problem before them and other Congolese as of July 28, forgetting past events. Facts are that most parliamentarians other than Conakats are gathered Lovanium and central government will emerge either controlled by moderates or Gizenga. Conakat presence would assure moderate victory and they should realize that if Gizenga won their aspirations would have little or no longer range hope. If moderates won without their assistance their hopes of attaining type of relationship they prefer with rest of Congo would be reduced. The time for them to make their voice heard is prior to and during formation or negotiations for formation of government.

Delegation finally agreed on wisdom foregoing advice and is sending message to Tshombe (which Dept transmitting addressees separately)3 urging he send parliamentarians Lovanium following statement from him that their participation under no circumstances implies abandonment Katangan position on appropriate future relationships between several parts of Congo. Message also informs Tshombe UN has given promise of 100 percent safety and will furnish transportation. Delegation had also pointed out that, after Tshombe experience Coquilhatville, their group feared for its safety. Dept officer told delegation he was certain UN would guarantee safety but only with some difficulty persuaded delegation it could rely upon UN.

Dept through USUN has read to Bunche paragraph in delegation message to Tshombe regarding UN guarantee of safety. Bunche replied UNOC has standing instruction for this type of guarantee all parliamentarians. UN also will provide transportation. Bunche undertook send immediate instructions Linner reiterate guarantee to Tshombe and provide transportation.

Delegation requested public statement by US Government expressing sympathy with Katangan aspirations. Dept officer stated USG could not appropriately take position on relationships between parts of Congo because this is exclusively Congolese affair. Delegation's insistence upon some public statement of US Govt's approval was satisfied by Dept officer undertaking arrange public statement by Dept spokesman, once Conakats actually enroute Léopoldville. Statement will welcome their departure as hopeful development in political solution Congolese problem. Solution this problem has been UN goal supported by US.

Leopoldville should immediately concert with Linner and Elisabethville to insure that UN assurances personal safety and provision UN transport is worked out with Tshombe. Léopoldville should also urge Kasavubu to recognize wisdom of leaving question of future relationship with Katanga to one side until new central government formed under control moderates. Trust he will not boggle at proposed Katanga statement that Conakat participation in national parliament will not by itself indicate total Katangan abandonment of its position. Would appear to Dept that arrival Conakats Lovanium would be excellent opportunity for Kasavubu name Adoula formateur. Léopoldville moderates should be urged seize this development if it occurs as beginning of bandwagon for moderate controlled government.

Leopoldville should urge upon Léopoldville leaders including Mobutu that Conakat delegation if it arrives should not be molested or threatened.

Dept aware Tshombe may not follow advice his delegation or not have sufficient power within Katangan government to do so. However, Dept officer persuaded delegation means what it says and all members delegation expressed easy confidence Tshombe will follow their advice. They did not mention Munongo and Dept did not raise subject.

Dept attempting keep meeting with delegation from press in view (1) use Gizengists and Bloc may attempt make of US-Tshombe connivance and (2) dislike of Afro-Asian nations for Tshombe.

Delegation raised difficulties Katangans had felt they labored under in discussing their problems with USG. Dept officer urged Katangans work closely with US Consul who experienced career officer enjoying confidence his govt. They gave every evidence see wisdom this advice.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2861. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Vance, cleared by Buffum and Miller in draft, and approved by Fredericks. Also sent to Elisabethville and USUN and repeated to Paris, London, and Brussels.

2 A memorandum of the conversation by Robert M. Fouche of the Office of Central African Affairs is ibid.

3 Sent in telegram 140 to Léopoldville, July 28. (Ibid.)

90. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 90. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, July 29, 1961, 5:34 p.m.

146. For Charge. Deptel 127; Embtel 220.2 Agree that Kasavubu's speech affects Deptel 127. Secretary desires emphasize for your guidance that Gizenga as Prime Minister not only question prestige abroad and reaction at home but involves our most vital interests in Africa and our future ability support UN in such situations. As you are aware from previous instructions, blocking Gizenga from controlling government is a specific object of policy for which your full attention and imaginative effort are required. Secretary considers you are doing excellent job in difficult circumstances but he wanted to underline gravity this matter.

It is apparent that Kasavubu holds the key to our being able to block Gizenga from gaining control of the central government. It appears reasonably clear that Kasavubu realizes as we do that Gizenga as Prime Minister would have disastrous divisive effects on the Congo. It would seem also that Kasavubu's instincts of self-preservation would re-enforce his reluctance to name Gizenga because he realizes Gizenga's ultimate goal would be to replace Kasavubu. If the Katangan members of parliament join the session at Lovanium as now appears possible (Deptel 137),3 attaining the goal of blocking Gizenga would appear to be considerably facilitated.

Dept would appreciate soonest your estimate of the likelihood of our having advance warning of any weakening of Kasavubu's will to resist Gizenga as government leader. It appears essential that we devise now some course of action we could take in this eventuality either to gain more time or to block a Kasavubu capitulation. We would hope courses of action could be found which would preserve the desirable public stance of the Léopoldville leaders regarding a parliamentary solution but wish to consider all feasible courses of action whether or not they meet this important consideration. Would appear that some short lapse of time or the development of an impasse in parliament might render suggestion contained Deptel 127 feasible.

Your suggestions on this matter also requested soonest.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2961. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Vance, cleared by Fredericks and in draft by Cleveland, and approved by Johnson. Repeated to London, Paris, Brussels, and USUN.

2 Documents 87 and 88.

3 Document 89.

91. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 91. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, July 29, 1961, 3 p.m.

131. Re Deptel 92.2 In conformity with instructions in reference telegram, I discussed major points underlying US position regarding Katangan participation in Parliament with Tshombe yesterday at dinner given by O'Brien and which brought together Tshombe and two ministers, UN officials, university rector and myself. Tshombe responded by indicating his willingness to send parliamentarians provided Summit Conference would be arranged beforehand. Interrogated on conditions for Summit, he stated that O'Brien has now offered to send him letter asking his attendance and offering full guarantees and that this constitutes satisfactory assurance on part of UN. He declined to indicate how soon Summit could take place. I offered services of Embassy Leopoldville in arranging with Kasavubu and others that Summit be held promptly. Tshombe added that he understood voting on House Bureau members was 61 to 57 in favor of extremists.

Earlier in evening I had occasion to present similar arguments to Kiwele3 who expressed understanding of US position and held out hope parliamentarians would eventually be sent.

Still earlier in day British Consul, under orders to make another determined effort to sway Katangans to Western viewpoint, saw Tshombe and after outlining all pertinent arguments, was able establish that Tshombe believed Katanga could sell parliamentarians provided its autonomy recognized beforehand by Congolese leaders, that Tshombe convinced meeting with Kasavubu, Kalonji and hopefully Gizenga would produce such guarantees and that UN could make such meeting possible. Tshombe declined to offer any specific plan for holding Summit.

At yesterday's dinner, O'Brien carried on where British Consul stopped by telling Tshombe UN prepared to implore him to go to Summit Conference and that O'Brien would today send him letter offering full guarantees for safety. O'Brien told me Tshombe indicated these moves cleared way for Summit meeting but was vague as to whether he himself would attend or would sent Munongo.

Canup

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2961. Confidential; Priority. Received at 4:12 a.m. on July 30. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to Brussels, USUN, Paris, and London.

2 Telegram 92 to Elisabethville (also sent to Brussels), July 27, suggested that it might be convincing to point out to Munongo and Tshombe that their bargaining position would be strong if they agreed to participate in Parliament in a move to circumscribe the Gizengists. Continued refusal to cooperate could have the reverse effect on their position. Canup was instructed, unless he had strong objections, to make these points to Munongo and Tshombe. (Ibid., 770G.00/7–2761)

3 Katangan "Minister for Education" Joseph Kiwele.

92. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 92. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, August 3, 1961, 5 p.m.

153. Eisenberg2 and I called today on Tshombe who received us in presence of Struelens only. Meeting lasted over an hour. Tshombe seemed shaken and appeared to be seeking desperately for way to protect stability of Katanga which he feels could be endangered by re-entry into Congo without adequate guarantees or by possible military action by Léopoldville Government. Statement by Adoula making return of Katanga to Congo urgent task of his Government3 has made strong impression on Tshombe and his Ministers and probably been given sinister meaning.

Tshombe stated that he wants Katanga to stay in Congo and is ready participate in working out new constitution which necessary since old one is Belgian law and Congo too large to be administered on centralized principle and also to protect interest Katanga people. He had hoped obtain adequate assurances in summit meeting but with creation Central Government makes it necessary to use different procedures, probably negotiations within Parliament. This raises difficult problem in view small voice which Katanga representatives bound to have there and resulting danger of their wishes being overruled by majority. He recognized mutual advantages of Katanga's remaining in Congo, particularly for his country with regard to manpower, markets, transportation and, lastly and less clearly, political desirability of unification. He also appeared aware that economic strength Katanga could be factor alleviating to some extent his political weakness in Central Parliament [government?], but threat of majority decision disregarding views of minority or of military action if negotiations do not take place appear to dominate his thinking. He implied need for US and UN support in future negotiations on form and organization new Congo if Katanga's wealth and stability to be safeguarded.

(While Tshombe took definite position in favor reunification Congo, his Cabinet appears divided on this issue. In particular, Munongo reported opposed to sending Parliamentarians to Leopold-ville or making statement in favor reunification envisaged in Washington after talks with Tshombe and Struelens. However, question of specific steps which Katanga Government might take to reopen talks with Léopoldville was not discussed.)

Recent Khiari statement that UN would not interpose itself if Central Government tried to end secession Katanga considered very ominous and Tshombe and his Ministers clearly fear that Mobutu's troops will be permitted by UN to march down here. Tshombe in general critical of UN operations in Katanga which he believes aim is goading Katanga Government into actions which permit UN to react strongly. Referred to numerous local incidents involving UN troops individually and their security actions. On other hand he fully aware beneficial effect UN presence had in rest of Congo and dangers for Katanga if UN had not stepped in. He appeared to be satisfied with cooperation given by O'Brien but considers Tombelaine4 as clearly unfriendly to Katanga and asked Eisenberg specifically to try to improve atmosphere by talking to Tombelaine. (O'Brien left today for two weeks in Europe under long-standing engagement.) Also makes UN responsible for inability establish contact with Kasavubu in Brazzaville.

Tshombe raised question of protection for Parliamentarians and was assured of our confidence in UN's ability to satisfy him, passing on Linner's detailed information of measures in force. He also referred to effect of three weeks presence Mobutu's officers on his army where mutiny had just barely been nipped in bud. Mobutu's officers had propagandized Katanga soldiers, suggested they request higher pay and inveigled them against whites.

In reply to questions and statements of Tshombe we stressed our satisfaction over Tshombe's clear intent to re-establish unity of Congo and engage in negotiations on constitutional questions. We explained that form and structure relations of Katanga with rest of Congo are internal matter of Congo which should be worked out by peaceful negotiations and expressed strong hope they will succeed without bloodshed or military operations. We suggested discussions would perhaps concentrate more on substance rather than questions of principle. US could not interfere in such internal matters but we recognized difficulties which Tshombe faces in protecting political and economic stability of his country. Furthermore we explained importance which US places on reunification of Congo in line with world political situation, Berlin and UN organization issues, views of other African nations and future of Congo and Katanga itself. On specific question what US policy is in light yesterday's formation new government, we repeated that general line of our policy unaffected, namely need for Congolese to get together and discuss and work out constitution and administrative problems of reunification. We also expressed strong hope Tshombe in interest his own position in world will see fit make public views expressed to us that Katanga wants to remain within Congo and ready to engage in discussions on reunification with rest of country. Tshombe retorted by using well worn formula that he always had been willing to negotiate with rest of Congo and fault was on other side if no progress made. Struelens apparently trying to persuade Tshombe to send Parliamentarians to Léopoldville or at least make public statement using formula worked out in Washington. In discussion he attempted without success to support Tshombe. Indications are Tshombe will face considerable struggle within cabinet before he would get approval of any action or policy statement in favor Congolese unity.

On other hand, it would appear imperative for UN to attempt creating appropriate framework for negotiations on reunification if they are to take place at all and if they are to result in a solution which would permit Katanga to make a positive contribution to the Congo in economic and political terms.

Canup

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–361. Confidential; Priority. Received at 3:01 p.m. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to Brussels, USUN, Paris, and London.

2 Deputy Director of the Office of Central African Affairs Robert Eisenberg.

3 Adoula was approved as Prime Minister by both houses of Parliament on August 2. The text of his address to Parliament on that date is printed as an annex to U.N. doc. S/4923; also in Verhaegen, Congo 1961, pp. 422–433.

4 Deputy U.N. representative in Elisabethville Michel Tombelaine.

93. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 93. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy1

Washington, August 3, 1961.

SUBJECT

The Congo

Your memorandum of July 26 raised, among other matters, several questions regarding the Congo.2

As you know, the Congo Parliament on August 2 gave a virtually unanimous vote of confidence to Cyrille Adoula, who had been designated formateur by President Kasavubu August 1. There are three Deputy Prime Ministers, Gizenga, Sendwe, and Bolikango (Ileo's Vice Prime Minister). Bomboko continues as Foreign Minister and Ileo has become Minister of Information and Culture. Gbenye is Minister of Interior. Sendwe is a moderate and heads the Balubakat Party of North Katanga.

We had hoped that Adoula would become Prime Minister because he is the strongest and most attractive of the moderate Congolese leaders (a biographic sketch is enclosed).3 Gbenye is the most powerful of Gizenga's lieutenants and we would therefore hope that he would not long continue to hold the politically sensitive Ministry of Interior. However, we considered that the risks of Gizengist inclusion in the government in a minority position and controlling no politically sensitive ministries would be less of a risk than leaving Gizenga in his Orientale redoubt where he is a standing invitation to Communist penetration and where his isolation tends to drive him closer to the Soviet Bloc.

Gizenga will not be pleased with the politically unimportant position of Deputy Prime Minister and will be tempted and doubtless urged by the Bloc to remain in his redoubt. His recent protest to the UN that the conditions for the meeting of Parliament to which he agreed had been broken by (1) the frequent visits to Parliament of Kasavubu and UN officials and (2) the failure of the Congolese army either to be withdrawn from Léopoldville or be disarmed was probably designed to lay the groundwork for assertions that Parliament's action was taken under Western duress.

Gbenye has given evidence of independent ambition and we can only speculate that Adoula offered him a politically attractive ministry in order to weaken any effort Gizenga might make to withdraw his group once again to Stanleyville.

Adoula's victory removes any legal basis for Gizenga to claim that his regime is the legal government of the Congo. It is the second Soviet defeat in the Congo. The Soviet and Czech missions which arrived in Stanleyville just a short time ago are now in an embarrassing position.

The UN representative, Linner, through his efforts had made a large contribution to this successful outcome.

In addition to reintegrating Gizenga's territories and endeavoring to block his efforts to rebuild his power, we still wish to encourage the reincorporation of Tshombe's South Katanga into the rest of the Congo. Whether the Congo has a unitary form of government or some type of federation is, of course, a matter for the Congolese to decide. However, we believe that building a viable Congo, the next major task, would be greatly facilitated if the mineral-rich Katanga were to be included in some workable way.

Belgian Foreign Minister Spaak has made it clear in his frequent conversations with Ambassador MacArthur that he agrees with this view and has in fact made his position clear to Katanga authorities and to the large Belgian mining interests in Katanga. We anticipate that he will continue to work closely with the UN and with us to bring this about.

We are doing everything possible to hasten the arrival in Léopoldville of Ambassador-designate Gullion. The performance of our Charge in Léopoldville meanwhile has, I believe, been excellent.4

Dean Rusk

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Secret. The source text does not indicate the drafter, but another copy indicates that the memorandum was drafted by Vance. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–361)

2 The paragraph on the Congo reads as follows:"I feel that we should review the situation in the Congo. I have asked the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to speed up the Gullion hearing. What should be our policy on the Parliamentary meetings? Should we talk to the Belgians in regard to Katanga?" (Ibid., S/S–NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, Presidential Record of Report on the Congo)A July 26 memorandum from Battle to Thomas J. Dunnigan of the Executive Secretariat states that Bundy had told Battle that Kennedy was concerned because the United States had no Ambassador in the Congo, and he was not sure the problems were receiving the consideration they deserved. (Ibid., Central Files, 611.70G/7–2661)

3 Not printed.

4 The President's Deputy Special Assistant, Walt W. Rostow, commented on Rusk's memorandum in an August 4 memorandum to the President. It stated that although it was still possible that Tshombe's army might revolt or Gizenga might remain recalcitrant, "you should know that there is optimism all over town that the Congo situation is on the way to solution" and that "the constructive development of the Congo from here on out is going to be one of the most important and interesting tasks in all Africa." (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

94. Memorandum of Conversation 94. Memorandum of Conversation1

Paris, August 7, 1961, 11:30 a.m.

US/MC/10

Ministerial Consultations on BerlinParis, August 4–9, 1961

PARTICIPANTS

United States The Secretary of State

Ambassador Gavin

Ambassador Harriman

Mr. Tubby

Mr. Brown

United Kingdom Lord Home

Ambassador Pierson Dixon

Mr. MacDonald

Mr. Peck

Mr. Butler

Mr. Russell

France M. Couve de Murville

Ambassador Falaize

M. Lucet

M. Roux

M. Richer

M. Baraduc

M. Sauvagnatgues

SUBJECT

Tripartite Meeting on the Congo

The Secretary opened the discussion of the Congo by calling attention to a news report that Tshombe planned to send Parliamentarians to Léopoldville. We have no confirmation of this, but it would be welcome news. We are encouraged by the fact that a Government has been formed in Léopoldville. This will make it difficult for Gizenga to set up an enclave in Stanleyville. There are, of course, problems which remain. Will Katanga come into the central government perhaps through some sort of federal system? It is also our hope that we can see a viable government formed which can pay the Congo's way and take the burden off the U.N. Pressures on the U.N. treasury are extreme. Recent developments in the Congo have been good and the prospects seem better than they have for a long time. Our immediate concern is to get Katanga involved with the Léopoldville Government and to get the "odd balls" out of Stanleyville.

Couve agreed that Katanga is the big problem and it would be to our advantage to have it involved with Léopoldville. If the Léopoldville Government had Tshombe on one side and Gizenga on the other, it would be in a stronger position, as Gizenga's strength would be proportionately diluted.

Lord Home agreed that the Adoula Government is better than what we have had before. He thought that the pressures that the U.N. has been putting on Tshombe are spoiling his bargaining powers. He may lose more confidence now. If he is willing to send his deputies to Léopoldville, the Gizenga forces will be in a minority. Should all this take place, we may be able to reduce the U.N. presence. The U.N.'s financial position is terrible and it is unknown how long it can carry on. It must do so at this time.

Couve recalled that one of the chief reasons for sending troops in the first place was to cope with tribal warfare and provide safety for the European population. There are few disorders and tribal warfare has decreased. Thus, this could lead to a reduction of troops.

Lord Home replied that there is, however, the task of getting the army in order. Gizenga may also have private troops. Therefore we must continue the U.N. effort a bit longer. It has paid off for the West and has kept the Soviets out.

Couve said that Kasavubu is the central figure. The formation of the government is due in great measure to his clever handling.

The Secretary interjected that Linner had done a good job.

Couve agreed, at least in comparison.

The Secretary said that, during the Nigerian Prime Minister's visit,2 we had been impressed with Nigeria's interest in the Congo and in the moderating efforts it has undertaken. Nigeria and the Monrovia group are exerting a good influence both in the Congo and at the U.N.

Lord Home mentioned Nkrumah and Couve said that when he misbehaves the more moderate African powers come up on our side. He then referred to the difficulties that Youlou3 is causing. France has tried to cope with Youlou but has not been successful.

The Secretary concluded by stating that, if the French are encouraged by the course events are taking in the Congo, we would welcome a modification of the French stand in the U.N. He added that the French Government is, of course, well aware of our views on this subject.

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366, CF 1940. Secret. Drafted by Deputy Director of the Office of Western European Affairs L. Dean Brown and approved in S on August 9. The meeting was held at the Quai d'Orsay. Those not previously identified include Ambassador to France James M. Gavin, Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs Roger W. Tubby, British Ambassador to France Sir Pierson Dixon, and French Ambassador to Laos Pierre-Louis Falaize.

2 Prime Minister Balewa visited the United States July 25–28. He and President Kennedy discussed the situation in the Congo on July 27. A memorandum of the conversation is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Nigeria. A memorandum of a July 25 conversation between Kennedy and Balewa is scheduled for publication in volume XXI.

3 Abbe Fulbert Youlou, President of the Republic of Congo.

95. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 95. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State1

Paris, August 8, 1961, 1 p.m.

Secto 44. Congo. Following based on uncleared memcon.2

Secretary had brief discussion with Spaak on Congo August 7. Secretary opened saying for first time there seems real hope in Congo picture and although we not out of woods prospects seem improving with formation of new Adoula government. Spaak agreed saying he just received encouraging telegram and was particularly heartened that Tshombe at last seemed to have seen the light. According Spaak's information Tshombe sending eight parliamentary representatives to Léopoldville and desires reach agreement with central government. While Congolese quite unpredictable and Tshombe may go off beam tomorrow, there now hope of peaceful re-integration of Katanga through negotiations. Spaak sent message to SYG this morning stressing need peaceful re-integration of Katanga and urging UN and new Congolese Government take no sudden or abrupt moves re Tshombe since this might cause him to react violently.

Secretary said we been making great efforts obtain Tshombe's cooperation and recently worked very hard on his brother. Fully agree on desirability peaceful re-integration Katanga and believe if Tshombe and Kasavubu can be brought together they may be able to reach agreement on basic aspects of a constitution which while providing for a single federal Congolese state would take into account legitimate interests and individualities of the Katanga and other participating states. The Secretary said he thought Linner had done good job for UN for which we should all be grateful. Spaak agreed saying next four or five days critical and principal thing is for all including UN to use their influence to bring Elisabethville and Léopoldville together. If real progress could be made in next few days we might be out of woods. If not we would then have to reassess situation.

Secretary said if Leopoldville and Elisabethville could be brought together position of Gizenga in terms UN and world opinion would be so diminished he would have difficulty in continuing his past tactics. Even should he try to maintain separate regime Stanleyville his position would be greatly weakened. Spaak agreed but said he still not sure Gizenga would participate in new government. If he does presumably Soviet and other Communist representatives in Stanleyville will have to leave which will be a great defeat for Communists who have gone all out backing Stanleyville government.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–861. Confidential. Repeated to USUN, Léopoldville, and Brussels.

2 Not found.

96. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 96. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, August 11, 1961, 5 p.m.

334. Embassy assessment Adoula government and immediate future problems.

First ten days of Adoula government characterized by intense political and social activity. Latter included Balubad-Lulual Love Feast, Kasavubu, heads of chambers, and finally Adoula large receptions. EmbOffs attended all and from extensive conversations there and calls on politicians are unanimous in belief this is indeed honeymoon period. Former bitter enemies now warmly embracing, calling each other brother and loudly proclaiming desire collaborate in building nation. Adoula, Bomboko, Weregemere, Sendwe, Eleo, Lutula, Kiwewa, Delvaux, Koumorico, Galula, Ileo, Gbenye,2 and others to a man profess desire let bygones be bygones and solve nation's problems. Latter include in their minds national unity through security, nation's economy, unemployment, education, controlling army. Have not sensed one overt discordant note except Bolikango3 continuing sulk whose stock never lower. Remains be seen how long honeymoon lasts but for moment all showing non-Congolese industry and will to get on with job. Even Gbenye now refers to EmbOff he had under house arrest as his closest friend and recently requested I consider new era and forget past.

Substantive UN officers and other diplomats here share this view of outward indications stability. All however watching developments closely and are still amazed at present era sweetness and light.

Notwithstanding foregoing there are certain undercurrents that could cause serious problems and nefarious elements currently lying low. First of course is enigma Gizenga whose influence with former [garble—supporters?] unquestionably at nadir. Physical removal from scene and absence direct leadership have incited unfavorable comment many his former ardent supporters. While reports clandestine arms importation and belief he may be preparing commit Jeunesse Lumumbiste forces disquieting, he would in such effort be facing legal government supported not only by vast majority Congolese but certainly UN. One of principal elements continues be Lundula and we have no hard information on what he planning do but fear he may continue follow Gizenga's instructions. On opposite side coin is Gbenye who gives every indication being supporter Adoula and whom Adoula seems to have fenced in at Léopoldville.

Other source violent action, i.e., Mobutu army, currently appears quiet. Rumor still current re stresses strains within Mobutu-Bomboko-Nendaka –Adoula camp but these seem currently submerged and on all occasions, public or private, Mobutu appears relaxed and endeavoring emphasize his fidelity new government.

Last and perhaps in long run most serious problem continues Tshombe. Although his deputies currently integrated all aspects parliamentary life he continues remain Elisabethville and doubtful when and if and under what conditions he will proceed Léopoldville. Rumors prevalent violent Léopoldville action against Katanga once Gizenga brought to heel but we do not ascribe much importance thereto for moment due Adoula's caution and spirit of compromise. Yesterday for example Linner prevailed upon Adoula, Sendwe and Gbenye send Tshombe ministers who are also deputies back to Elisabethville in effort bring about indigenous Katangese movement to withdraw gendarmerie from North Katanga where they have always been causing trouble with Baluba.

Foregoing considered significant for we understand Gbenye and Sendwe had been advocating vigorous steps there to curtail Katangan excesses.

Kalonji is for moment playing ball. He is still potential problem but for moment appears as compromiser but some fear may be using this attitude build local power position south Kasai.

Finally, Kivu continues be near state of anarchy and some sort of order must be restored there.

UN representatives here believe important phase UN operations now ended and that emphasis UN role should be shifted from military and political to economic, social and administrative aid. Are anticipating gradual reduction military forces and decentralization UN services from Hotel Royal to interested ministries. They believe UN technical and other assistance desperately required and must become more closely associated with GOC efforts. UN should no longer exercise governmental powers but build up Congolese authority by improving its administration and developing indigenous governmental efficiency which now non-existent. This modification UN role is reason for Linner's presence UN next week.

Foregoing relatively rosy picture may of course change overnight but at end first ten days Adoula regime we are relatively optimistic that we may have some few weeks of respite. This calm, however, must be taken advantage of and used by US and other friends of Congo constructively. Re US we submit following recommendations or guidelines: 1. Assiduously avoid actions that might be interpreted locally as meddling internal Congolese affairs now nationalism running high and Congolese think they doing excellent job.

2. Early arrival Ambassador would be indication of confidence we have in new team.

3. Listen attentively to large number of requests for assistance we are receiving all sides. Every Congolese we have spoken to, after emphasizing will to get on with job, then says that this is critical period and Congo's great friend, US must be prepared assist in every way. Nevertheless we are taking care point out US assistance great in past and we hope sizeable in future must be channeled or coordinated through UN.

4. Heartily endorse Department's policy of not overtly rushing to acclaim Adoula. Believe now, however, time for African states come to his side and suggest discreet initiation such action possible where necessary through covert CAS assets.

5. Early approval Tempelsman diamond barter deal4 most desirable.

6. Early US initiative raise sizeable UN stabilization fund in neighborhood $100 million to permit UN sharply step up rate of import and [garble] on more than day to day basis.

7. Finally we anticipate great pressure from UN New York and contributing nations to withdraw UNOC forces precipitously. We recognize validity gradual overall UNOC force reduction but believe Kivu, Kasai and Maniema regions will probably continue for some time to require greater UN forces than presently exist these regions today.

Godley

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1161. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, Elisabethville, USUN, London, Paris, Khartoum, and Usumbura and pouched to Brazzaville, Lagos, Accra, Bamako, Dakar, Addis Ababa, Cairo, Rabat, and Monrovia.

2 Weregemere, Ambroise Eleo, and Joseph Lutula were newly-appointed Ministers for Agriculture, Economic Affairs, and Middle Classes, respectively. Victor Koumorico was the newly-elected President of the Senate. Albert Delvaux had served in the Ileo government and both he and Antoine Kiwewa had served in the Lumumba government in 1960. For a list of the members of the new government, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 827–828.

3 Bolikango was appointed a Deputy Prime Minister, but telegram 277 from Léopoldville, August 3, reported that he had resigned. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.13/8–361)

4 A U.S. firm, Leon Tempelsman and Son, was seeking U.S. approval for a barter transaction involving the exchange of approximately $54 million of Congo industrial diamonds for U.S. surplus agricultural commodities. Memoranda of conversations on this subject between Maurice Tempelsman and Rusk on July 26 and between Tempelsman and Bowles on August 9 are ibid., Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Tempelsman enclosed a summary of the proposal dated November 9, 1961, with a letter to Stevenson of the same date. (Princeton University, Stevenson Papers, Box 837, Maurice Tempelsman) Further documentation on this subject is in Department of State, Central File 870G.2535.

97. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 97. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, August 17, 1961, 7 p.m.

462. Congo. Department telegram 305.2 Gullion, Yost and Eisenberg called this morning on SYG and Linner. In response queries from US side SYG commented on following points: SYG was moderately hopeful satisfactory solution Orientale Province would come out of current Adoula-Gizenga meeting. He feels Gizenga now in decidedly weak position in that most of his lieutenants and supporters have endorsed and are cooperating with Adoula government. Gizenga's choices lie between participation in this government, probably futile attempt to maintain shadow regime in Stanleyville or inglorious exile. Hammarskjöld was inclined to think Gizenga would choose former in hope he will be able to achieve his ends from inside GOC, though SYG himself doubts Gizenga has personality or support to do so.

SYG is not unduly disturbed at "trickle" of arms which have been reaching Stanleyville3 inasmuch as he believes only 300-man gendarmarie, not Orientale ANC under Lundula, is loyal to Gizenga. However he also considers that, if constitutional Adoula government requests ONUC to check all incoming shipments by force if necessary, ONUC would thereby be given clear legal right to do so which had not existed under SC resolutions.

As to Katanga, SYG said Tshombe if he had his way would come to Léopoldville but that Munongo and others are still being "sticky". However he considers that, if Léopoldville-Stanleyville agreement is reached, Katanga cannot long exist in isolation. He does not think Adoula government will have to use military force to establish its authority there.

In this connection he said solution problem Belgian political advisers is moving along satisfactorily but so-called Egge plan4 envisaging replacement military advisers and mercenaries over three month period is still awaiting Spaak's agreement. He thought white mercenaries in North Katanga might still give trouble and have to be dealt with by UN.5

As to training ANC he said he had asked Emperor of Ethiopia to make Iyassu available for this exclusive purpose, and he hoped program could be initiated as soon as Orientale ANC could be included. He proposed former Belgian bases be used for this purpose as well as for civil aviation training, and hoped Belgians would raise no objection to such utilization bases in advance settlement their claim for compensation.

Though Gullion pressed him hard for prompt initiation broad stabilization program, SYG made it clear he does not wish to go beyond current and continued import program during next few weeks. He is apprehensive that substantial aid program based almost exclusively on US funds might be politically damaging to Adoula, at least as long as Gizenga is maintaining separate status. He prefers therefore await Orientale settlement and report by IBRD representative before going ahead with full stabilization program. In meantime he proposes seek further funds from countries other than US and may ask USG to assist in this canvass.

Obviously SYG generally optimistic. He did, however, attempt envisage possible future complications among which vague aspirations Youlou, possibly seconded by some French interests, but not French Government, to dominate Bakango grouping cutting across existing boundaries; also said Mobutu would bear watching and under certain circumstances might have attempted coup during Lovanium Parliament. Linner later told Gullion advisers around Mobutu unstable and cited as example Mobutu might make possible coup if bloc embassies reinstalled or if government swings left.

SYG agreed our projected representations Balewa and Houphouet-Boigny (as per reference telegram).6

Plimpton

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1761. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to Brussels.

2 Telegram 305 to USUN, August 16, suggested using a projected call on Hammarskjöld by Ambassador-designate Gullion to explore major Congo problems, such as plans for retraining the Congolese army, implementation of an economic stabilization program, withdrawal of Belgian and other foreign personnel according to the February 21 resolution, and measures to reintegrate Orientale and Katanga into the central government. (Ibid., 770G.00/8–1561)

3 Telegram 305 instructed USUN to express concern about recent unauthorized flights to Stanleyville, some of which had reportedly brought in arms.

4 The "Egge plan" was based on a report to Hammarskjöld by Colonel Bjorn Egge of the U.N. forces in the Congo. Telegram 355 from USUN, August 4, reported a conversation with Wieschhoff, in which he described the plan and summarized the U.N.-Belgian discussions concerning it. Wieschhoff commented that the establishment of a Congolese government with parliamentary approval rendered the Egge Plan somewhat irrelevant. Thereafter the government would determine the removal of foreign officers, and the U.N. forces could not prevent it from taking action against Katanga or Stanleyville. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–461)

5 Telegram 464 from USUN, August 17, reported comments made by General Rikhye during this meeting. Rikhye predicted that U.N. forces in the Congo would be reduced from 17,000 to 14,000 by November 1. Concerning Katanga, he indicated that the United Nations would take action against Katangan forces rather than permit ANC entry into Katanga before a political agreement was reached with Tshombe. In a subsequent discussion, however, Bunche described the U.N. position as "hands off" any attempt by the central government to subdue a regional insurrection. (Ibid., 332.70G/8–1761)

6 Telegram 305 stated that the United States was approaching Prime Minister Balewa and Ivory Coast President Felix Houphouet-Boigny to urge their support for the Adoula government. Instructions to this effect were sent in telegram 253 to Laos, also sent to Abidjan, August 17. (Ibid., 770G.02/8–1761)

98. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 98. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, August 20, 1961, noon.

216. Re Deptel 163.2 Called on Tshombe yesterday morning and had half-hour discussion on situation of Katanga vis-a-vis Congo. Tshombe began by complaining of his weakened condition due to low blood pressure.

I began my approach by saying that I seriously worried and fearful over future prospects for Katanga in light of increasingly unfriendly statements issuing from Leopoldville and Tshombe's failure to negotiate with Adoula. I said I foresaw Katanga facing invasion or other hostile pressure from Léopoldville as result of its isolation and encirclement, and Tshombe agreed, adding that coming events might result in untold destruction here. I replied that I could not understand why this need be, since Tshombe himself had qualities of leadership and sufficient economic and financial trumps in his possession to go to Adoula and negotiate peaceful settlement to crisis. I expressed opinion Tshombe can still bargain for satisfactory position in new Congo but that time is running out. I took occasion to point out that USG, other friendly governments and probably UN would be hard-pressed to find solution avoiding bloodshed if situation between Katanga and Léopoldville degenerated to breaking point and I underlined legitimacy with which Léopoldville regime endowed in eyes of whole world.

Tshombe indicated understanding of this position and substantial agreement therewith, but he pointed out that he considered Léopoldville leaders determined to apply solution of force and violence against Katanga in any event since they wish to destroy him personally. He said he had few friends among moderates in government—moderates being in reality Socialists and potential extremists—and that his true friends, Bolikango and Delvaux, not in government and only Mobutu likely to support him. He qualified Adoula as dangerous Socialist of Solvay Institute stripe and Kasavubu as ineffectual. Further, Tshombe said he informed Adoula regime now planning divide Katanga into four provinces, which would spell ruin for country. He added that report brought back by Minister Nyembo last week end not encouraging and that he hoped for more optimistic report from Minister Samalenge (also a deputy) who arriving this day from Léopoldville. Tshombe indicated these Ministers continuing to talk with Adoula team, and I took occasion to caution him against public admission that these lower-echelon talks transpiring. Tshombe also said he has sent personal message to Adoula.

I remarked that I believed that Adoula had not closed door to negotiations with him and that Tshombe, as legitimate provincial president, could still find way to save situation of Katanga, and legitimate economic and other interests of Africans and Europeans alike, by making concessions in return for certain guarantees. Tshombe then asked me for USG opinion of situation, to which I replied that it was as I had outlined it in my discussion, with accent laid on his negotiating at once in Léopoldville. I underlined our belief that substance of eventual negotiations strictly matter for Africans to determine and that, furthermore, we could not guarantee outcome. I cited Linner's statement in New York as indication that UN believed Adoula still willing to talk to Tshombe, and I reminded Tshombe that Linner had offered to have him as guest in Royal Hotel during talks.

In leaving I asked Tshombe if I should tell Department that he pessimistic and believed negotiation now impossible, to which he replied that he still hoped to avoid test of strength with Léopoldville and held out possibility Samalenge would bring back new elements. Tshombe concluded, however, by remarking that, while hoping to find peaceful solution, Katanga determined to defend by force of arms its rights and its accomplishments of past year.

Comment: At no point in friendly and relaxed conversation did Tshombe show willingness to discuss practical measures which would prove seriousness of his intentions toward reconciliation and reintegration.

Canup

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–2061. Confidential; Priority. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to Brussels, USUN, Paris, and London.

2 Telegram 163, August 16, instructed Canup to make a demarche to Tshombe, along the lines of his previous representations, to impress on Tshombe the need to pursue actively the reintegration of Katanga into the Congo. (Ibid., 770G.00/8–1661)

99. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 99. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, August 26, 1961, 4 p.m.

248. Re Contel 247.2 After hearing Katangan version of approach made by O'Brien and Colonels Egge and Waern to Tshombe, Munongo and Kimba this morning (see reference telegram), Consuls present decided to call on O'Brien immediately. O'Brien and Egge were informed of Katangan viewpoint and O'Brien advanced opinion that divergences between Katangan version and his own interpretation of meeting not wide. O'Brien said he had seen Adoula in Léopoldville and agreed to convey invitation (he insisted on word invitation) to Tshombe on Adoula's behalf. O'Brien said that in talking to Tshombe, he added own advice that time running out and that it strongly in Tshombe's interests to go to Léopoldville at once and unwise to allow things to continue as at present. O'Brien offered absolute security to Tshombe while in Léopoldville under UN protection and indicated that Egge and himself would accompany Tshombe in comfortable DC–6 which prepared to depart noon today. O'Brien stressed that he exerted "strong and friendly pressure" on Tshombe and voiced fear that situation will deteriorate sharply if Tshombe fails to accept invitation.

According to O'Brien, Munongo requested explanation of deteriorating situation and asked whether UN would assist Central Government in military manner. O'Brien told Consuls he replied that Katangan Ministers knew UN fully supporting Central Government and that if latter requests military assistance it safe to assume this will be given. O'Brien underlined Katanga Government should not count on UN neutrality in military matters. O'Brien reiterated to Tshombe this not ultimatum but strong, clear statement of position. He also told Consuls Tshombe appeared inclined accept Adoula's invitation, Kimba appeared without strong position on matter but Munongo violently opposed.

Egge told Consuls that point also made to Katangans that all other provincial Presidents now in Léopoldville at invitation of Adoula and that Tshombe should join them. Egge also made clear that under resolutions UN has responsibility to see to it that foreign military officers and advisers leave Congo. Egge pointed out this not same as disarming Katangan troops, as now feared by Katangan leaders, but he admitted this could of course lead to some measures in this direction.

Finally O'Brien told Consuls Adoula has not yet requested military assistance and that he O'Brien did not know what reply UN would make to such request. He underlined that Linner arrived in Léopoldville with orders take very strong line against Katanga Government and to place before Katangans their responsibilities. O'Brien confided to Consuls that Adoula obliged pursue active and successful Katanga policy if his government is to survive; this could of course force Adoula to undertake military activities against Tshombe.

Subsequent to visit by Consuls O'Brien told me privately Tshombe has indicated by phone he cannot accept Adoula's invitation today, in any event, and that Tshombe will receive O'Brien later in day. O'Brien told me he took occasion to underline that message from Adoula constitutes "pressing invitation" rather than ultimatum, that Tshombe will be treated with every respect and given every possible guarantee and that O'Brien hoped Tshombe would look to his political future and that of his provincial government rather than listen to the advice of certain Ministers who have no future in political organization of Congo.

O'Brien also admitted in confidence that UN approach to Tshombe contains element of exaggeration and bluff but that circumstances warrant using such means to vital and imperative end.

Canup

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–2661. Confidential; Niact. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to Brussels, USUN, Paris, and London.

2 Telegram 247, August 26, reported that Tshombe had called in the Consular Corps that morning and told them that O'Brien had given him a message from Adoula ordering him to go immediately to Léopoldville or the situation in Katanga would "worsen." When asked to explain what this meant, O'Brien said that if Tshombe did not go to Léopoldville and if Adoula appealed to the United Nations for help in reducing Katanga's "secession," the United Nations would place its forces at his disposal. (Ibid.) For O'Brien's description of his meeting with Tshombe, see To Katanga and Back, pp. 214–215.

100. Editorial Note 100. Editorial Note

On August 28, 1961, U.N. forces seized key points in Elisabethville and moved swiftly to arrest Belgian officers and mercenaries in the Katangan forces. Telegram 256 from Elisabethville, August 28, reported that U.N. Representative O'Brien had told Canup that the U.N. actions then underway were aimed at rounding up and expelling foreign officers and mercenaries in accordance with a request from the Congolese Government for U.N. assistance in evacuating the foreign officers and mercenaries serving with the Katangan forces. (Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/8–2861) For text of Prime Minister Adoula's August 24 request for U.N. assistance, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, page 830.

In a radio address on August 28, Tshombe declared Katangan agreement to the dismissal and evacuation of all foreign officers from the Katangan armed forces. Telegram 261 from Elisabethville, August 29, reported that approximately 82 European officers and mercenaries had been arrested, that resistance had completely subsided, and that a joint U.N.-Belgian repatriation commission had met for the first time. The commission's meeting proceeded with such complete cooperation that O'Brien had stopped making arrests and hoped to develop a mass parole arrangement under the Belgian Consul's guarantee that evacuation would be completed in the next few days. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–2961)

101. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 101. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, August 31, 1961, 7 p.m.

509. Yesterday when discussing Deptel 3112 with Linner speaking personally, I chided him a bit on his failure inform certain key diplomats here re Katangese operation once it had begun. Said I recognized necessity highest security before operations began but that once underway he should have convoked British, French (Belgium protecting power Congo), ourselves and briefed us on intentions, et cetera. Said it was a bit annoying to read in press or hear over radio of major UN action in a country we were supposed to report on.

Linner smiled and said he would never do so in a major operation of this nature because once we were informed our governments would be pestering him or his superior in New York and that he then would be obliged spend valuable time answering inquiries rather than direct operations. Said he also thought O'Brien had kept Consul Elisabethville informed and felt this was sufficient. Also said that he had not informed Hammarskjöld extent of military operations for that would have bound his hands too tightly.

I pointed out he had taken major risk re security Europeans and could have somewhat reduced possibility of his losses by tipping off certain key people. Linner only remarked that he felt he was paid to take risks and assume that responsibility.

Just before I left him, he said in line with tipping people off I should not be surprised some morning to find similar but less dramatic steps being taken Leopoldville against Belgians here. Said this was for my own information and not to be reported.

Am considerably concerned re this possibility in that once such action were to begin here it might well get out of control. I do not refer here to insecurity in Léopoldville but rather to extended arrests and deportation Belgian advisers which could mount to some 100 or 150 key men in all branches of government who currently assuring some semblance of governmental administration. Action might also extend to technicians who keep public works, communications, transport operating. This fear based on one of Linner's few blind spots, i.e., disgust with Belgians plus prodding by Khiari who while extremely able sees Belgians at base of all Congolese problems. View confidence shown by Linner, am somewhat at a loss as how to proceed but unless Department desires otherwise, plan endeavor suggest Linner avoid "dramatic" action Léopoldville and limit arrests to the 12 or 15 unquestionably bad elements here.3

Godley

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–3161. Top Secret; Niact; Eyes Only. Secretary Rusk commented on this telegram in a September 1 telephone conversation with Cleveland. Notes of the conversation by Phyllis D. Bernau read in part as follows:"The Sec thinks this attitude of Linner's is unacceptable particularly when he talks about taking action there to throw out Belgians working there on various administrative jobs. He is not playing completely clear with the SYG because he does not want his hands bound too tightly. He is not a sovereign state and we have a lot at stake. C thought it was extreme in Katanga even though there was provocation. The Sec said to look at it and he thinks we should have a serious talk. He is not the responsible party here and we have a tremendous stake here—we expect to be kept informed and expect the SYG to be informed. If you can mask it in a friendly way, fine." (Ibid., Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192)

2 Telegram 311 to Léopoldville, August 28, suggested that Williams ask Linner about U.N. plans to follow up the Katanga operation, specifically what steps it envisaged to effect Katanga's reintegration into the Congo and protect its economic viability. (Ibid., Central Files, 770G.00/8–2861) Williams visited Léopoldville on August 29, in the course of a trip to southern and central Africa. His discussions with Linner, Adoula, Bomboko, and Kasavubu were summarized in telegram 492 from Léopoldville, August 30. (Ibid., 110.15–WI/8–3061)

3 Telegram 345 to Léopoldville, September 2, approved Godley's assessment of the situation and the line he proposed to take with Linner. (Ibid., 770G.00/9–261)

September–December 1961: Hostilites in Katanga and the Kitona AccordSeptember–December 1961: Hostilites in Katanga and the Kitona Accord

102. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, September 1, 1961, 9:33 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–2861. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Woodruff; cleared by Eisenberg, Blue, and Wallner; and approved by Ferguson. Also sent to Brussels and Elisabethville and repeated to USUN, Paris, and London.

103. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, September 6, 1961, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–661. Confidential. Repeated to Léopoldville and Brussels.

104. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, September 8, 1961, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–861. Top Secret; Eyes Only.

105. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, September 11, 1961, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1161. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Brussels, Elisabethville, USUN, London, Paris, and Salisbury.

106. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State

Brussels, September 12, 1961, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1261. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Léopoldville, Elisabethville, and USUN.

107. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, September 13, 1961, 9 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.70G41/9–1361. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, London, Paris, Elisabethville, Brazzaville, USUN, and Salisbury.

108. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, September 14, 1961, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/9–1461. Confidential; Niact. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to Brussels, USUN, London, Paris, and Salisbury.

109. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, September 15, 1961, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1561. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to Brussels, USUN, London, Paris, Salisbury, and Brazzaville.

110. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, September 15, 1961, 8:55 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1561. Secret; Priority. Drafted and approved by Cleveland and cleared in substance by Vance. Repeated to Elisabethville, London, USUN, and to the President at Hyannis Port, Massachusetts.

111. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, September 15, 1961, 10:18 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1461. Confidential; Priority. Drafted and approved by Blue. Repeated to Léopoldville, USUN, London, and Paris.

112. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, September 15, 1961, 10:47 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1561. Secret; Niact. Drafted and approved by Vance and cleared in draft by Cleveland and Rusk. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, Paris, and London.

113. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, September 16, 1961, 6:20 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/9–1661. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Sisco, cleared by Vance and Fredericks, and approved by Cleveland. Also sent to Léopoldville, London, Paris, and USUN.

114. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, September 16, 1961, 9:29 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 325.70G/9–1661. Confidential; Priority; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Sisco and Cleveland, cleared by Vance, and approved by Rusk. Rusk's staff assistant Walter L. Cutler initialed for him. Also sent to Léopoldville, London, Paris, and USUN.

115. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, September 17, 1961, 1 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1761. Secret; Niact. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, Brazzaville, Paris, and London.

116. Editorial Note

117. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, September 18, 1961, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/9–1861. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Vance, cleared by Fredericks, and approved by Cleveland. Also sent to USUN and repeated to London, Paris, and Brussels.

118. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, September 18, 1961, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1861. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Received at 2:50 a.m. on September 19 and repeated to Brussels and Léopoldville.

119. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, September 18, 1961, 11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1861. Secret; Niact. Received at 8:10 a.m. on September 19 and repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, Paris, and Brazzaville.

120. National Security Action Memorandum No. 97

Washington, September 19, 1961.

Source: Department of State, NSAM Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 97. Secret. A copy was sent to the Secretary of Defense. A draft with Bundy's handwritten revisions is filed with a September 19 memorandum to Wallner in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Additional documentation concerning its background is filed with a September 26 memorandum by Brubeck in Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, Presidential Record of Report on the Congo.

121. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, September 20, 1961, 9:56 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2061. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Eisenberg, cleared by Vance, and approved by Cleveland. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, Paris, and Salisbury.

122. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Ball) to President Kennedy

Washington, September 23, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Secret. The Department of State copy of this memorandum indicates Ball was the drafter. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2361) A covering memorandum of the same date from Ball to the President states that this memorandum represented the Department of State view of the proper U.S. position in the Katanga crisis. For Ball's recollection of the Congo problem, see The Past Has Another Pattern: Memoirs, pp. 222–259.

123. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate in Elisabethville

Washington, September 23, 1961, 8:51 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2261. Confidential. Drafted by Vance and Eisenberg, cleared in substance by Rostow and Deputy Director of the Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs William B. Buffum, and approved by Williams. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to USUN, Salisbury, London, and Brussels.

124. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, September 26, 1961, 8:51 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2661. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Woodruff; cleared by Blue, Buffum, and Wallner; and approved by Ferguson. Also sent to Paris and Salisbury and repeated to USUN for Secretary Rusk, Léopoldville, and London.

125. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, September 27, 1961, 10:14 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2361. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Miller and Woodruff; cleared by Ferguson, Vance, Wallner, and Tyler; and approved by Ball.

126. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, September 28, 1961, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2861. Confidential; Niact. Also sent to Léopoldville and Brussels and repeated to USUN, Paris, London, and Salisbury.

127. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, September 29, 1961, 8:12 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.70G41/9–2961. Confidential. Drafted by Robert C. Huffman of the Office of Central African Affairs and by Eisenberg; cleared by Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs Edwin M. Martin, Deputy Director of the Office of International Administration Frank K. Hefner, Buffum, and with the ICA; and approved by Ball. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, and Paris.

128. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State

Brussels, September 30, 1961, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–3061. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to USUN, London, Paris, Léopoldville, and Elisabethville.

129. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, October 13, 1961, 4:57 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–1361. Secret. Drafted by Woodruff, cleared by Fredericks, and approved by Vance. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, Paris, London, and Salisbury.

130. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, October 13, 1961, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–1361. Secret. Received at 2:40 p.m. on October 15 and repeated to London, Brussels, USUN, Paris, Brazzaville, and Elisabethville.

131. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, October 16, 1961, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–1661. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, USUN, Paris, London, Salisbury, and Rome.

132. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, October 21, 1961, 1:33 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–1261. Confidential. Drafted and approved by Eisenberg and cleared by Vance, Wallner, Buffum, Burdett (Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs), and in draft by Fredericks. Repeated to USUN, Léopoldville, and London.

133. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, October 27, 1961, 9:57 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–2761. Confidential. Drafted by Woodruff and Eisenberg; cleared in substance by Officer in Charge of UK and Ireland Affairs Joseph Sweeney and Wallner; and approved by Burdett. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, Paris, and USUN.

134. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State

Brussels, October 31, 1961, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–161. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, London, Paris, and USUN.

135. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, November 3, 1961, 8:03 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–361. Confidential. Drafted and approved by Blue and cleared by Vance and Cleveland. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, Elisabethville, and USUN.

136. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate General in Geneva

Washington, November 3, 1961, 9:51 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–361. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Vance and Woodruff; cleared in substance by Wallner, Burdett, Williams, and Ball; and approved by Vance. Also sent to Brussels and repeated to USUN, London, Paris, and Léopoldville. Ambassador at Large Harriman was in Geneva attending the Conference on Laos.

137. Telegram From the Consulate General in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, November 5, 1961, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–561. Confidential; Priority. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to Brussels, London, Paris, and USUN.

138. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, November 7, 1961, 9:05 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–761. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Sweeney, cleared by Eisenberg and in substance by Cleveland, and approved by Williams. Repeated to London, USUN, Brussels, and Paris.

139. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, November 9, 1961, 5:32 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–761. Confidential. Drafted by Officer in Charge of United Nations Political Affairs Nathan Pelcovits, cleared by Eisenberg and Buffum and in substance by Colonel Greene of the Department of Defense, and approved by Wallner. Repeated to Léopoldville.

140. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, November 11, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. The Department of State copy indicates that the memorandum was drafted by Buffum and Tron. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–1161)

141. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 20, 1961, 10:35–11:35 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Secret. Drafted by Tyler and Edmund S. Glenn of the Division of Language Services. The time of the meeting is taken from the President's appointment book. (Kennedy Library) The conversation also included discussion of Berlin; a memorandum of that portion of the conversation, along with additional material concerning Spaak's visit, is in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366, CF 1995.

142. Editorial Note

143. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, November 25, 1961, 11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2561. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to London, Léopoldville, and Brussels.

144. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, November 30, 1961, 4 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo, 12/2/61–12/13/61. Confidential; Niact; Presidential Handling. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, Luanda, and USUN.

145. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, December 1, 1961, 9:16 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–161. Confidential. Drafted by Woodruff and Miller; cleared by Wallner, Burdett, and Cleveland; and approved by Fredericks. Also sent to London and Paris and repeated to Léopoldville, Rome, The Hague, USUN, and Salisbury.

146. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, December 3, 1961, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–361. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville and Brazzaville.

147. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State

Paris, December 5, 1961, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–561. Confidential; Niact. Received at 12:47 p.m. and repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, USUN, and Elisabethville.

148. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, December 5, 1961, 5:05–6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/12–561. Confidential. Drafted by Vance and approved in S on December 20. The time of the meeting is taken from Secretary Rusk's appointment book. (Johnson Library)

149. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, December 5, 1961, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–561. Official Use Only. Also sent to USUN and Salisbury and repeated to London, Paris, Brussels, and Elisabethville.

150. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, December 6, 1961, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–661. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, London, Paris, Salisbury, and USUN.

151. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State

Brussels, December 6, 1961, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–661. Confidential. Repeated to USUN, Léopoldville, Elisabethville, London, Paris, The Hague, and Salisbury.

152. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, December 7, 1961.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Files. Secret. A note on the title page reads in part as follows: "Submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence. The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff."Concurred in by the United States Intelligence Board on 7 December 1961." The representatives of the AEC and FBI abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

153. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, December 9, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. Drafted by Eisenberg and Canup, according to the Department of State copy. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.00/12–961) A handwritten note on the source text reads: "Bundy has original."

154. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Paris, December 11, 1961, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1161. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to USUN, Léopoldville, London, and Brussels. Rusk was in Paris December 10–15 for quadripartite Foreign Ministers meetings and a NATO Ministerial Meeting. Documentation is ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366, CF 2002 and 2003.

155. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Paris

Washington, December 11, 1961, 9:33 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1161. Secret. Drafted by Tron, Buffum, Sisco, and Ball; cleared by Vance and Burdett; and approved by Ball. Repeated to USUN, Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and Paris.

156. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Paris

Washington, December 12, 1961, 9:27 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1261. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Cleveland, cleared by Vance and in substance by Miller, and approved by Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs McGhee. Repeated to USUN for Stevenson and to London, Brussels, and Léopoldville.

157. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Embassy in France

Léopoldville, December 13, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1461. Secret; Niact. Received at 10:26 a.m. on December 13 and repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, and the Department as telegram 1480, which is the source text. The source text, which is incorrectly dated December 14, does not indicate the time of transmission.

158. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation

December 13, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Burdett. Filed with an undated covering memorandum from Battle to Bundy. The conversation apparently took place between 4:35 and 5 p.m. Washington time. The President's appointment book indicates that Ball, Cleveland, Williams, and Dungan were with him at that time. (Kennedy Library)

159. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation

December 13, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12– 1361. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Burdett and approved by the White House on December 20. The conversation took place after President Kennedy and Ball spoke to Rusk in Paris; see Document 158.

160. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, December 13, 1961, 9:28 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1361. Secret; Niact. Drafted and approved by Burdett and cleared in substance by Williams, Wallner, Dungan, and McGeorge Bundy. Repeated to USUN, Paris for Rusk, Brussels, and London.

161. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, December 14, 1961, 3 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1461. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London, Paris, Brussels, and USUN.

162. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, December 14, 1961, 9:23 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1461. Official Use Only; Niact. Drafted and approved by Ball. Also sent to Elisabethville and repeated to USUN, Paris for Rusk, Brussels, and London.

163. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, December 15, 1961, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1561. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, Paris, Salisbury, London, and USUN.

164. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, December 15, 1961, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1461. Secret; Niact. Repeated to London, Paris, Brussels, USUN, and CINCLANT. The source text is incorrectly dated December 14.

165. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Venezuela

Washington, December 16, 1961, 5:14 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.11–KE/12–1661. Confidential; Presidential Visit Eyes Only. Drafted by Vance, cleared in draft by Williams and Cleveland, and approved by Ball. Repeated to USUN, Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and Paris. President Kennedy visited Caracas December 16–17.

166. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Colombia

Washington, December 17, 1961, 4:35 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1761. Confidential; Niact. Drafted and approved by Ball and cleared by Williams and Cleveland. President Kennedy visited Bogota December 17.

167. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, December 17, 1961, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1761. Secret; Niact. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, and Paris.

168. National Security Action Memorandum No. 120

Washington, December 17, 1961.

Source: Department of State, NSAM Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 120. Confidential.

169. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, December 18, 1961, 3 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1861. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to Rome, USUN, Brussels, London, Salisbury, and Paris.

170. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, December 19, 1961, 12:54 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1961. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Eisenberg; cleared by Williams, Cleveland, McGhee, and Bundy; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Brussels, Paris, and USUN.

171. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, December 19, 1961, 11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1961. Confidential; Niact. Received at 10:36 a.m. on December 20 and repeated to USUN, Brussels, Salisbury, London, Paris, Brazzaville, Elisabethville, and CINCLANT.

172. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, December 20, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2061. Confidential; Niact. The source text does not indicate the time of transmission; it was received at 11:30 p.m. Repeated to USUN, London, Paris, Brussels, and Rome.

173. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, December 20, 1961, 11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2061. Confidential; Priority; Limited Distribution. Received at 5:58 a.m. on December 21 and repeated to Léopoldville and Brussels.

174. Editorial Note

175. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, December 21, 1961, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2161. Confidential; Niact. Received at 2:49 p.m. and repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, Paris, Elisabethville, Brazzaville, and CINCLANT.

176. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Bermuda

Washington, December 21, 1961, 5:02 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2161. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Cleveland and Tron, cleared by Vance, and approved by Ball. Repeated to London, Léopoldville, USUN, Paris, and Brussels. President Kennedy and Secretary Rusk met with Prime Minister Macmillan and Foreign Secretary Home in Bermuda December 21–22.

177. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, December 28, 1961, 9:42 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2861. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Officer in Charge of U.N. Congo Affairs Charles S. Whitehouse; cleared by Tyler, Vance, and Cutler; and approved by Fredericks.

178. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, December 21, 1961, 8:07 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2161. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Miller; cleared in draft by Deputy Assistant Secretary for European Affairs Richard H. Davis and by Wallner, Vance, and Williams; and approved by Ball. Repeated to Léopoldville, Paris, London, USUN, and Bermuda for the Secretary.

179. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, December 22, 1961, 1:50 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo Cables. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Robert L. West of the Office of Central African Affairs, cleared by Williams and in draft by Ball, and approved by Vance. Also sent to USUN, Brussels, and London and repeated to Bermuda for Rusk and to Paris.

180. Telegram From the Department of State to President Kennedy, at West Palm Beach, Florida

Washington, December 23, 1961, 8:17 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2361. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Woodruff and Tron; cleared by Wallner, Miller, and in substance by Davis and McGhee; and approved by Fredericks. Repeated to Léopoldville as telegram 1117 and to Brussels, London, Paris, and USUN.

181. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, December 26, 1961, 6:59 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2661. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Eisenberg; cleared by Fredericks, Vance, McGhee, and in substance by Wallner; and approved by Rusk (McGhee initialed for him). Repeated to London, Brussels, Paris, USUN, and Salisbury.

182. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, December 29, 1961, 7:57 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2961. Confidential. Drafted by Alf E. Bergesen of the Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs and approved by Vance. Also sent to Léopoldville, Brussels, Salisbury, USUN, and Paris.

102. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 102. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, September 1, 1961, 9:33 p.m.

341. Brussels' 328.2 While we approve removal of Belgian military personnel Katanga at earliest possible date and believe this action will reduce Tshombe ability remain in secession we believe current situation requires great care and careful assessment subsequent UN steps if eventual political reconciliation is not to be jeopardized. We fear there is danger that recent action might start chain of events which UNOC could not control and which would lead well beyond legitimate objectives initial measures.

Furthermore, we believe that Tshombe could provide conservative counterweight needed in Adoula government, and we hope UN will use new position of strength to induce Tshombe's cooperation with central government and not to destroy him. Moreover we certainly wish avoid major political upheaval or civil war in Katanga as result UN action.

We recognize Tshombe has never shown serious interest returning Katanga to Congo except on basis confederal arrangement which would be politically and economically unacceptable to Adoula. Also possible he may no longer have sufficient independent authority Katanga to effect reintegration on acceptable basis even if he wished. Nonetheless we do not believe all peaceful means toward meaningful reconciliation have been exhausted and consider imperative avoidance further use military measures and destruction of political framework in Katanga.

We believe it important for all concerned to accept fact Katanga's leaders still hold many economic cards, that they have substantial separatist public opinion behind them, that present GOC needs Katanga more than Katanga needs GOC, and that political upheaval in Katanga would seriously endanger possibility Katanga making desired economic contribution to Congo and its leaders playing legitimate role in GOC.

For present therefore Tshombe in our view should be afforded every opportunity save face and go to Léopoldville of own volition without pre-conditions but with personal stature not any further reduced.

Welcome addressee comments on foregoing. However pending receipt views and further developments Congo following lines action should be pursued:

For Léopoldville: You should present as much as appropriate of foregoing views re Katanga problem at highest available level GOC and suggest moment may be opportune for conciliatory gesture from Adoula to Tshombe with appropriate fraternal overtones. You should also inform Linner of our views and enlist his cooperation.

For Brussels: You may advise GOB we acting on Spaak suggestion reftel.

For Elisabethville: You should maintain dialogue with Tshombe, see him as often as you deem feasible and continue press argumentation used previously.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–2861. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Woodruff; cleared by Eisenberg, Blue, and Wallner; and approved by Ferguson. Also sent to Brussels and Elisabethville and repeated to USUN, Paris, and London.

2 Telegram 328, August 28, stated that Spaak had asked the Embassy to convey his suggestion that it would be most helpful if Adoula could be persuaded to send a conciliatory message directly to Tshombe requesting him to come to Léopoldville. (Ibid.)

103. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 103. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, September 6, 1961, 8 p.m.

639. Congo. SYG requested see Yost this a.m. in order discuss current Katanga developments. Dean and Campbell (UK) as well as Wieschhoff and Wachtmeister (Secretariat) also present.

SYG began by giving detailed history recent events starting August 23 when GOC passed ordinance in effect reiterating provisions February 21 SC resolution concerning withdrawal foreign military advisers and mercenaries from Katanga.2 SYG said these totalled 506, of which 412 Belgians and 94 mixed nationalities. Only approximately 300 have been brought under control, 185 of which actually repatriated, 8 await repatriation from Kamina and 40–50 from Elisabethville. Remainder have gone underground either to hills or taken refuge in Consulates.

SYG said UN has asked Belgians for list Belgian soldiers and mercenaries present Katanga as of August 1 and has requested full repatriation all such people by target date September 9. SYG said Belgians have agreed to both requests but currently drawn attention to fact situation somewhat beyond Belgian control particularly with regard those in hills.

SYG said Tshombe had stated publicly at time GOC decided endorse UN action re Katanga that he supported this decision. Munongo, however, probably due his involvement Lumumba murder and his realization he has no future in United Congo, is resisting and has taken to airwaves in order stimulate tribal agitation, particularly among Balubas. As result there are 15,000 refugees on UN hands in Elisabethville. SYG said Tshombe has every right arrest Munongo who literally in state insurrection, but Tshombe, showing characteristic weakness, has refused do so. In response query, SYG said some 200 foreign officers and mercenaries present no military threat per se but in view Munongo's activities, could become dangerous in stimulating dissident tribal units.

SYG noted Belgian authorities had repeatedly warned UN that, without Belgian officers to command it, gendarmerie would unquestionably revolt. Nine days have elapsed, SYG pointed out, and still no signs of revolt. On contrary, gendarmerie appears satisfied with change, encouraged by occasional and heretofore almost non-existent promotions and pleased to have their arms back for which they credit UN. SYG reemphasized gendarmerie not source of trouble. In reply Yost query he said UN no longer plans supply officers for Katanga gendarmerie, except ultimately for training as part of broad ANC training program.

SYG noted that purpose of UN Katanga operation at this time had been to strengthen Adoula vis-a-vis Stanleyville. UN authorities had felt that, as long as Gizenga had example of Katanga separatism to follow, he would hold out in Orientale and his followers in GOC would divert energies Adoula Government to reducing Katanga redoubt and avenging Lumumba. UN operation had therefore been designed clean up Katanga as essential prelude full integration Orientale. SYG thought results so far had served this purpose well.

However he pointed out that coming week extremely critical. If present situation continues he is convinced ANC will initiate major assault on Katanga which would mean outbreak civil war on substantial scale. Alternatively, UN would have to act much more drastically in Katanga. Either of these alternatives is most undesirable. Only reasonable solution is for Tshombe to open negotiations with Adoula and arrange full scale cooperation with central government under constitution. In SYG's view Tshombe quite willing to do so but being prevented by Munongo. SYG believes latter will have to be removed from scene very shortly if problem is to be solved. At this point he read telegram he just received from Léopoldville quoting Kasavubu as fully endorsing recent UN action in Katanga except that he regretted UN had not moved further and faster.

Finally SYG spoke rather harshly of Consular Corps démarche last week.3 He averred Consuls had expressed great concern for security of whites which is not at present being threatened but no concern for security of Africans which is being threatened by Munongo maneuvers.

In response to Yost's query he declared recent resolution of Katanga Parliament hostile to UN was taken in absence of quorum and is not significant. He also said UN representatives are in daily contact with Tshombe though they have ceased any effort keep in touch with Munongo.

Yost commented that we understand reasons which have prompted UN undertake present Katanga operation, but that USG, thinking along same lines, is now deeply concerned lest Katanga be eliminated as significant political force, just at time when its moderate political influence may be most gravely needed to counterbalance that of Stanleyville. While Gizenga may have renounced his efforts to maintain separate regime in Stanleyville, we feel this merely means transfer center of power struggle to Léopoldville where extremists will endeavor make their influence predominant inside GOC. It is as counterweight to this influence that we feel Katangans should be enabled and encouraged to play important role.

Dean strongly supported this argument. SYG expressed full agreement, said this exactly his intention and that if Tshombe will negotiate with Adoula this is precisely what will occur. Yost expressed appreciation for this analysis and these assurances but asked that we be kept informed daily during present critical period. SYG agreed.

Comment: We have impression that SYG is determined to eliminate bulk of remaining foreign military in Katanga by end this week and is also determined either neutralize or destroy Munongo whom he considers committed, for reasons of self-preservation, to Katanga separatism. If these objectives can be achieved he believes he can prevent ANC attack and bring Katanga peacefully into fold. Fact he called UK and ourselves in for this lengthy exposé indicates he believes next week or so very critical and he desires our understanding and cooperation.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–661. Confidential. Repeated to Léopoldville and Brussels.

2 For text of this ordinance, dated August 24, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 829–830.

3 Telegram 295 from Elisabethville, September 2, reported that the Consular Corps had approached O'Brien formally on the subject of the safety of foreign nationals. Canup had not participated in the démarche and had telephoned O'Brien to disassociate the U.S. Consulate from it. (Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/9–261)

104. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 104. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, September 8, 1961, 7 p.m.

577. Asked to see Linner again today and he came to Embassy at his request for 45 minute conversation. Alluded to statements to Yost by SYG (USUN 639 to Department repeated Léopoldville 63)2 on decisive importance of coming week for Katanga situation. Said I hoped therefore maintain closest contact with Linner. He then reviewed relatively short report he had from SYG relating to conversations not only with Yost but also British, Tunisian and other representatives New York during which SYG set forth four alternative courses of action re Katanga.

1. Tshombe on his own adopts conciliatory attitude overcome Munongo opposition and enters into substantive discussions with Adoula for Katanga's incorporation in Congo Government on some basis which would be established during negotiation of national constitution.

2. Drastic UN measures continuing pressure on Tshombe including possibly arrest Munongo and other extremists. This contrary general UN preferences and peaceful intentions and only being considered due unacceptable alternatives three and four below.

3. Central Governments bows to nationalists here and undertakes military operations against Katanga.

4. Conservative elements Léopoldville when faced with alternative three back down and country continues in its present divided state but with Katangese separatism reinforced by its successful resistance against UN pressure.

Foregoing further complicated by fact Linner has hard evidence that ANC preparing military invasion of Katanga from north and has set date for initiation operations within week or ten days hence. Linner not aware details but believes Stanleyville troops might be involved and that once undertaken could conceivably be prelude to increased military stature of Gizengists. (Embassy and Attaches have no evidence of any concrete ANC preparation or movements; ARMA however reports Bobozo, Commandant Thysville, advocating "invasion", [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] also reports Mobutu cryptically alluded to "orders" received to plan for action. (Embassy unaware how logistic and geographical obstacles would be surmounted.)

In preparation for alternative two [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified] Indian Battalion now Léopoldville will be moved Stanleyville [Elisabethville] next few days.

Execution second alternative which would include again seizing radio station depends on clear indication position of GOC and SYG's approval once GOC position given UN here.

Khiari departing Brussels tonight.3 May touch upon foregoing with Spaak but Linner was vague on degree to which Khiari would take Spaak into UN confidence.

Since my arrival here have been groping for possible action we might take in effort assist solution Katangese problem. My thoughts had included inspecting Consulate Elisabethville and possibility frank talk with Tshombe which would probably require UN notification and clearance Adoula. After some discussion with Linner, I have for now discarded idea lest some people endeavor tie in trip with eventual drastic UN action. Any US association with severe measures Katanga would be most unfortunate and could seriously jeopardize chance of success. Also mentioned to Linner possibility Adoula sending through Congolese channels fraternal message to Tshombe and invitation him come Léopoldville. Linner admitted this had considerable appeal and would mention it to Adoula. Repeated to Linner Yost's arguments re conserving assets solution including Tshombe might have. [sic] Linner in general agreement this approach and we believe shaping policies accordingly.

Linner who seems worthy of very considerable trust and respect fully appreciates dangers involved in drastic action but appears resolved to proceed for he is obviously concerned re possibility of civil war and chaos if some solution Katangese problem not arrived at.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–861. Top Secret; Eyes Only.

2 Document 103.

3 Gullion reported in telegram 578, September 8, that Linner, instead of Khiari, was going to Brussels. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–861)

105. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 105. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, September 11, 1961, 4 p.m.

593. Embassy officer today informed Linner in confidence of Parliament vote on Katanga Embtel 589.2 Linner stated GOC has now issued arrest warrants for Tshombe and Munongo but did not intend exercise warrant on Tshombe.

Linner said decision being taken today whether force should be used in Katanga. Personally he opposed to use of force unless absolutely necessary. He believed chances for peaceful solution had improved in last two days since Tshombe now indicating in his conversations with UN officials that he looking for way to divest himself of Munongo. However Tshombe still afraid come Léopoldville for two reasons: (1) concern for personal safety and (2) fear Munongo will take over in his absence. Linner stated Gizenga's presence Léopoldville has done much to allay Tshombe's fears re personal safety.

According Linner Tshombe's last remaining prop is support he believes he receiving from British and French. In case of French Linner stated he "has no illusions" and knows they supporting Tshombe. Linner in contact with British Charge and is convinced British official policy not supporting Tshombe. However activities British Consul Elisabethville have led Tshombe conclude he has British support.

Linner stated it "would not be difficult to arrest Munongo since he now has sufficient troops in Elisabethville". However he reluctant to do so even with full backing he now has from GOC. Since Katangans would not be taken by surprise he expects some shooting would take place. Thus he attempting get Tshombe to carry out Munongo arrest.

Linner stated this week should be decisive one for Katanga operation.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1161. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Brussels, Elisabethville, USUN, London, Paris, and Salisbury.

2 Telegram 589, September 11, reported that in secret session on September 9 the Congolese Parliament had passed a resolution asking Kasavubu to take the following actions: declare a "state of exception" in Katanga; arrest Tshombe, Munongo, and other Katangan leaders; suspend the Katangan provincial government and assembly; appoint a special commissioner for Katanga; occupy the radio station with troops; request the United Nations to disarm the Katangan police, gendarmerie, and militia; establish joint ANC–U.N. patrols to assure order; expel all foreign civil and military advisers; forbid entry into Katanga for 6 months by all foreigners not specifically authorized by the Congolese Government; and confiscate all Katangan war equipment. (Ibid.)

106. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State 106. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State1

Brussels, September 12, 1961, 3 p.m.

420. Congo. Embtel 409.2 I met with Spaak last evening to discuss Linner visit (reftel) and general Congo situation. Spaak said Linner was "charmant et gentil" and he appreciated frankness with which he had spoken. However, from what Linner had told him, he understood UN was seriously contemplating major moves, including action against Munongo, which went far beyond UN mandate. What troubled him was that UN did not seem to have any definite plan for peaceful political reintegration of Katanga by GOC at Léopoldville and was groping, improvising and playing it by ear. This could be very dangerous and result in disaster if any serious mistake was made.

Spaak said he most concerned by this situation. He also has related problem in that Belgian elements opposing his policy of full cooperation with UN are using present unstable and deteriorating situation in Katanga to attack and undermine GOB. For example, Union Miniere has just written him letter pointing out GOB policy (supporting UN) responsible for bringing about instability in Katanga and grave threat to Belgian economic and industrial activities there, et cetera. This letter clearly for record to provide basis for future attack against GOB if Katanga situation not straightened out.

Spaak said present deterioration in Katanga comes at particularly bad time for GOB, which must face serious domestic political situation (reported separately) over A) fiscal reforms; B) GOB measures re Flemish-Walloon problem, and, to lesser extent, C) legislation to deal with ailing coal industry. He explained Congo problem added to domestic political problems could jeopardize future of present government.

Reverting to Congo, Spaak said UN and GOC pressing him to withdraw Belgian Consuls from Elisabethville. While he would like to cooperate with UN and Léopoldville on this, he does not see how it possible to withdraw Consuls this juncture because if he does so Katangans may refuse to permit return of any Belgian Consul accredited only to GOC in Léopoldville and it impossible in present disorderly situation in Katanga to deprive many thousands of Belgian residents there of services and assistance of a Consul. Belgian public, Parliamentary and press opinion would strongly oppose any such gamble.

Comment: Spaak was depressed over Congo and much troubled because he knows of no UN and GOC plan for peaceful political reintegration of Katanga. He fears situation may deteriorate to point of chaos unless there constructive and well-planned program, and his concern doubtless augmented by criticism and attacks against him by certain powerful interests in Belgium.

In light Linner request in reference telegram I have no objection to Gullion informing Linner of Spaak reaction to Linner's visit and general gist of my talk with Spaak if, but only if, Linner will keep this information confidential for his own background [9 lines of source text not declassified].

MacArthur

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1261. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Léopoldville, Elisabethville, and USUN.

2 Telegram 409 from Brussels, September 11, reported a conversation on September 9 between MacArthur and Linner in which Linner described his meeting that day with Spaak. (Ibid., 770G.00/9–1161)

107. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 107. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, September 13, 1961, 9 a.m.

613. Have just had one hour talk with Adoula.2 Surprised to find Gizenga3 (sporting Jomo Kenyatta4 lapel button) present most of time. Delivered President's letter5 and autographed books. Adoula sincerely touched by this personal attention.

After amenities referred to forthcoming PL 480 negotiations and fact funds available from sale could be made available to UN for assistance to GOC. Sensed certain confusion Adoula's part that we might be talking bilateral aid for he spoke for several minutes of necessity for maintaining aid on multilateral basis through UN. He then requested warm thanks of GOC be transmitted USG for aid given in part. Subsequently during conversation Gizenga reverted to question of 480 aid and asked if this were on loan basis. I pointed out it was not and that sale of products would be through normal Congolese commercial channels and funds would be made available to UN and GOC.

Spent at least half hour discussing Katanga. Made all points suggested Deptels 341, 374, 3796 except Adoula going himself Elisabethville.7 Did not mention latter for Adoula himself raised it as possibility pointing out he has been to Elisabethville twice and would not dream of doing so again. All my arguments met with reasoned courteous rebuff. Adoula traced history of relations with Katanga since September 1960 meeting Brazzaville. Said he personally involved in all these negotiations and could attest that Léopoldville had always given in and Tshombe had not budged an inch. This connection referred to Tananarive where Léopoldville gave maximum even going so far as to propose confederation. Confirmed rumors we had heard that prior recent meeting provincial Presidents he sent Tshombe personal message assuring security not only by UN but also adding his own guarantee and inviting him attend stating he would be available at any time for private quiet discussions. Tshombe refused and Adoula emphasized he had made this personal appeal without going through UN or other intermediaries. On latter point Adoula said he had met frequently with Conakat deputies and Senators who reported in confidence their discussions only to have them published shortly in Katangese press.

I emphasized our desire to be helpful and our sincere hope for Congolese unity. Said I had no wish meddle in internal Congolese affairs and hoped to see national reconciliation. My government was, however, hopeful every effort would be made reach solution without bloodshed or economic dislocation of country and to conserve potential of Katanga. Asked if it were not true Tshombe was prisoner of his entourage or his fears and if some way could not be found to free him and save face for him. Adoula said he convinced Tshombe a prisoner both of his apprehensions and his advisers. He strongly affirmed he would do all possible avoid bloodshed, could not deny conversations would not ensure8 but he would try to limit these also. He expressed his understanding our concern, yet was visibly oppressed by its intentions; also doubtless constrained by intermittent smug presence Gizenga. In response my queries he seemed on point of identifying some kind peaceful initiative he might take but never did.

Adoula brought up courteously but pointedly recent speech by Senator Dodd.9 (His first reading of press report coincided our representations.) I sought dissociate executive branch from sentiments expressed Dodd's speech. Said observations made by me on behalf my government did not partake Senator's philosophy. Fortunately press report Adoula had of Dodd's speech, which he read to us, indicated Dodd was attacking US administration for precisely action we were now taking, i.e. supporting Congolese unity.

At this point Godley, who had been leafing through President's book,10 drew Adoula's attention to portion expressing President's views on transition from colonialism (re Algeria), a page and a half of which Adoula read out loud with obvious gratification and which I was able to point out had been written while President was Senator and was criticizing certain of administration's policies. I assured Adoula my confidence his intention do his best for peace and we felicitated each other on frankness.

Gizenga-Adoula interchange and telephone call indicated Gizenga leaving shortly for Stanleyville. During farewells inquired when this trip might occur, duration and reason. Gizenga said he would be leaving "in few days" for "few days" in Stanleyville pick up effects and family. Specifically indicated he would return Léopoldville.

Only other point brought out was phone call from Bakavu which led Adoula remark situation going badly there with tribal complications. Said he was convinced recently independent countries such as Congo not prepared for majority rule and rule must be by compromise and collaboration lest minority feel oppressed by majority as they had been oppressed by colonial authorities.

Comment: Believe Adoula will do utmost avoid bloodshed Katanga. He nevertheless appeared resolute solve problem. Do not believe there is anything further can be said by us here lest additional demarches be interpreted by Adoula already under great strain as USG associating self with the Katangese, with separatism and what he considers reaction. Despite my admittedly brief time here nevertheless have a notion UN and GOC will somehow or other bring Tshombe to heel and avoid fire fight. Much depends, however, on what men without future (Munongo) may do to stir up Katanga.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.70G41/9–1361. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, London, Paris, Elisabethville, Brazzaville, USUN, and Salisbury.

2 The meeting apparently took place on September 12. Telegram 606 from Léopoldville, September 12, noted that Gullion was to see Adoula at 3 p.m. that day. (Ibid., 770G.00/9–1261)

3 Gizenga went to Léopoldville on September 3. He and Adoula left that day for Belgrade where they attended the Conference of Non-Aligned Countries. Both returned to Léopoldville on September 9.

4 Kenyan nationalist leader.

5 It conveyed the President's greetings and good wishes; a copy, undated, is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo.

6 Telegram 341 is printed as Document 102. Telegrams 374 and 379, September 8 and 11, urged Gullion to present the views in telegram 341 to Adoula as soon as possible and urge him to capitalize on the success of the U.N. action and initiate talks with Tshombe. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–861 and 770G.00/9–1161, respectively) Telegram 606 (see footnote 1 above) stated that Gullion had been following the line set forth in these telegrams in talks with Linner, Bomboko, and Kasavubu.

7 Telegram 374 (see footnote 5 above) suggested a conciliatory approach from Adoula to Tshombe, possibly a high-level personal emissary or a trip to Elisabethville by Adoula himself.

8 As received. [Footnote in the source text.]

9 Senator Thomas J. Dodd of Connecticut. Reference is to a speech that he gave in the Senate on September 8; for text, see Congressional Record, 87th Cong., 1st sess., vol. 107, cols. 17593–17595.

10 Evidently The Strategy of Peace, a collection of Kennedy's speeches, published in 1960, which included a 1957 speech on Algeria.

108. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 108. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, September 14, 1961, 4 p.m.

355. Most critical situation has arisen between UN on one hand and Europeans and Africans on other.2 UN now placing entire blame for misfiring of its plan to turn Katanga over to GOC on intervention of Europeans, mainly Belgians, who appear increasingly effective as snipers, troop commanders or armored car drivers and machine gunners. GOC Commissioner has arrived but has no possibility of negotiating with any official and has to be closely guarded. UN claims only two soldiers killed, but eyewitness accounts tell of attack on and destruction of two trucks filled with Swedish soldiers and another attack on Irish convoy by Katangan armored vehicles manned by Europeans. UN helpless to prevent participation by Europeans in what has now become "war of liberation" against UN, but may be forced to decide to employ Malayan troops and armored cars expected soon, plus artillery, recoilless rifles, et cetera in full warfare which would result in widespread destruction and loss of civilian lives.

Europeans' attitude even more emotional than UN's. Belgians led by their ConGen seem to have declared war on UN. ConGen enraged over severe damage to Belgian Consular offices in fighting around post office. Also charges UN, especially Indian troops, with atrocities such as defenestrations of surrendering Katangans, firing on ambulances, shooting of Red Cross man and other civilians and fortifying by Irish of civil hospital filled with patients. Belgians adopting threatening tones against all who do not accept their viewpoint and one has told me that I must associate myself with Belgian Government (which Crener3 says is through with UN) and other Western Consuls in denouncing atrocities of UN monstrosity. British Consul shares these views completely and other consuls may also. After taking asylum at British Consulate yesterday (according to CAS report), Tshombe now in Kipushi organizing national resistance movement, which will probably have support of majority of white population and active participation by considerable number of Belgians.

Attended roadside meeting near Belgian ConGen residence at which Belgian extremists planning moves. A group leader arrived and, not realizing who I was, said he had just come from directing Katangan troops fire and that UN morale low but Katangan soldiers very tired. Speaker said time has come for Europeans to give helping hand to Katangans and those present appeared to know that organizational procedures underway.

Above situation places members of Consulate completely on side of UN despite our willingness to recognize that UN has committed inexcusable blunders in not preparing for any eventuality and not having sufficient armored transport to assure control of streets of city.

Canup

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/9–1461. Confidential; Niact. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to Brussels, USUN, London, Paris, and Salisbury.

2 Fighting broke out in Elisabethville between U.N. and Katangan forces early on September 13. Telegrams that day from Elisabethville and Léopoldville reported that the U.N. forces had sought to seize public buildings and strategic points in Elisabethville and arrest Munongo and most of the other Katangan leaders. They had not tried to arrest Tshombe since they hoped to bring about a political settlement. Munongo and most of the other Katangans escaped. (Ibid., 332.70G/9–1361 and 770G.00/9–1361) An unnumbered telegram from Elisabethville sent late in the day reported that European-led Katangan forces had launched strong attacks against the U.N. forces. (Ibid.)

3 Belgian Consul General Henri Crener.

109. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 109. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, September 15, 1961, 7 p.m.

658. Saw Hammarskjöld, Linner and Wieschhoff 1245 today.2 Stated it was now essential I receive latest estimate situation Katanga and indication their assessment and future plans. From certain alarming reports that had been brought to my attention,3 said it appeared conflict might become critical, and US had to think what it should do. Asked what were UN military plans.

SYG and colleagues unfailingly optimistic. Stated Kibwe re-appeared this morning and promised meet again 1300 with O'Brien to prepare subsequent meeting between O'Brien and Tshombe to arrange cease-fire. This agreement would be on basis status quo but UN mission must be accepted, i.e., foreign officers must be expelled from Katanga. There was no question of UN withdrawing from positions now held nor renouncing mission. Optimism re cease-fire based on Katangese battle fatigue and fact that once local cease-fire can be arranged, UN believes Katangese will assist in removing Belgian officers. Once cease-fire achieved military situation will be satisfactory for UN convinced it can assure local security.

Problem then becomes political and UN objective will be to bring about reconciliation and reintegration Katanga into Congo. Bocheley4 with two moderates will be available for preliminary discussions and UN will do everything possible to maintain open door between Léopoldville and Elisabethville to permit Bantu palaver.

Again reverting to military developments Hammarskjöld said most if not all attacks on UN have occurred during night. These plus ground snipers and sneak air attacks are principally terroristic uncoordinated actions of desperadoes. Sniping has diminished. Situation tense yesterday at Kamina where Katangese appeared unsuccessfully to have committed bulk of local forces available. Arrival six Ferret cars plus Swedish reinforcements it is hoped will stabilize area.

Re security Consulate Hammarskjöld reverted absence day attacks and therefore believed none would occur.

Mentioned report of Consuls to Spaak (Embtel 638)5 on military situation and described it as gross exaggeration. Re anti-UN propaganda Katanga stated it shows lack of any political judgment and military seem striking out blindly in uncoordinated fashion.

Re my question on possible broadening of military action which I purposely did not spell out, he stated there appeared be no action against foreigners and again reiterated that UN military seem capable handling situation. Pointed out Baluba refugees present problem but that so far had behaved remarkably well and had caused no special headache. European refugees had not yet appeared in number and there seemed be no panic.

I asked if cease-fire could not be negotiated what would be military situation. Linner and Wieschhoff agreed with SYG UN military would prevail and would take initiative which they had purposely avoided doing so far in order minimize bloodshed and destruction. In order further probe military situation I asked if his military required any special equipment if cease-fire not attained and he said he did not think so but MacEoin would know. I emphasized I not making any offers.

Tackling broad political questions and misgivings Department's 387,6 SYG began with eulogy Adoula whom he described as most purposeful, energetic and capable African he knew with possible exception Nigerian Prime Minister. From extensive meetings he has had with Cabinet he is convinced Adoula definitely dominates his colleagues and is personally the leader of his country. Then said he wanted to speak frankly and in confidence to me. Said if UN had not acted in Katanga Adoula would have been under tremendous pressure from Gizengists. If UN can clean up Katanga situation Adoula by far greatest winner. UN action unquestionably on behalf moderates for Katangese participation is key to Congolese balance of power. If Katanga can be integrated Adoula commander of situation. Wieschhoff added if UN had not acted he feared Lundula would take action in his own hands thus presenting counter with Gizengist National Movement which would have put Adoula in difficult position and would have resulted wide-spread civil war for ANC Léopoldville could it have stood by.

SYG said all UN elements deeply regretted Bocheley designation and that Linner had done everything possible oppose it. They shared our concern and were watching Bocheley carefully. Bocheley currently under O'Brien control and they hoped it would continue. Linner referred to moves taken by UN rout out bad actors and provocateurs in Stanleyville camp, and UN share in getting and keeping Gizenga in Léopoldville (at least this long). I mentioned briefly Belgian demarche (Deptel 401).7 Hammarskjöld expressed understanding Belgian difficulties but said they would make fools of themselves if matter were to be raised UN, particularly view role individual Belgians have played last 72 hours. This connection said two Belgians who led attack Jadotville now being interrogated.

During dictating foregoing have just received word from Canup they anticipate Tshombe-O'Brien meeting 1800 Léopoldville time.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1561. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to Brussels, USUN, London, Paris, Salisbury, and Brazzaville.

2 Telegram 413 to Léopoldville, September 15, indicates that Gullion reported the gist of the conversation in a telephone conversation with Fredericks that morning. (Ibid.) Hammarskjöld arrived in Léopoldville on September 13 for what was intended to be a brief visit. Telegram 713 from USUN, September 12, reported that Cordier had stated that day that the Secretary-General planned to leave the Congo on September 17 unless Tshombe came to Léopoldville for talks. He said it was hoped that Adoula could use Hammarskjöld's presence to give Tshombe a face-saving opportunity to do this. (Ibid., 770G.00/9–1261)

3 Telegrams dated September 15 from Elisabethville and Léopoldville reported continuing fighting in Katanga, including attacks by a Fouga Magister jet fighter on the Elisabethville airport and the Kamina airfield. (All ibid., 770G.00/9–1561)

4 E. Bocheley-Davidson had been appointed Commissioner for Katanga by the Congolese Government.

5 Telegram 638 from Léopoldville, September 14, transmitted the text of a message sent via Brussels from the Swedish, Greek, Belgian, Portuguese, and French consular representatives in Elisabethville to their respective governments. The message described the situation in Elisabethville as "very grave" with bombardment of the Belgian and Portuguese Consulates. (Ibid., 770G.00/9–1461)

6 Telegram 387 to Léopoldville, September 13, criticized the appointment of Bocheley-Davidson as Commissioner for Katanga, calling him an "extreme leftist radical." (Ibid., 770G.00/9– 1361)

7 Telegram 401 to Léopoldville, September 14, stated that the Belgian Ambassador had conveyed a suggestion from Spaak for U.S., U.K., and French consultation to work out a position for the Security Council to assure U.N. action for the protection of Europeans in Katanga. (Ibid., 330/9–1461)

110. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 110. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, September 15, 1961, 8:55 p.m.

416. In telecon with Secretary,2 Bunche (UN) made these points in reply to concern Secretary had expressed yesterday about fact war rather than peace being made in Katanga:

1. Operation 13 September was really continuation and follow-up of roundup of "outlaw mercenaries" conducted 28 August. Mercenaries went underground after 28 August, were responsible for numerous incidents against UN operation and personnel. UN operation was being conducted with clear legality under February 21 SC resolution.

2. UN could not anticipate that action would require such fighting, in view fact that August 28 operation had not been seriously resisted. Therefore, there was no special reason for UN to consult U.S. or other members in advance.

3. First knowledge SYG had of fighting was in a "contentious Reuters report" handed to him in Accra on way to Léopoldville. (Presumably reason SYG made this point was to deny assumption that he had gone out to Congo in order to direct a big new military operation.)

4. SYG agrees everything possible must be done to bring Tshombe and Adoula together. Feels UN hasn't had much help from British locally; especially critical of British Consul Elizabethville.

5. Bunche said UN has unconfirmed report that Katanga radio announced Tshombe and O'Brien now meeting.

6. SYG hopes that Linner's report of yesterday3 and supplement to it (which we have not yet seen) will help to calm fears.

7. SYG takes dim view of Welensky's position in all this. Notes that pilot of jet plane operating against UN is a Rhodesian.

8. Bocheley-Davidson is accompanied by two "Congolese moderates". In any event Adoula is dominating force and has situation under control.4

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1561. Secret; Priority. Drafted and approved by Cleveland and cleared in substance by Vance. Repeated to Elisabethville, London, USUN, and to the President at Hyannis Port, Massachusetts.

2 According to notes of the conversation by Phyllis Bernau, the conversation took place at 5:40 p.m. (Ibid., Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations)

3 Dated September 14; U.N. doc. S/4940. For an extract, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 831–832. See also O'Brien, To Katanga and Back, pp. 247–268.

4 According to Bernau's notes of the telephone conversation, Bunche concluded by assuring Rusk "that our people including especially Linner are acting under direct instructions from headquarters."

111. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 111. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, September 15, 1961, 10:18 p.m.

647. Paris USRO. Reference Brussel's 453, Sept 14.2 Belgian Ambassador at his request called on Secretary today.3 Said Mr. Spaak understood there had been discussion of Congo by Foreign Ministers4 and wondered if the Secretary could convey their views. Secretary said unfortunately he not present this discussion but went on to express his views situation in Katanga. Mentioned his concern over some of the persons who had been brought up from Léopoldville by UN and central government, such as Bocheley-Davidson. Said US had pressed UN to work out settlement between Tshombe and Adoula. Added US worried about possible collapse of UN effort as they did not have necessary back-up. Stressed aim of US was immediate cease-fire and recommencement of discussion of issues between Tshombe and Adoula.

Belgian Ambassador expressed particular concern about Lincoln White statement evening September 145 and said it would undoubtedly be badly received in Belgium where people tended consider UN activities as US operation. In response request that US issue another "correcting statement" Secretary said we would need more information before any further statement could be made. Secretary mentioned he thought some of trouble in Katanga caused by mercenaries who had gone underground temporarily.

Ambassador also passed on to Secretary Spaak's request that US, British and French concert to obtain from UN juridical basis for its action. Secretary asked Amb. to assure Spaak that he personally following situation and had talked with Mr. Bunche twice about it. Added his British and French colleagues also concerned. Expressed hope Spaak would understand that US had not been consulted about this operation. Added although US pays a part of cost UN operation they not always inclined follow our advice. Ambassador clearly implied SYG authorized operation order have clear record on Congo by Sept 19.

Referring Spaak's visit Moscow, Amb. said Spaak felt situation so tense and dangerous that it might be possible for him bring back useful information from Khrushchev. Wondered if Secretary who had been discussing matter with his fellow FonMins, might have some message to send to him. Ambassador assured Secretary Spaak was firm on questions such as peace treaty, access to Berlin, etc. Secy. replied not possible to say anything this time as Ministers had only discussed contingency plans so far. Doubted Spaak be able open up any new possibilities as Mr. Khrushchev had been remarkably consistent in Vienna talks, aide-memoire, as well as in Fanfani and Sulzberger talks. Added he would be discussing matter with Mr. Gromyko in New York next week. Secretary said expected Mr. Khrushchev would employ same "terror tactics" in dealing with Spaak as on previous occasions. Expressed hope that Mr. Khrushchev could not get any impression from visit that there were differences within alliance in view Spaak's former close association with NATO and De Staerke's present position.

In subsequent conversation with Deputy Under Secretary Johnson Ambassador was informed that Foreign Ministers had been in general agreement that objective in the Congo must be to bring Adoula and Tshombe together for political talks. He added it further agreed representatives of all three countries would work toward this end both in UN and the Congo.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1461. Confidential; Priority. Drafted and approved by Blue. Repeated to Léopoldville, USUN, London, and Paris.

2 In telegram 453, MacArthur reported a September 14 conversation with Spaak, who declared that the U.N. authorities had deliberately taken the initiative in using force, contrary to Hammarskjöld's prior assurances to Spaak. He said that he had received a telegram saying the Congolese Government was closing the Belgian Consulate in Léopoldville. He warned that if this was done, he would stop all Belgian aid to the Congo and withdraw every Belgian technician. MacArthur commented that he had known Spaak for 15 years and had "never seen him more angry and bitter." (Ibid.)

3 A memorandum of the conversation by Blue is ibid., 770G.00/9–1561.

4 Rusk discussed Germany and Berlin with Lord Home and Couve de Murville on September 14 but left before the Congo was discussed. A memorandum of the brief discussion of the Congo states that Deputy Under Secretary Johnson told Home and Couve that Rusk had expressed to Bunche U.S. concern over the use of U.N. forces. Home stated that he had told Hammarskjöld that the U.N. action had caused "consternation" in the United Kingdom and that continuation of the present U.N. line would jeopardize British support of future U.N. military actions in other parts of the world. (Ibid., 396.1–WA/9–1461) According to Harold Macmillan, he spoke to Kennedy on September 14 and urged that they press Hammarskjöld to get a settlement on a federal or semi-federal basis. (Pointing the Way, 1959–1961, p. 442)

5 A September 14 statement by Department spokesman Lincoln White noted U.S. support for the concept of a unified stable Congo and expressed the hope that order would be restored promptly and that the province of Katanga would play a constructive role within the Congo. The text is in telegram 405 to Léopoldville, September 14. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1461)

112. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 112. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, September 15, 1961, 10:47 p.m.

423. To Ambassador from Secretary. President and I deeply concerned over current course of events in Congo. You should make every effort ensure SYG, and in your discretion Adoula, aware US interest and views along following lines: 1. Necessity to bring Katanga situation urgently from present fighting stage to period of negotiation, if at all possible using Tshombe. You should press SYG as strongly as is necessary to make certain he accepts and follows through on this philosophy. While we understand depth of feeling bound to be generated among Congolese and UN personnel at Katanga reaction to recent UN moves, believe it essential you do what you can to substitute statesmanship on their part for present emotions.

2. Dept much relieved hear SYG feels as we do re Bocheley-Davidson. However, in view importance this question not only for Katanga but for American support UN Congo operation—subject to increasing domestic political criticism—hope you will continue press SYG hard along lines Deptel 512.2

3. You should reiterate our dismay that UN should have taken such a serious step, jeopardizing everything we have attempted to accomplish in Katanga and Congo, without adequate consultation. While we recognize that UN had warned us that energetic action might be required in Katanga, we consider timing most unfortunate and we would certainly have counseled against at this time. Objection to timing is simply that we had hopes of securing Tshombe's agreement to see SYG in Léopoldville.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1561. Secret; Niact. Drafted and approved by Vance and cleared in draft by Cleveland and Rusk. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, Paris, and London.

2 The reference should be to telegram 512 to USUN, September 13, which expressed concern at the Bocheley-Davidson appointment and urged that if the Congolese Government did not replace him, the United Nations should not permit him to treat Katanga like a "conquered territory" but should keep administration in U.N. hands until quiet was restored and the provincial Parliament reconvened. (Ibid., 770G.00/9–1361)

113. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 113. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, September 16, 1961, 6:20 p.m.

661. For the President Hyannis Port priority. Léopoldville pass Elisabethville as Dept's 274. At midnight last night Bunche called Assistant Secretary Cleveland to pass on urgent request from SYG in Léopoldville. Bunche informed Cleveland UNOC wants re-inforce its military operation in Katanga by bringing battalion Ethiopian troops from Stanleyville to Elisabethville. UN requested US loan 3 or 4 US Air Force Globemasters. For this operation UN would make exception to standing policy not to use US or other national military airlift in internal operations of Congo. Bunche explained that this show of force would be designed induce Katangans accede to pressure being exerted by UN for cease-fire. During night Operations Center ascertained that USAF could make such lift in two or three days if this necessary and if decision made that US should provide such assistance.

Secretary and staff met with UK early Saturday a.m. and decided that following five points should be conveyed to UN immediately. In telephone call from Cleveland to Bunche following transmitted as present US position on this matter.

1. In our judgment we do not believe this is feasible military operation in light information we have been receiving that Kamina Air Base, and possibly Elisabethville under attack, including strafing and (in case of Kamina) napalm bombing. Security of operation therefore doubtful.

2. We strongly believe SYG should make every effort to get fighting stopped immediately.

3. While we are not at this time saying we will not provide the assistance requested, we could provide such assistance only if (a) we know clearly what SYG intends to do and what his plans are; and (b) that we agree with these plans. It was emphasized that this was key point to our position.

4. Cleveland inquired whether we could provide any medical supplies or if there was any kind of a mercy mission that we could undertake if casualties are considerable on behalf of the UN.

5. We asked if there is any rescue operation which the US should consider undertaking alone or in concert with the UK, pursuant to UN request; for example in connection with Irish troops said to be surrounded at Jadotville.

Bunche responded that he would convey immediately the above to the SYG and would be in touch with us during course of the day. During course above conversation Bunche also made following principal points: 1. With respect to operation being undertaken by UN its purpose is to root out the remaining mercenaries. He maintained that the UN could not have predicted kind of military resistance which has taken place, particularly in light of the fact that similar operation was successfully carried out August 28.

2. Bunche emphasized that resistance could not have taken place without white mercenary leadership.

3. He said military action undertaken pursuant to SC resolution which gave UN mandate to remove mercenaries.

4. He also said purpose of UN operation was to avert serious civil war which undoubtedly would have taken place since alternative to present UN action was imminent movement by ANC against Katanga forces.

5. The objective of getting Ethiopians to Kamina quickly is to give UN greater strength immediately so that lesser number are killed and so that problem can be moved into political context. Bunche insisted this was not a general action against Katanga, and that this military move was directed against those Katanga gendarmerie who are resisting largely because of white leadership.

6. Bunche emphasized that UN and Hammarskjöld have consistently sought to use peaceful means and that SYG is directing present efforts to achieve immediate cease-fire. Bunche said situation confronting UN had developed to a point where UN could fulfill its SC mandate or would have to get out. In these circumstances major civil war was likely. Moreover, Bunche stressed that if Katanga not brought under control this would increase pressure on Adoula to point where there would be real danger of Gizenga take-over. In his judgment importance of supporting UN lies in fact that this will strengthen Adoula and central government and help maintain moderate leadership within Congo.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/9–1661. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Sisco, cleared by Vance and Fredericks, and approved by Cleveland. Also sent to Léopoldville, London, Paris, and USUN.

114. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 114. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, September 16, 1961, 9:29 p.m.

663. Leopoldville pass Elizabethville as Dept's 275. Following statement re Katanga made by US spokesman with approval of President:2

[Here follows the text of a statement issued by the Department of State that day expressing support for efforts to obtain a cease-fire in Katanga; it is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, page 832.]

For Léopoldville: In informing SYG urgently of above, you should make following points: 1. Statement reflects our continued strong support of UN in Congo, but is not intended as US endorsement specific military operation which has been undertaken by UN in Katanga.

2. We do not want UN pushed out of or defeated in Katanga since we strongly believe that effective UN presence in Katanga is essential if Katanga is to play useful and constructive role within unified Congo and if situation is not to be created which will encourage separatism and weaken Adoula.

3. However, we believe there must be prompt cease-fire, even if this means UN military operation falls short of achieving its full objective of rooting out by military means all mercenaries in Katanga. We cannot support UN in any drawn out military operation requiring considerable bloodshed in order to completely force removal all mercenaries. In short, we believe that circumstances have evolved in such way that it is necessary to stop short the scale of offensive military operations that full prosecution of UN mandate now seems to require.

4. Apart from cease-fire UN must create basis for constructive talks with Tshombe and then promote actively talks between Tshombe and GOC. To this end seems reasonable raise question replacement or reassignment O'Brien, Tombelaine and Bocheley-Davidson with persons who able gain confidence of both sides which seems none of three able do. In case of O'Brien this could be done by placing another UN official in charge Katanga operation over him.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 325.70G/9–1661. Confidential; Priority; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Sisco and Cleveland, cleared by Vance, and approved by Rusk. Rusk's staff assistant Walter L. Cutler initialed for him. Also sent to Léopoldville, London, Paris, and USUN.

2 A September 16 memorandum from Cleveland to Rusk indicates that the President called him on the telephone that morning, directed the issuance of a public statement urging a cease-fire, and expressed the general views stated in this telegram. Kennedy "repeated several times that we must not let the UN 'get licked' by Katanga with all the adverse consequences that might have but also emphasized that 'we should not push Katanga any further'." Cleveland noted that Kennedy, unlike Stevenson, wanted to bring the situation to an end as quickly as possible, even if it meant the United Nations did not achieve its objective of routing out the mercenaries and bringing Katanga into a federated Congo. Stevenson thought the United Nations should be given more time to try to carry out its mission. (Ibid., 332.70G/9– 1661)

115. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 115. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, September 17, 1961, 1 a.m.

683. Department pass Hyannisport. Prior hours conference with Hammarskjöld this evening2 had sent him earlier in day letter on general US attitude on Katanga crisis as we urged it on Adoula and Hammarskjöld last few days, together with gist of Department's instructions Deptels 415 and 423.3

We had also conferred earlier with Lansdowne4 and UK Ambassador Riches5 who told us that prior to their presentation SYG had informed them of his decision to try to enter personally into negotiation with Tshombe.

At outset our meeting SYG had me read draft of his project for negotiation (see Embtel 677)6 which he said was then before Adoula Cabinet.

SYG anticipated pitfalls. Principal problem was whether GOC would accept it. He had just concluded half hour discussion with Adoula. Latter was not happy but said he would undertake to present proposition to his Cabinet and that he would in effect "go along". SYG indicated what he was hoping for from Adoula was acquiescence if not approval.

In discussion with Tshombe, Hammarskjöld said would point out that Tshombe had previously tried make contact for cease-fire and failed. UN had since then tried several times to make contact and failed. SYG now proposed he and Tshombe seek cease-fire.

Settlement should be one which left future in Congolese hands. Solution imposed by force was impermanent. UN wished to promote law and order, prevent civil war and to evacuate foreign military technicians.

He thought Tshombe shared these objectives and was in accord with the principles of pertinent UN Resolution. He would say to Tshombe that secession of Katanga hardly consonant these purposes and there should be no trigger to civil war arising out of separatism.

Foreign political and military advisers should go in accordance with UN Resolution. Tshombe should take steps with gendarmerie to help eliminate them.

Hate propaganda and broadcast should be halted.

Any other frictions which could lead to fighting should be removed.

SYG said that getting contact with Tshombe was of course not assured. Read message from O'Brien indicating Tshombe was supposed today to make contact but Tshombe "advisers" had warned of trap. SYG recognized Tshombe might well be prisoner.

In response my queries he said he was quite aware Tshombe might be seeking merely the most secure protection wherever it was and that Tshombe probably had very little credit anywhere in Congo. He said there was some symbolic value however in that Tshombe was after all a Provincial President. He said that Adoula while extremely hostile to Tshombe believed it was possible for discussion to take place.

I asked whether Adoula had formulated any requests or conditions. SYG replied in negative and said if GOC accepted his project their only requirement would be that Central Government take no part in the contact.

SYG then turned to US representations as contained in Deptels 415 and 423. The length of his stay in Congo would be decided from day-to-day and would be as long as his presence here could do any good. This had priority over GA attendance at opening GA.

As to US pressure for negotiations he believed his Tshombe project was the answer.

As to "dismay" by US that UN should take such "serious" step he said firmly there had been a concrete risk of civil war if there had been no break in Katanga situation. However UN had not entered Katanga to overturn regime. It had intended merely to take actions which he thought had been generally approved to set stage for peaceful integration. (These were in extension or similar to those taken on August 28, which had gone through with no difficulty.) UN people here had obviously expected to be able to repeat the coup. Everybody had been surprised at extent to which operation developed. SYG again insisted he had not known of operation until he reached Accra and read a Reuters dispatch. (SYG created impression he could be more critical of miscalculations made in field if he were not speaking in presence of his advisers.)

At this point we received news of Adoula Cabinet acceptance of Tshombe project and his careful Scandinavian calm gave way to something like jubilation. Since Adoula had said negotiations could take place "anywhere" SYG interpreted this to mean GOC actually anxious to see termination of struggle.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1761. Secret; Niact. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, Brazzaville, Paris, and London.

2 September 16.

3 A copy of Gullion's September 16 letter to Hammarskjöld is in the National Archives and Records Administration, RG 84, FRC 64 A 5321, Léopoldville Embassy Files: Lot 63 F 85, 320—Congo-UN, September 1961. Telegram 423 is printed as Document 112. Telegram 415, September 15, stated that in a discussion of the Congo situation that day, Rusk and Lord Home had agreed that Hammarskjöld should remain in the Congo until the crisis was resolved. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1561)

4 U.K. Minister of State for Colonial Affairs Lord Lansdowne. For Macmillan's description of Lansdowne's mission, see Pointing the Way, 1959–1961, pp. 443–444.

5 Sir Derek Riches.

6 Telegram 677 from Léopoldville, September 16, transmitted the text of a draft message from Hammarskjöld to Tshombe proposing a cease-fire and a meeting between the two. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1661) For text of the message, dated September 16, similar in substance to the draft but with a revised paragraph (7) proposing Ndola, Northern Rhodesia, as a meeting place, see Public Papers of the Secretaries-General, vol. V, pp. 569–571.

116. Editorial Note 116. Editorial Note

Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld left Léopoldville on September 17, 1961, intending to meet Katangan provincial President Moise Tshombe in Ndola, Northern Rhodesia. His plane crashed as it approached Ndola that evening, and all aboard were killed. Telegrams from Léopoldville and Salisbury on September 18 reported first that the plane was missing and later that the wreckage had been located and Hammarskjöld's body identified. (Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/9–1861 and 310/9–1861) A report dated January 19, 1962, by Officer in Charge of the U.N. Operation in the Congo Sture Linner (U.N. document S/4940/Add.5) is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pages 833–835.

Secretary of State Rusk, who was in New York to attend the General Assembly session, called on Hammarskjöld's Executive Assistant Andrew W. Cordier and U.N. Under Secretary for Special Political Affairs Ralph J. Bunche at 1 p.m. on September 18. They stated that the plane had flown at night because of a single jet plane that had fired on U.N. forces on a number of previous occasions. According to a memorandum of the conversation, Bunche "emphasized the depradations of a single jet fighter and raised the question of how to deal with it," and Rusk assured the group that "the United States could not stand idly by and let U.N. planes be interfered with on their missions." (Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366, CF 1957)

In a report dated March 8, 1962, a U.N. Commission of Investigation into the circumstances of the Secretary-General's death stated that it could find no evidence of sabotage, attack from ground or air, aircraft failure, or pilot error but could not exclude any of those possibilities. (U.N. document A/5069 and Add.1) Extracts are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pages 844–847.

117. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 117. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, September 18, 1961, 9 p.m.

438. Inform Linner and Bunche US compliance late SYG's request for urgent dispatch 4 US transport aircraft for use internal Congo airlift effected in hope the reinforcement of UN forces Katanga which they will make possible will enhance chances achievement early cease fire under conditions favorable to UN achievement its basic objectives in Congo.2 As Léopoldville pointed out in its 712,3 collapse of UN operations Congo or settlement on Tshombe-Munongo terms would greatly strengthen Gizenga position. Either would of course also gravely prejudice overall position UN. SYG's death and ambiguous military results to date UN Katangan operations cannot help but hearten his Katangan opponents.

While we continue believe as stated Deptel 431 to Léopoldville4 that the UN objective in the Katanga should be attainment of early cease fire, we believe that the changed circumstances render practical prospects achievement early cease fire on conditions acceptable to UN require UN attaining position of greater strength in Katanga. US action referred to above and supply by Ethiopia of jet fighters should permit this improvement UN posture Katanga. Purpose would not be to support long drawn out military operation but rather attempt avoid necessity thereof through UN presence sufficiently strengthened hopefully to convince Tshombe and European advisers of necessity prompt negotiation on reasonable terms.

Leopoldville pass Elisabethville.

Bowles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/9–1861. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Vance, cleared by Fredericks, and approved by Cleveland. Also sent to USUN and repeated to London, Paris, and Brussels.

2 Telegram 1559 from the JCS to USCINCEUR, September 18, authorized the use of three C–130 and one C–124 aircraft in support of the U.N. forces in intra-Congo airlift during the existing emergency. The flights should be made only if the USCINCEUR representative in the Congo was satisfied that they could be made without undue risk. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JCS 9111/4031 (17 Sept 61))

3 Dated September 18. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1861)

4 Telegram 663 to Brussels (Document 114) was repeated to Léopoldville as telegram 431.

118. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 118. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, September 18, 1961, 9 p.m.

798. Congo. Bunche today read us excerpts from top secret tel which he said SYG sent just before leaving on flight which ended in crash.

Bunche said he had reported to SYG his talks with Secy and Cleveland re UN's evaluation that strong action in Katanga was necessary to avert civil war. In reply to US view that there was no indication of clear and present danger of GOC intervention in Katanga, SYG's reply was, in substance, the fol res passed by Congo Parliament shows pressures for ANC action; situation is difficult for Adoula. There is ample proof that our (meaning UN) evaluation of risk of war was correct. Risk may have been or may be activated by ANC intervention in Katanga or breakup of Adoula Cabinet with Orientale group going to Stanleyville. Short of trend toward resolution of Katanga problem, at least in form of discussions, risk remains grave. Our (UN) response has been measures tending to free Tshombe of foreign domination or domination by ultras. These have been absolute condition for staving off aforementioned risk; in particular, they are absolute condition if we are to give Adoula chance to keep govt together and resist pressure for military action. SYG went on: Of course, Adoula and several others in Cabinet know ANC without foreign support would not be able to end Katanga secession by military means and also know that such solution would not be basis for acceptable future. As Adoula himself has pointed out to me, political problem facing him is one understood only in emotional terms.

Bunche referred to GOC decision (ourtel 796)2 which, he said, showed accuracy of SYG's appraisal.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1861. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Received at 2:50 a.m. on September 19 and repeated to Brussels and Léopoldville.

2 Telegram 796 from USUN reported that, according to Bunche, the Congolese Cabinet had decided that the United Nations "must put its troops into a position to fight with equal arms against mercenaries in Katanga." If it could not do so, the Congolese Government proposed to ask friendly countries for military assistance so that it could undertake operations itself. (Ibid.)

119. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 119. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, September 18, 1961, 11 p.m.

721. For Secretary. Just saw Adoula at my request for 45 minutes. He received me alone while Gizenga sat in pitch-dark outer room.

I pretexted telecon with Secretary to confirm a rapport with him which I expected would be under strain to extent he might have been persuaded we throttling UN and interceding for Katanga. Claimed Secretary said world's eyes were on Adoula now since tragic death of Secretary General and was up to him, Adoula, to keep his country from flames of civil war. The Secretary was aware of pressures to which Adoula was subject and I had assured Secretary Adoula was the man to contain them so long as situation did not deteriorate drastically. I told him of reports of unrest in military camps, brought him up to date on developments and offered to continue to pass him news (in whirl of events GOC seems get information last if at all). I said decision for civil war the highest and most grievous any nation could make. It was of course within the supreme authority of a state when all else failed but not one would choose it without heeding all concerned and trying all means to avoid it. Pointed out that civil war in this case was entirely illogical, logistically infeasible and likely indecisive. Said military situation in Katanga not fundamentally deteriorated. UN casualties very few and single Katanga fighter plane was causing ravages far out of proportion to Tshombe strength.

Assured him US policy unchanged in favor Congolese unity but claimed this entirely consistent with negotiations. It did not necessarily mean we committed to or wanted to save skin of Mr. Tshombe. US had little financial interest in Katanga, did not need it but Congo did. Civil war could only lose it or destroy it.

Said that if UN is to negotiate it seemed to me it must do so from firm position and told him frankly that I hoped and thought UN mobility would be strengthened. I said necessary in eyes of world that Hammarskjöld's work be carried on and contact established and maintained. Informed him Linner in view latest extravagant pretensions of Tshombe and in view his own responsibilities here was sending number two man Khiari to establish contact. Said that if it turned out that Tshombe's claims were too great, he, we and world would at least know that much.

Adoula obviously heartened by sentiments I attributed to Secretary. (Hope that these or something like them can be confirmed to me by Secretary or even President in urgent message to Adoula. I have set forth my representation at length in order to show line I am taking in situation moving too rapidly for instructions to catch up.) Adoula highly appreciative US policy, recognized we had no financial or other interest in Katanga, wanted to assure me he doing all possible to prevent civil war.

He acknowledged pressures on him and said he had been able to "dam" them and only hoped be able to continue to do so. The government or chamber (I am not sure which) had nevertheless urged immediate action. He therefore had hit upon and commenced "procedures", a series of delays which he believed would work.

Said he hoped we would help him in this game if possible. I answered we would do all we properly could. With respect to present unrest in military camps and in population he said he believed Mobutu had situation in hand at least for present. I queried him on coup d'etat or assassination. He said he was well aware these possibilities and would welcome any intelligence from US.

Adoula more in sorrow than in anger regretted UK "action against UN". I tried to mitigate his feeling on this point. He said he had never asked UN to undertake war in Katanga, that UN had never intended war against Katanga, that UN had urged him constantly to prevent civil war, that no one on this side wanted war but that Munongo and Tshombe had prepared the combustible to which least spark set fire.

As to military situation he said it was absolutely necessary that the fighter plane be neutralized. He thinks SYG was shot down. I said I hoped some measures would be taken.

In closing I said we might be able from time to time to help him with communications to Katanga. He pleased at this; said not for moment but he might call on us.

I was reassured to find in Adoula strength, calm and good will. Unhappily he is dejected by tragic miscarriage Katanga events and by Hammarskjöld's death. He also obviously thinks British are anti-UN and for impure reasons.

Since dictating above I gave Linner gist. He pleased to note Adoula interposed no objection to Khiari mission despite Adoula earlier objection expressed to Linner to any re-opening of cease-fire talks outside Congo. For record, Linner would like a note of this part of our conversation which I shall give him.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1861. Secret; Niact. Received at 8:10 a.m. on September 19 and repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, Paris, and Brazzaville.

120. National Security Action Memorandum No. 97 120. National Security Action Memorandum No. 971

Washington, September 19, 1961.

TO

The Secretary of State

SUBJECT

Use of U.S. Fighter Aircraft in the Congo

The President at 4 p.m. on September 19 authorized the dispatch of U.S. fighter aircraft with the necessary logistical support to the Congo, on a contingency basis. This authorization would become effective only if no fighter aircraft of other nations were made available to the United Nations,2 and the President specifically directed that the mission of U.S. fighter aircraft would be to support and defend U.S. and U.N. transports or other U.N. forces that might come under air attack. There will be no effort to seek out and destroy Fouga Magister jets not attacking U.S. or U.N. forces without further authority from the President.

In the President's view it is of high importance that U.S. fighter aircraft be understood to intervene only in defense of beleaguered U.N. forces. He is not prepared to authorize their use at this time in offensive activities against Katangan forces.

McGeorge Bundy

1 Source: Department of State, NSAM Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 97. Secret. A copy was sent to the Secretary of Defense. A draft with Bundy's handwritten revisions is filed with a September 19 memorandum to Wallner in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Additional documentation concerning its background is filed with a September 26 memorandum by Brubeck in Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, Presidential Record of Report on the Congo.

2 Telegram 823 from USUN, September 19, reported that Bunche had stated that India was going to make jet aircraft available and that the United Nations had decided to request U.S. jet fighters only if it was unable to obtain them from India or Ethiopia. (Ibid., Central Files, 770G.00/9–1961)

121. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 121. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, September 20, 1961, 9:56 p.m.

461. US urging UN to issue statement interpreting Katanga cease-fire2 as measure to prevent further fighting and loss of life and permit UN continue by peaceful means carry out mandate Security Council and General Assembly Resolutions, in particular preservation territorial integrity Congo.

Suggest you make urgent approach to Adoula stating US will urge UN continue vigorous efforts to fulfill mandate under which it so far operated. US Government considers imperative that UN military posture in Congo be strengthened so that without danger of new outbreak armed resistance against UN it obtain adequate power to achieve its objectives in Congo by peaceful means. You should reassure Adoula that UN will have fullest US support in pursuing policy under which it operated since February. Also inform him we believe pressure of strengthened UN presence and other political pressures to which Katanga will be exposed will result in forcing Tshombe to reintegrate Katanga into the Congo on reasonable basis not full autonomy.

Fully realize Adoula rejected cease-fire and great pressure under which he bound to be in view unfortunate Katanga developments and deeply felt Congolese insistence upon ending secession. Our purposes of course must be to strengthen Adoula against Gizengist group and believe strengthening UN presence best means. Realize Adoula may have to permit ANC let off steam but view limited capabilities ANC this unlikely result civil war for considerable time pending which combined pressure from UN and fear ANC attack should hopefully move Tshombe toward conciliatory position. By then, hope Adoula would be able take constructive attitude which would facilitate reintegration without destroying political contribution which Katanga could make Congo.3

Bowles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2061. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Eisenberg, cleared by Vance, and approved by Cleveland. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, Paris, and Salisbury.

2 A provisional cease-fire agreement was signed on September 20 at Ndola by Khiari and Tshombe. For text, see U.N. doc. S/4940/Add.7; also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, p. 835.

3 Gullion reported in telegram 789, September 22, that he had read this message to Adoula almost verbatim, and that Adoula was highly appreciative and generally in agreement. Gullion commented that the Adoula government seemed to think the United States "one of its few friends." He thought it was important to give them encouragement but not to arouse "excessive expectations," and he recommended that the Department think in concrete terms of the political and economic pressures that might be applied to Tshombe. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2261)

122. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Ball) to President Kennedy 122. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Ball) to President Kennedy1

Washington, September 23, 1961.

SUBJECT

US Policy Toward the Congo-Katanga Problem

We have been carefully rethinking the policy which the US should pursue with regard to the Congo. Our analysis and conclusions are as follows:

1. A UN Capitulation, Giving Katanga Independence or Effective Autonomy, Would Be a Serious Setback for US Policy.

A. Adoula cannot accept an independent Katanga.

Adoula's government stands for reunification of the country. All Congolese leaders outside the Tshombe group are agreed on this policy. They feel it is a necessary precondition to the political and economic viability of the Congo.

Adoula recognizes the need for moderation. He would like to end Katangan secession with UN help and through negotiations. The Gizengists, who call themselves the nationalists, have sought to pre-empt the popular position of being the champions of national unity. As extremists they would prefer to crush the Katanga in a civil war.

If the UN fails to end the Katanga secession, it will mean the failure of Adoula's policy of moderation. In order to survive, he will be forced to precipitate a civil war.

B. In the long run an independent Katanga cannot maintain itself as an effective political unit.

It can perhaps maintain itself for a while but only as a kind of enclave of colonialism, dominated and financed by white elements and particularly by big Belgian banking and mining interests.

Nor can the Congo remain non-Communist unless Katanga becomes again an integrated part. In the short run the necessities of a civil war with Gizenga would force out the moderate elements and provide the opportunity for Soviet and other Bloc interference leading to an effective Gizenga takeover. In the longer run a Congo deprived of the economic resources of Katanga would be doomed to permanent poverty.

C. UN capitulation would shatter Afro-Asian faith in the UN.

The Bloc is already adroitly exploiting the contention that the UN is not effective in dealing with white colonial interests, such as those which dominate Tshombe. It is using British, French and Belgian criticism of the UN Katangan venture as demonstrating the hypocritical nature of the Western position. With our support the UN can and must show that we mean what we say where colonial interests are involved.

2. If We Take the Necessary Measures There Is Strong Reason To Hope That Adoula and Tshombe Can Be Persuaded To Reach a Satisfactory Solution for the Integration of Katanga.

Before the September 13 fighting, progress was being made toward an Adoula–Tshombe deal. Tshombe had acquiesced in the UN's intensified drive, started August 28, to remove foreign military officers and political advisers. His deputies and senators were participating in the Léopoldville parliament meeting on a new constitution. Tshombe had several times appeared on the verge of meeting with Adoula for a practical discussion of their differences.

The failure of the inadequately prepared UN military move has set back the progress toward negotiations. We must now take prompt measures to restore and improve the conditions in which negotiation becomes not only possible but inevitable.

3. What Are the Conditions Essential To Bring About Negotiations Between Adoula and Tshombe?

A. Tshombe is the basic problem.

So long as he feels in control of the military situation in the Katanga, and so long as he remains under the effective direction of his Belgian backers and advisers, Tshombe will be unwilling to negotiate for anything but the partition of the Congo. Our policy must therefore be directed most immediately to destroying Tshombe's assurance in his own military supremacy, and to removing, or at least greatly weakening, the influence of his Belgian advisers and the support he receives from foreign sources.

We must immediately build up UN fighting power to the point where Tshombe will realize he cannot win. Tshombe and his officers and advisers believe they have won a victory over UN forces. By concentrating substantial elements of military strength (including primarily air striking power and transport) in Léopoldville and elsewhere in the Congo outside Katanga, we can impress Tshombe with the futility of attempting to hold out militarily. If the UN makes a sufficient show of strength, it should not find it necessary to employ it.

At the same time we must strike at those essential elements of Tshombe's strength which derive from foreign money and influence. While Tshombe's policy has some popular support among his own Lunda tribe in the southern Katanga (the only area he controls), his essential strength is founded on the fact that his movement is organized, financed and exploited by the white population and Belgian mining interests which wish to maintain an essentially colonial control in the Katanga. In addition he has received significant support—material and diplomatic—from Rhodesian interests, and particularly from Sir Roy Welensky, the white supremacy Prime Minister of the Rhodesian Federation.

We can reduce these external sources of support by intensified diplomatic efforts. We must in particular make clear to the Belgian Government that peaceful reintegration of Katanga is in its own best interests, and we must seek to enlist Belgian Government support in persuading Tshombe to get rid of his white officers and advisers and to negotiate on a reasonable basis. Before the recent UN miscalculation, Belgian Prime Minister Lefevre and Foreign Minister Spaak had recognized the importance of disengaging Belgium from shortsighted colonial nostalgia in the Katanga as the only way to maintain Belgium's long-range interests in the whole Congo.

Sir Roy Welensky has his own difficulties in the Rhodesian Federation and there is recent evidence that he is worried about our reaction to his activities there. We may therefore be able to deflect his interest from Katanga or at least moderate his support for Katanga separatism.

The British Government has always believed in the desirability of integrating Katanga in an independent Congo. British popular reaction to the recent UN military move was almost violently adverse. However, with the fighting stopped, the Macmillan Government should be able to free itself from the pressures of City and Conservative groups in the UK and the Rhodesias and join with us in trying to bring about a peaceful reunification of the Congo.

B. Adoula is basically prepared to negotiate.

Adoula favors a practical solution provided it does not mean a recognition of Katangan independence. Furthermore he is friendly to the United States, respects our judgment, and has depended on our support.

By marshaling an adequate show of UN military strength, we should be able to demonstrate to Adoula that he is receiving the support necessary to enable him to take a moderate line. This means that he should be prepared to offer Tshombe some measure of autonomy within the framework of a central government structure in which Katangan interests are adequately represented.

4. The United States Should Not Try To Dictate the Terms of a Settlement.

In seeking to establish the conditions essential to a negotiation between Adoula and Tshombe, we must be careful to avoid any effort to dictate the precise form of a Congo-Katanga constitutional deal. What is wrong with the present constitution of the Congo is that it was written by white men and not negotiated among the Congolese themselves to reflect their own conception of their interests. Once we create the conditions for negotiation we must then rely upon the process of "Bantu palaver" to settle the constitutional details.

Almost all the Congolese leaders, including most of those who closely supported Gizenga, favor modifying the unitary form of government inherited from the Belgians. All wish to accord a considerable measure of local autonomy to the main tribal areas. Accordingly, a consensus which would include Tshombe has from the beginning been feasible.

Given the frame of mind now prevailing in both Congolese groupings, the US could not advocate any particular solution of the constitutional issue without antagonizing one or both sides and depriving us of the possibility of influencing them. The constructive approach would seem to be the pragmatic one: to bring about discussions between Congo and Katanga on specific questions, such as trade, revenue and expenditure sharing, currency, political cooperation, military cooperation and finally organizational questions.

5. The Extent of the Needed UN Military Commitment.

The recent UN intervention failed because it was inadequately prepared. The United Nations had at its command insufficient forces. It could not even deal with the single fighter plane which played a decisive role in immobilizing UN ground forces.

The basic assumption of this paper is that, if the UN with our help concentrates adequate elements of military strength in Léopoldville and in the Congo outside Katanga, it can make such a show of overwhelming strength as to persuade Tshombe without the need to employ that strength for anything other than brief local actions.

Although the evidence suggests otherwise, there is always the possibility that this assumption may be disproved. If this should occur we would face a new set of facts. We are not now recommending that the UN undertake protracted military operations in the Katanga. We can only decide what we should do when we are able to appraise the situation in the light of the facts that then appear. This includes not only the situation in the UN but the situation in Léopoldville.

Our inability to predict future developments precisely should not, however, keep us from doing what needs to be done now.

George W. Ball

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Secret. The Department of State copy of this memorandum indicates Ball was the drafter. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2361) A covering memorandum of the same date from Ball to the President states that this memorandum represented the Department of State view of the proper U.S. position in the Katanga crisis. For Ball's recollection of the Congo problem, see The Past Has Another Pattern: Memoirs, pp. 222–259.

123. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate in Elisabethville 123. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate in Elisabethville1

Washington, September 23, 1961, 8:51 p.m.

284. Salisbury unnumbered September 22.2 In reply to message from Tshombe addressed to President Kennedy transmitted through Salisbury ConGen you should deliver to Tshombe following message.

"US Govt welcomes end hostilities in Katanga and hopes that this current cease fire can lead to a resumption of efforts by all Congolese leaders with help of UN leading to peaceful reintegration of Katanga with the rest of the Congo. The US Govt will continue to offer all appropriate support to the UN for these purposes. You are well aware that the Govts of Belgium and UK, like US and most other members of UN, favor peaceful reintegration of Katanga into Congo. To work out specific arrangements under which this will be done is of course strictly internal matter for Congolese people and its elected representatives. Nevertheless, we would like to suggest strongly that you resume discussions with Léopoldville without delay in order to speed up the restoration territorial integrity of the Congo. In this manner, we believe you will contribute most effectively to return of peace and order all over country."

When presenting this message you should orally remind Tshombe our view that separation of Katanga from Congo is not in interest of people of Katanga nor does it have as a practical matter any hope of success. No single government today or in past has recognized secession of Katanga and it is also totally unacceptable to rest of Congolese people.

Our advice at all times has been and remains Tshombe should talk with Léopoldville in a reasonable frame of mind and avoid accepting advice from persons who want to press him into extreme positions without regard to his best interests.

In past we had advised Tshombe to take part in formation of new Congo Govt. This would have permitted him to exercise great influence and would have created basis on which future Constitution of Congo could have been worked out in atmosphere of friendship rather than under impact of recent military encounters.

We cannot appropriately comment on form of constitution of other nations but we note that virtually all Congolese leaders favor greater autonomy for individual parts of Congo than provided under fundamental law of 1960. Believe solution should take account legitimate interests of all Congolese and permit creation of central government on workable basis.

Regarding Kimba request for visa to attend UNGA suggest you tell Tshombe this visit highly inopportune at present since most of other nations currently reacting unfavorably to Katanga armed resistance to UN. Kimba presence New York now would only tend to exacerbate Katanga relations with GOC and other Africans. Once Tshombe has taken steps along lines suggested above Kimba visit could be reviewed.

We remain willing consider what sympathetic helpful measures we could take once Tshombe has given clear proof of constructive approach to problems faced.

In your discretion also inform Tshombe of hope of Governor Williams that Tshombe will regard US Consul Elisabethville as informal friendly advisor and effective channel communications with USG.

For Léopoldville: You should convey foregoing to Linner and Adoula and other members GOC your discretion, assuring them of our intention be helpful in attaining peaceful reintegration Katanga. What Dept has in mind in next to last paragraph above is intention urge GOC be conciliatory. No distribution Tshombe telegram to Senators or Representatives will be made as considered inappropriate, nor is publicity envisaged for time being.

Bowles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2261. Confidential. Drafted by Vance and Eisenberg, cleared in substance by Rostow and Deputy Director of the Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs William B. Buffum, and approved by Williams. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to USUN, Salisbury, London, and Brussels.

2 Reference is to telegram 235 from Salisbury, which transmitted a message from Tshombe to Kennedy. The message argued that the United Nations had no mandate for its "aggression" in Katanga, requested Kennedy's intervention to stop the reinforcement of U.N. troops in Katanga, and declared that "on the basis of the universally recognized right to self-determination" Katanga would negotiate with the Léopoldville authorities "for establishing a Katangan state in its relationship with the Congo." (Ibid.) The September 23 memorandum from Ball to Kennedy (see the source note, Document 122) states that, since Tshombe was only a regional leader without legitimacy, the Department took for granted that Kennedy should not reply to his letter but was instructing Canup to press him toward negotiations with Adoula.

124. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 124. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, September 26, 1961, 8:51 p.m.

751. Léopoldville pass Elisabethville. Deptcirtel 580.2 Assistant Secretary Williams presented following points on Congo to Hood, British DCM here, September 25:3

1. Emphasized danger for Western position Congo if Adoula forced yield to extremists Léopoldville on ways means effecting reintegration Katanga or if Adoula forced out of power by Gizengists as result his failure effect reintegration on basis acceptable to majority GOC. Stressed importance Adoula being able continue as Prime Minister and emerge as man whose policy backing UN achieved unity Congo.

2. Urged UK to exert all possible pressure Tshombe to induce him begin constructive talks with Léopoldville government and dismiss mercenaries. Would be helpful if Federation Government could take similar action.

3. Urged UK exercise all possible influence on Federation Government induce latter prevent supply arms and other support Katanga and discourage entry mercenaries Katanga forces, which, policy questions aside, would be in violation UN resolutions.

Hood indicated HMG agreed on desirability Congo unity and support for Adoula government and on point 3 state UK and Federation policy would oppose personnel or materiel support for Tshombe. Today UK EmbOff told Department they just informed by Foreign Office it has concluded unity Congo more imperative than ever if possible intervention on part Casablanca and Bloc powers to be precluded. HMG does not believe Congo Army has capability achieve unification however and UN weakened by recent losses manpower and prestige would be seriously handicapped attempt try achieve this. UK therefore considers imperative stimulate Tshombe-GOC dialogue soonest and subject to any comments Federation Government might have, will work on Tshombe to this end and accord suitable publicity its efforts this direction. UK would hope thereby strengthen Adoula's hand and alleviate some of criticism it has attracted from Congolese and others who believed UK supporting Katanga against UN.

UK also studying possibility attempt elicit similar action from Federation Government, Belgian Government and prominent moderate African states, possibly Tunisia and Nigeria, all whom may have some influence Tshombe, as well as Union Miniere and British companies with Katanga interests. Instructions have been transmitted UK HICOM Salisbury to make appropriate demarche to Welensky following which demarches to be made Elisabethville and Brussels.

In response question, UK EmbOff stated Federation Government would not be given veto over proposed policy but since it touched on important area for Federation Welensky would be consulted.

In response further question EmbOff said HMG had not yet expressed views on augmentation fighting capabilities UN force, but reiterated UN influence on negotiations Tshombe-GOC unlikely be very great view rancor created between Tshombe and UN by recent events.

Drawing on reftel action addressees should ask host governments adopt lines and courses action stressed in Williams approach to UK without however referring to UK EmbOff information above, which he asked be held within USG until Federation Government views obtained. Paris and Brussels should make first two points, Salisbury all three, perhaps with expression our gratification Welensky role in inducing Tshombe modify his original cease fire conditions. Rhodesian representative Washington not present either meeting. Addressees should also urge host governments make public statement supporting both reintegration Katanga and departure mercenaries. Emphasize our view that while considerable pressure will be needed to induce Tshombe to approach talks with Léopoldville on any basis which would be politically acceptable to Adoula, we intend also urging on Adoula need for conciliatory attitude.

Bowles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2661. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Woodruff; cleared by Blue, Buffum, and Wallner; and approved by Ferguson. Also sent to Paris and Salisbury and repeated to USUN for Secretary Rusk, Léopoldville, and London.

2 Circular telegram 580, September 26, was sent to 24 missions, most of them in Africa. It set forth U.S. views on the Congo situation. (Ibid.)

3 A memorandum of the conversation is ibid., 770G.00/ 9–2561.

125. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 125. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, September 27, 1961, 10:14 p.m.

767. References: (a) Brussels 453,2 480,3 562.4 (b) Deptels to Brussels 647,5 660.6 We appreciate your assessment of Belgian reaction to recent events in Congo. This reaction must certainly be countered, and you should in your discretion do everything possible to this end with GOB (in particular Spaak), with business and right-wing political elements which have all along supported Katanga separatism, and with opinion leaders and general public.

Part II of this cable7 contains guidance for discussion with Spaak and GOB, who we recognize share our basic objectives in Congo, though subject to political pressure and emotional reactions.

In addition these official contacts, we trust you will present forcefully to key Union Miniere and Societe Generale officials such as Sengier and Robiliart our basic views on Congo, making it particularly clear we do not accept talk of U.S. responsibility for recent trouble in Katanga, which stems in fact from Katanga extremists and from those Belgian interests which have short-sightedly given these extremists aid and comfort.

In public contacts you should make every effort to convey correct picture that US efforts have been designed build up stable and moderate Congo leadership which is only way safeguard long-term interests Belgium and West; sabotage of these efforts by Katanga extremists and their external supporters is principal cause of present trouble.

Guidance follows separately for your use with Spaak.

Bowles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2361. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Miller and Woodruff; cleared by Ferguson, Vance, Wallner, and Tyler; and approved by Ball.

2 See footnote 1, Document 111.

3 Telegram 480, September 18, commented on reports of rising anti-American sentiment in Belgium in connection with U.S. support for the United Nations in the Congo. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–1861)

4 Telegram 562, September 23, reported a brief discussion of the Congo between MacArthur and Spaak, who said he was resisting pressure to make a statement blaming the United Nations for the recent Katanga situation but that he "could not exaggerate seriousness with which GOB viewed recent developments in Katanga and prospects for the future." (Ibid., 770G.00/9–2361)

5  Document 111.

6 Telegram 660, September 16, provided further detail concerning the September 15 conversation between Rusk and Scheyven, summarized in telegram 647, and requested the Embassy's comments on a statement made at the meeting by Belgian Embassy Counselor Jean de Bassompierre that there was a new wave of anti-Americanism and neutralism in Belgium. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9– 1661)

7 The telegram was originally drafted in two parts, but Part II was sent separately as telegram 768 to Brussels, September 27, repeated to Léopoldville, London, Paris, and USUN. (Ibid., 770G.00/9–2761)

126. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 126. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, September 28, 1961, 2 p.m.

379. As instructed in Deptel 284,2 I called upon Tshombe this morning and, in presence of Vice President Kibwe, gave him letter from myself consisting of text quoted as paragraph two of Deptel 284. I also gave him unofficial French translation of letter and explained that text, in reply to his telegram to President, originated with Department and not with President's office.

Tshombe and Kibwe read text and translation with greatest consternation and dismay, which increased visibly as I presented passages of oral argument. At end of my discussion Tshombe shocked and furious found few words. He asked me what I expected him to reply to government which failed to include in its message regret for loss of life in Katanga and appeared to blame Katanga for resisting UN aggression. Seizing upon passage wherein USG pledges continued support to UN effort, Tshombe lashed out with accusation that USG planned and executed UN military moves in Katanga and this explained vigor of UN aggression. He brushed aside my denial of this. He pointed out that USG is doing this to very small country but one which will fight to death. Tshombe implied that outrageous attitude of USG found parallel only in my own and offered opinion that my imminent departure was only suitable eventuality as far as I am concerned. He refused to discuss matter further with me, dismissed me summarily, but said he willing to meet my successor.

Tshombe obviously shocked and grieved by this approach but gave no indication of final effect which it will have on his thinking.

Canup

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2861. Confidential; Niact. Also sent to Léopoldville and Brussels and repeated to USUN, Paris, London, and Salisbury.

2  Document 123.

127. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 127. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, September 29, 1961, 8:12 p.m.

539. Embtel 823.2 Department agrees with Embassy views expressed paras 5 and 6 section 2 reftel3 and hopes negotiations proposed agreement can start soonest. Re Embtel 8144 official French translation should have reached Léopoldville September 26.

Objections expressed by Khiari on bilateral approach are understandable. Dept also has been concerned over possible political consequences using this approach.

Dept continues favor channeling aid to Congo through UN in order bolster UNOC and prevent subversive operations under guise aid programs. However must recognize UN Secretariat will eventually reduce its role in Congo aid program and has specifically suggested US negotiate bilateral PL 480 agreement to avoid becoming involved directly in such agreement on behalf of Congo. Formula worked out for 90% local currency proceeds to be used by UN financed projects in Congo was specifically designed to serve as possible pattern to permit UN control of bilateral aid programs.

Appropriate publicity should bring out UN role and sponsorship.

At present UN is administering Congo aid as far as it receives contributions in UN Congo Fund and coordinating foreign aid as far as bilateral programs exist (e.g. US scholarship and educational programs) approved by UN.

If UN/HQ should at some future date decide no longer desirable for UN to administer and coordinate aid, possible that UNOC Léopoldville might assume coordination all direct (bilateral) aid which is expected replace present UN Congo Fund. If this not attainable presence UN advisers in key positions in GOC, particularly UN expert as head of Monetary Council, might permit establishment satisfactory machinery to coordinate and control foreign aid to Congo. This could be done by establishing committee preferably responsible directly to Prime Minister with powers to coordinate and control all foreign aid to Congo. Committee should be headed by UN or Western expert cooperating closely Monetary Council as well as body that might be created administer external budget aid.

Therefore (1) US aid to continue be given through UN channel (with PL 480 somewhat exceptional arrangements as now envisaged) as long as UN willing play active role administering Congo aid funds and does so in way satisfactory to US; (2) in order to prepare, in advance of eventual phasing out direct UN role in Congo aid, for satisfactory coordination aid to Congo under as strong UN or Western influence as obtainable and to assure increasing participation by Congolese personnel in UN aid activities, US to encourage creation machinery within GOC under control Prime Minister and directed or assisted by experts from countries friendly to West but staffed mainly by Congolese which could eventually assure satisfactory coordination foreign aid granted to Congo directly by various aid givers. This body would take charge of coordination when UN moves toward phasing out coordination aid to Congo; IMF to be requested (by UN, GOC with US support) play active though advisory role in working out and facilitating implementation program for financing aid needs Congo as long as stabilization program may be necessary, and IBRD for longer range economic development needs.

Would appreciate Embassy's views best way to implement policy outlined preceding paragraph. Suggest you discuss also with UNOC.

Bowles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.70G41/9–2961. Confidential. Drafted by Robert C. Huffman of the Office of Central African Affairs and by Eisenberg; cleared by Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs Edwin M. Martin, Deputy Director of the Office of International Administration Frank K. Hefner, Buffum, and with the ICA; and approved by Ball. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, and Paris.

2 In telegram 823, September 25, Gullion reported a conversation the previous day with Khiary, who had expressed disapproval of a proposed U.S.-Congo agreement to extend P.L. 480 assistance to the Congo on the ground that it would set a precedent for bilateral aid agreements and would open the way for Soviet bloc offers of bilateral aid. Gullion pointed out to Khiary that the form of the proposed agreement had been suggested by U.N. headquarters. (Ibid., 611.70G41/9–2561)

3 These paragraphs commented that Gullion thought a bilateral agreement would bolster the Adoula government and that he questioned whether the Adoula government would refrain from entering into bilateral aid agreements even if the United States adhered to the multilateral formula as Khiary proposed.

4 Dated September 23. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.70G41/9–2361)

128. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State 128. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State1

Brussels, September 30, 1961, 7 p.m.

630. Paris pass USRO. Embassy telegram 597.2 Congo. Believe Department telegrams 767,3 7684 and 7695 largely overtaken by time and events insofar as approach to Spaak is concerned. As reported in Embassy telegrams 562,6 5937 and 597 Spaak has been taking very constructive and helpful position re Congo and Katanga despite his private outburst to us September 14 against what he considered UN duplicity. If UN and US act in way that Belgians believe shows understanding of Belgium's legitimate interests and position in Congo, we think there is no serious problem of anti-Americanism insofar as Spaak and GOB are concerned because while bitter about UN action, Spaak continues convinced that Belgium's interest in Congo can only be preserved through reintegration of Katanga and continued presence of UN. He also agrees every appropriate and feasible step must be taken to try to strengthen Adoula's hand to prevent Gizengist takeover and to maximize chances of peaceful reintegration of Katanga. In this connection he has been pressing Union Miniere and Societe Generale vigorously to use their influence with Tshombe for peaceful reintegration of Katanga. To summarize Spaak agrees generally with points and argumentation in Department telegram 768 except third paragraph dealt with below.

In addition to series of talks on Congo that Ambassador has had with Spaak and other cabinet ministers and top officials and businessmen, Embassy has at all levels been endeavoring to educate Belgians. In addition to off-record talks with Libre Belgique and other press, Ambassador also has personally had series conversations with Robiliart and Union Miniere and Societe Generale leaders who agree with our view although Robiliart admits privately that some of their people in Katanga do not always agree with Union Miniere Brussels and are not fully controllable. This seems borne out by Elisabethville's 329,8 which reports that Van Weyenbergh showed open contempt for views of Robiliart and Union Miniere officials in Brussels, saying "Union Miniere here." We are continuing our efforts but Union Miniere is not monolithic organization controlled in Brussels and key to Union Miniere cooperation lies also in Katanga not just here. However, Van Weyenbergh (whose comments Ambassador passed on to Robiliart without divulging source) has been recalled to Brussels and Ambassador has been shown letter and telegrams (by Robiliart) dated September 27 and 29 to Van Weyenbergh's temporary successor Wallen who was sent from Brussels instructing latter use all influence with Tshombe to get him meet with Adoula and reintegrate Katanga into Congo.

Re third paragraph Department telegram 768 we believe argumentation is most dubious and to use it would be counter-productive. To try to argue fighting in Katanga was in effect started not by UN use of force to expel mercenaries and to arrest ministers of Katanga Government (latter GOB thinks was not in UN mandate), but by Katangans because they resisted use of force by UN "apparently with assistance of Belgian nationals" would be construed as an attempt on our part to pervert the true facts, would be deeply resented and would simply add to anti-American sentiment here since Belgians would consider it (A) not in keeping with facts, and (B) an attempt by US to saddle Belgium with responsibility for present Katanga strife. In this connection, it is as well known in Brussels, London and elsewhere as it is in Elisabethville and Léopoldville (Léopoldville's 507) that in a number of instances, Katangan forces resisted courageously without Belgian or other white mercenaries. Furthermore, on basis of reports from Belgian, British and other sources it also generally believed here that in addition to Belgian mercenaries there are substantial number of French, South Africans and Rhodesians. Belgians believe press reports from American and other correspondents that French officer mercenaries with Indochina and Algeria experience among most fanatical and effective in resisting UN and that Belgian mercenaries are actually a minority of total.

We believe that key to future Belgian sentiment re both US and UN will depend primarily on outcome of Katanga crisis and on US and UN attitude towards Belgium. If Congo situation deteriorates to point where Belgium's legitimate economic interests are lost there will inevitably be strong reaction, not only against us for supporting UN, but also against Lefevre and Spaak for same reason. No argumentation will lessen that sentiment with a certain sector of opinion here and we will have to ride it out. If in Belgian eyes it appears UN is trying to shift responsibility for present grave situation in Katanga from shoulders of its own officials, notably O'Brien, to the shoulders of GOB and Belgian people by blaming Belgian mercenaries for Katanga upheaval and failure of UN action, there will be strong and bitter reaction against UN. If they believe we are supporting UN campaign to shift blame on to Belgium, result will of course be increase in anti-American sentiment. In other words, development of Belgian sentiment adverse to Belgian-American relations and our interests in Congo and NATO will not depend on arguments which at this juncture are put forward as to responsibility of Katanga imbroglio, but in final analysis on what develops in Congo and on what we do and say to show understanding of and support for legitimate Belgian economic interests there. In this connection, efforts of Ambassador Gullion and Embassy Léopoldville to make both UN and GOB clearly differentiate between helpful and fully cooperative attitude of GOB and nefarious activities of Belgian, French, South African and other ultras are greatly appreciated and should prove most helpful.

MacArthur

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–3061. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to USUN, London, Paris, Léopoldville, and Elisabethville.

2 Telegram 597, September 28, stated that, although Spaak was initially enraged at what he considered U.N. duplicity, his view of the Congo situation was much the same as the U.S. view. He shared the same basic objective of reintegrating Katanga into the Congo and had an open mind as to tactics to bring Tshombe back into the fold. (Ibid., 770G.00/9–2861)

3 Document 125.

4 See footnote 6, Document 125.

5 Sent to Léopoldville as telegram 517, September 27. It suggested that Gullion point out to the Congolese Government the desirability of containing the growth of anti-Belgian sentiment. (Department of State, Central Files, 770.G.00/9–2761)

6 See footnote 3, Document 125.

7 Telegram 593, September 27, reported that, in a September 27 conversation, Spaak expressed deep concern about the Congo situation. He had sent Tshombe several messages in the last few days urging him to have constructive talks with the Léopoldville government. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2761)

8 Telegram 329 from Elisabethville, September 8, reported a conversation with the head of Union Miniere operations in Katanga. (Ibid., 325.70G/9–861)

129. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 129. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, October 13, 1961, 4:57 p.m.

624. Léopoldville pass Elisabethville. Following based on uncleared memo conversation:2

Congo FonMin Bomboko called on Secretary October 10, stated GOC has two basic problems, Gizengists and Katanga. Re Gizengists, Bomboko stated parliamentary approval of present government with moderates in control still viewed by Gizengists as defeat. Gizenga came to Léopoldville only under parliamentary pressure and to avoid complete isolation. His group continues efforts attempt increase their influence in GOC but so far moderate group had been successful inhibiting Gizenga and Gbenye. Gbenye for example had not been successful setting up his own Surete apparatus. Problem bloc and Casablanca group diplomatic reps largely resolved.

Re Lundula, Bomboko stated he would be called to Léopoldville in near future and be given opportunity regulate his status. If he refuses, Gizengist parliamentarians will be held responsible for making him behave.

Bomboko said he disturbed certain elements US press and opinion appear view GOC as pro-communist and dominated by Gizengists, however Léopoldville moderate group thought best prepare ground thoroughly and move against Gizengists only after their actions known and therefore more vulnerable to counter-action, rather than to take counter-measures only against Gizengist intentions.

Bomboko said moderate group must take certain precautions however, e.g. physical protection for leaders, creation investigative service for PriMin permitting him keep track activities his ministers, creation counter-intelligence unit in FonOff to follow activities foreign missions, creation military intelligence unit and effective loyal commando force for Mobutu, positive action in field of press, youth, radio, dissemination of tracts and establishment Congo embassies, key capitals, with Washington embassy to be opened in near future.3

Re Katanga, Bomboko said there is considerable bitterness against Tshombe on part other Congolese, and most feel Tshombe has been given many opportunities cooperate. However Congo cannot afford civil war and Léopoldville group recognizes need make certain changes in constitution. Bomboko aware cooperation Tshombe with GOC would strengthen moderate position generally and in parliament and Tshombe intransigence provides ammunition for Gizengists.

Now Tshombe feels he has won victory and will be more difficult deal with. Bomboko inquired what means open to US to induce UN take prompt effective action Katanga to prevent civil war. Secretary stated we shared Bomboko views Katanga problem and asked Bomboko what in his view US might do in this regard.

Bomboko replied difficult for him answer since he not familiar with means open to US to influence UN, however pointed out that in past UN inaction had permitted military build-up Katanga and installation bloc diplomats Stanleyville, even though UN controlled airfields and had troops both places. At same time UN had prevented GOC from utilizing bilateral channels. Bomboko stated now GOC legitimately installed, UN would have no further excuse not make every effort neutralize regional opposition like Tshombe and Lundula, if necessary by disarming troops these factions, although he realized fighting would be involved if such move attempted in Katanga at present. In addition UN should now begin military re-training program but only for those troops loyal Kasavubu.

Secretary enquired whether Bomboko saw any possibility fruitful talks with Tshombe. Bomboko replied he had some hope, and that if Tshombe willing recognize authority Kasavubu, talks might be productive. Question whether Katanga returns to Congo not negotiable, however GOC prepared to talk about practical matters such as taxes, economic relations, transport etc.

Secretary enquired who seems have most influence Tshombe. Bomboko replied financial groups, including British, Rhodesian, and Union Miniere.

Secretary said he hoped moderate group knew they had support of USG, but that for many reasons much of this support had to be channelled through UN. As example USG support Secretary cited pressures we bringing bear on Tshombe. Bomboko pointed out his group never had any doubts re USG support. Secretary said we much interested strengthening Adoula government and hoped Léopoldville moderates would stay in close touch with Embassy Léopoldville so that we could be informed of developments and assist as appropriate. FonMin replied he had always collaborated with Embassy but on basis freedom not satellite and was persuaded US only nation really close to Congo.

Secretary closed discussion by assuring Bomboko US had no national interests Congo, does not ask Congo to join any military grouping, and hoped Congo would develop as truly independent nation.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–1361. Secret. Drafted by Woodruff, cleared by Fredericks, and approved by Vance. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, Paris, London, and Salisbury.

2 A memorandum by Vance of Rusk's conversation with Bomboko on October 10 is ibid., 770G.00/10–1061.1

3 Bomboko discussed these points in more detail in a conversation with Fredericks the same day. Lavallee's memorandum of the conversation is ibid.

130. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 130. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, October 13, 1961, 5 p.m.

975. Department telegrams 505,2 601,3 Elisabethville's 218.4 While trying to contribute to pressure on Tshombe we are at same time constantly trying to keep Adoula in power and receptive to negotiations. These efforts are continuous and impractical to report in every detail. They are not limited to representations made by me to Adoula and Kasavubu but as best we can our influence on ONUC and foreign mission, our use of American aid, our information and intelligence efforts, our guidance to press and American visitors are well deployed to that end.

Adoula has been working under tension for months and subject to extreme pressure from extremists. Two days ago he was acutely depressed and on point of slipping leash on Congolese Army to extent of allowing it at least to cross Katanga border. Moreover he allowed himself to be worked up much more than usually by false report UN mediator Khiari had accepted Tshombe proposition that contact be made in a "foreign Embassy" in Léopoldville. Linner professed some alarm. I met Adoula on October 10 and twice on October 11. As usual took line that policy of pressure on Tshombe and strengthening UN both for negotiation and for any eventuality was best hope provided it was matched by reasonableness on part GOC. Said I thought strong medicine administered Tshombe was beginning to have some effect and recalled efforts made not only by ourselves in Katanga, in UN, and world-wide, but abroad activities of Belgians, British and others who might be expected have influence on Tshombe. Alerted Adoula on basis observations our trip to Stanleyville and Coquilhatville of latest machinations Lumumbist extreme faction together with speculation on Gizenga role. Adoula needs no lesson on these dangers but I said longer negotiations deferred more they would fester.

Then used letter Tshombe had sent our Consul Elisabethville (Elisabethville telegram 406 to Department)5 in effort demonstrate former was beginning to water his wine. As possible aspects pointed out: (A) Reference to Tananarive accords which Adoula himself had earlier hinted as possible framework of agreement; (B) Readiness to meet Adoula without further reference to "neutral territory"; (C) Claim that Katangese secession was myth (Adoula snorted); (D) The "yes" to Léopoldville.

Adoula intensely interested but initially indignation Tshombe claims uppermost in his reaction. If true, said Adoula, that writ of GOC ran only in territory controlled by UN troops then Tshombe ought to strive for parliamentary solution because with UN troops withdrawn he would have majority support. He was amazed at claims Katangese Parliamentarians went to Lovanium.

In summary Adoula refused to believe that letter represented anything new. His main contention was Tshombe had repeatedly professed identical intentions but long experience had shown he had no intention of carrying them out. Adoula also believed Tshombe trying psychological warfare on Americans and fears we might fall for it (told him we aware this angle; Tshombe retains very skilled propagandists, possibly French experts ex-Algeria). Adoula said door had never been closed but Tshombe refused to cross threshold.

As further means pressure asked Adoula if he had thought of invoking any kind conciliation machinery, e.g. UN conciliation commission. Idea startled and worried him. He saw no place for arbitrament of these issues. I said for present we continued hope Congolese could find their own solution.

Denied to him (at Linner's request) that Khiara had invited Tshombe to meet Adoula "in a foreign Embassy".

Effect all above probably salutary but such arguments must be used judiciously because they could make Adoula lose some confidence in US extent he thinks we would force departure from irreducible GOC position: No meetings on "neutral ground"; no abstention of Katanga from Parliament; no impairment economic unity of country; and recognition of primacy of central government. GOC remains basically convinced (and they are not alone in that opinion) that whatever Tshombe's words and however many emissaries he sends he has no intention whatsoever of rejoining either Union or Federation. They believe he will procrastinate interminably in expectation that dissolution and civil strife will overtake rest of country (Canup inclined concur this estimate of Tshombe; also points out as long as Gizenga stays away Tshombe likely try assist efforts spread dissension).

Another danger is that Adoula, stubborn and courageous as he has been, may simply give up. Without mass or tribal support or even truly operative governmental structure he has prevailed up to now, essentially by moral ascendancy.

We have long term plans for building up Adoula and helping create governmental apparatus but immediate goal is to keep him in office. If he should fall or withdraw or be replaced my military coup we can foresee grave consequences.

Since principal interview described above visit of CODEL Gore6 has genuinely heartened both Adoula and UN. Also since dictating above have received from Linner report of imminent dispatch Tshombe emissaries which if it really materializes should buck Adoula.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–1361. Secret. Received at 2:40 p.m. on October 15 and repeated to London, Brussels, USUN, Paris, Brazzaville, and Elisabethville.

2 Telegram 505, September 26, requested the Embassy's views as to how best to persuade Adoula and key members of his government of the necessity of taking a conciliatory attitude toward Tshombe and how best to get talks going on a constructive basis between Tshombe and Léopoldville. (Ibid., 770G.00/9–2561)

3 Telegram 601, October 9, instructed Canup's successor, Lewis Hoffacker, to reply verbally to a letter from Tshombe by encouraging him to go to Léopoldville to begin negotiations with Adoula. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–861) Tshombe's letter to Hoffacker, sent on October 6, expressed willingness to negotiate a formula for a federal or confederal solution for the Congo. Hoffacker sent a translation to the Department in telegram 406 from Elisabethville, October 8. (Ibid.)

4 Telegram 218 from Elisabethville to Léopoldville, October 10 (sent to the Department as telegram 411), suggested that if the Department wished to do everything possible to bring about fruitful negotiations between Adoula and Tshombe, the U.S. position should be flexible enough to permit at least superficial involvement of the U.S., U.K., and French Consuls in the transportation and reception arrangements for Katangan emissaries to Léopoldville. This would meet Tshombe's request to the governments represented in Elisabethville to guarantee the security of such emissaries. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–1061)

5 See footnote 2 above.

6 Senators Albert Gore of Tennessee, Philip Hart of Michigan, and Maurine B. Neuberger of Oregon visited the Congo October 11–12. Reports of their visit are in Department of State, Central File 033.1100–GO.

131. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 131. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, October 16, 1961, 3 p.m.

430. Saw Tshombe for first time this morning. He greeted me by saying he knew I would understand why he could not receive me while Gurkhas occupied Consulate.2 He took initiative to express his personal affection for US and Americans, remarking that Belgians were critical of him when as child he sought American Methodist education. His feelings toward US Government were another thing, he said, particularly since US chose support recent UN military action Katanga.

Presented letter stating inter alia: 1) US confident in UN guarantee security for emissaries and 2) US like UN and GOC, not here to destroy him (Department telegram 3003 and Léopoldville telegram 2304 ). He made no comment after reading letter. I expressed pleasure his decision send emissaries tomorrow to Léopoldville. He confirmed this still his intention and did not seem disturbed Khiari obliged go to Léopoldville yesterday in advance of them.

He said he had given Khiari letter yesterday repeating Katanga position of August 28 on mercenaries. Speaking at some length on this subject, he said even if he wanted put Europeans once again at head of Katanga military units, Katanga members of forces would object since they have developed liking for prerogatives of command positions and are proud command without European assistance.

He referred to Radio Brazzaville but hinted would be wise postpone judgment until more factual information available. He gave no indication what his government intended do re Irish prisoners, who scheduled be exchanged this afternoon, or re cease-fire in general.

Tshombe confirmed he leaving for provincial tour tomorrow through Thursday, this time to regions near Rhodesian border.

He complained about "Canup refusal" of visa for his trip to Canada earlier this year. Tried convince him Canup spoke and acted for his government.

Saw O'Brien later this morning and learned from him Khiari left for Léopoldville last night to attempt dispel consternation which he confirmed did exist New York and Léopoldville on cease-fire accord.5 O'Brien deeply concerned, particularly over prisoner exchange, and said UN will of course not turn over Katangan prisoners at Manono or elsewhere if Irish not released today. I have since heard from generally reliable source that General Moke said there will be no prisoner exchange until ratification by Secretariat General.

O'Brien says emissaries not definitely named. He hopes one will be Kimba. He less enthusiastic about prospect of state secretary A. Niembo being another.

Italian Consul Natali called to say Italian medical prisoners (Consulate telegram 394)6 released 2 a.m. this morning. He expressed appreciation for US sympathy and support.

Hoffacker

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–1661. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, USUN, Paris, London, Salisbury, and Rome.

2 Reference is to a U.N. guard unit provided to the Consulate during the September 13 fighting. Prior to that, a Katangan police guard had been stationed there after a crowd attack on the Consulate on September 5. (Telegrams 310 from Elisabethville, September 5, and 615 from Léopoldville, September 13; ibid., 770G.00/9–561 and 770G.00/9–1361) Hoffacker reported in telegram 388 from Elisabethville, October 1, that although the U.N. guard was an irritant to Tshombe, it was necessary because of threats directed at the Consulate. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–161) He reported in telegram 404, October 7, that the guard had become a severe handicap to the Consulate's work; telegram 600 to Léopoldville, October 9, authorized him to request its removal. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–761)

3 Dated October 3. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–261)

4 Telegram 230 from Léopoldville to Elisabethville, October 7 (sent to the Department as telegram 933), reported that Linner had written to Tshombe on October 6 extending formal U.N. protection to him if he came to Léopoldville. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–761)

5 Khiari and Tshombe signed a protocol of agreement on October 13 implementing the September 20 cease-fire agreement; for text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 838–839.

6 Dated October 3. (Department of State, Central Files, 270G.5591/10–361)

132. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 132. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, October 21, 1961, 1:33 p.m.

954. While Department does not rule out possibility last minute change in Tshombe's position which would result in real progress towards reintegration Katanga and forestall dangers which we are facing in Congo, it appears that pressures in Léopoldville and in New York for more energetic UN action to put an end to Katanga's secession are building up dangerously. Statements made by Bomboko publicly and in discussions with US officials as well as reaction not only of Soviet but other delegates to certain provisions recent UN-Katanga agreement on cease fire arrangements lead us suspect there is substantial readiness in UN GA to favor revision of UN mandate which would require UNOC take energetic action even involving military measures against Tshombe. We obviously do not wish see such resolution come to a vote. Clearly, British, Belgians, French and number of Brazzaville powers as well as others would oppose such mandate but whatever resolution emerges discussion would certainly result in weakening perhaps gravely Western position in Léopoldville and make settlement of Katanga issue by negotiations more rather than less difficult. Moreover Western allies could be seriously split on issue.

Department's conclusion is that this is critical moment at which maximum pressure must be brought to bear on Tshombe in order make him take unequivocal measures which demonstrate his willingness bring Katanga back into Congo. So far U.S., British and Belgian Governments and Welensky have declared their support of Congo unity, refused recognize Tshombe secession and urged Tshombe negotiate. Tshombe thus exposed to political pressure which has made little dent. Time has come to attempt put bite into this pressure to make it effective before it too late.

You requested raise with Spaak this serious situation, and ask him to consider what further political steps and what effective economic and financial measures might be taken to put greater concrete pressure on Tshombe. In doing so you should indicate in connection possible economic measures we not sufficiently up to date on present status financial relationship Belgium-GOC-Katanga to suggest concrete measures; however, wonder whether GOB could prevent Tshombe from obtaining, controlling and using sizeable tax and export revenues from UMHK and other Belgian enterprises in Katanga through measures affecting tax and dividend payments of Belgian companies, Katanga export proceeds, Katanga assets in Belgium, operations parastatals, etc. in order to make revenues available to GOC rather than to Tshombe or at least to deny use these funds to Tshombe until they could be handled in accordance agreed terms reintegration Katanga into Congo. Denial of these funds to Tshombe would have political character and could logically be presented as step towards regularization GOB-GOC relations in light Loi Fondamentale and GOB recognition Adoula Govt.

You should make clear our realization if measures available to GOB they might be politically difficult implement; however, US believes extraordinary effort required if solution to be found to GOC-Katanga conflict.

Advise soonest.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–1261. Confidential. Drafted and approved by Eisenberg and cleared by Vance, Wallner, Buffum, Burdett (Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs), and in draft by Fredericks. Repeated to USUN, Léopoldville, and London.

133. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 133. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom1

Washington, October 27, 1961, 9:57 p.m.

2303. For Ambassador. Request you speak to Lord Home on following lines at earliest opportunity:

Believe US and UK are agreed on urgent necessity effecting peaceful reintegration of Katanga at earliest possible date. To this end Embassy Léopoldville will attempt persuade Adoula make every effort meet Tshombe personally, without pre-conditions on either side, and discuss specific economic and military steps toward reintegration, reserving question political and constitutional relationship. At later stage they could agree on constitutional changes they would press on Parliament as package.

In our view, most members Adoula government basically pro-Western orientation, however, this government may well fall, replaced by more radical, leftward-looking regime if their present policy does not succeed bringing Katanga back into Congo early date. In such case would face very real danger of Soviet penetration and Western interests in Katanga itself would also be in jeopardy. We moreover convinced Tshombe and Katanga have constructive economic political role play national scene. Adoula government needs conservative counter-weight Tshombe can provide and country needs public revenues provided by Katanga to achieve economic viability.

We will continue press Tshombe in direction resuming dialogue with central govt, although our influence Katanga negligible.

Purpose this approach is ask HMG assistance in bringing appropriate pressures bear on Tshombe in political and economic sphere, directly, as well as through Welensky, in order render Tshombe more amenable to meaningful negotiation with central government.

Would be most useful if management industrial enterprises Katanga clearly took position favor integration and refused support separatism. HMG might attempt persuade British business interests involved Katanga cooperate along foregoing lines. Also appreciate HMG views as to what other measures or steps United Kingdom or other govt might be effective in desired direction.

HMG could continue refrain permitting arrival in Katanga any material susceptible military use and obtain cooperation Rhodesia Fed Govt along these lines.

From detailed consultation held between our govts believe in agreement as to objective in Congo. Are concerned however period in which can influence events nearing end, and unless more successful measures devised and applied, UK and US will lose what little control we have.2

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–2761. Confidential. Drafted by Woodruff and Eisenberg; cleared in substance by Officer in Charge of UK and Ireland Affairs Joseph Sweeney and Wallner; and approved by Burdett. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, Paris, and USUN.

2 Bruce reported in telegram 1805, November 2, that he had discussed the Congo with Lord Home the previous evening. Home showed Bruce a letter from Sir Roy Welensky stating that Welensky would use his influence to try to bring Adoula and Tshombe together. Home told Bruce that he had recently spoken to British business interests in Katanga but expected little if any support from them because they feared nationalization by Tshombe. He also told Bruce that since Tshombe was going to be in Geneva, he would instruct the head of the U.K. mission there to see him and urge him to meet with Adoula. (Ibid., 770G.00/11–261)

134. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State 134. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State1

Brussels, October 31, 1961, 4 p.m.

790. Congo: Re: Department telegrams 9542 and 10203 and Embassy telegram 748.4

Although I received Department telegram 1020 shortly before I saw Spaak last evening, there was insufficient time for me to prepare text to hand him. Accordingly I spoke to him about message from Secretary and promised to send him text (which I delivered to Rothschild this morning).

Spaak said that following our meeting October 23 he had requested Foreign Office as matter of urgency to make thorough study as to financial, economic, or other measures that might be taken to bring greater pressure on Tshombe. While this study not complete, it already clear that there are serious legal as well as political difficulties involved. However, he fully agrees that maximum pressure must be exerted on Tshombe and assured me that he wishes to take all feasible steps. In addition to possible financial and economic steps Spaak has already decided to proceed with following three measures: 1. He will deny or withdraw (if physically possible) passports of all Belgian mercenaries and make public announcement of this today or tomorrow.

2. He is replacing Belgian military in Belgian Consul General in Elisabethville with civilian functionaries (Department telegram 1008 and Embassy telegram 786).5

3. He has ordered Longerstaey (Belgian representative Léopoldville) and Colonel Vandewalle (in charge Belgian Consul General Elisabethville) to return to Brussels to discuss possible measures which may be taken to bring Tshombe and Adoula together.

Spaak warned however that his relations with Tshombe were very close to breaking point and that Tshombe had recently threatened to nationalize certain Belgian industrial interests in Katanga "if hostile attitude of Spaak and GOB continues". Despite risks involved in GOB relations with Tshombe, Spaak felt above three steps would be helpful and therefore he is taking them. However, tenseness of relations with Tshombe and latter's ability to do lasting damage to legitimate Belgian interests in Katanga emphasizes difficulties and risks involving precipitous financial and economic sanctions against Tshombe.

MacArthur

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–161. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, London, Paris, and USUN.

2 Document 132.

3 Telegram 1020 to Brussels, October 29, transmitted the text of a letter from Rusk to Spaak emphasizing the importance the United States attached to the need to bring about the peaceful integration of Katanga with the rest of the Congo as soon as possible, and reiterating the U.S. request for Spaak's assistance in bringing political and economic pressures to bear on Tshombe, including convincing Belgian business interests in Katanga to cooperate in this. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–2961)

4 Telegram 748 from Brussels, October 23, reported that MacArthur had discussed telegram 954 (Document 132) with Spaak, who replied that he would give the U.S. suggestion close study but it raised serious political, legal, and practical problems. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–2361)

5 Dated October 27 and 30. (Ibid., 325.70G/10–2761 and 770G.5455/10–3061)

135. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France 135. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France1

Washington, November 3, 1961, 8:03 p.m.

2563. Following based on uncleared memcon.2

French Ambassador called on Under Secretary Ball this afternoon concerning situation in Congo. After mentioning the representations recently made by the French in Léopoldville and Elisabethville he expressed the concern of his Government about situation in Stanleyville and wondered if USG would consider an approach to UN to take action in Stanleyville. He admitted that French were not in very good position make such approach. In response Mr. Ball said we considered French demarches helpful, that we did not believe any approach to UN would be useful at this time. Mr. Ball said that by staying in Stanleyville Gizenga was weakening his position and preparing the way for his removal as Vice Premier. He also indicated that we consider Lundula reasonably loyal to the Léopoldville Government and did not take very seriously the movement of his forces southward, particularly as the UN was deployed between the two forces in the Kasai. Ambassador was also informed US had no evidence substantial buildup foreign influence in Stanleyville as yet. Mr. Ball indicated that if we could stop the provocative air raids and cut off the flow of money to Tshombe so that he would be more disposed to talk and at the same time persuade Adoula to negotiate with Tshombe, the situation might be cleared up.

Ambassador also expressed concern re Gizenga clique around Adoula. Mr. Ball stated Adoula not now in position eliminate this group and must use them to weaken Gizenga's position. Mr. Ball concluded that although there is some risk involved in Adoula's method dealing with situation Stanleyville, we believed this the best approach available to us now.

Bowles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–361. Confidential. Drafted and approved by Blue and cleared by Vance and Cleveland. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, Elisabethville, and USUN.

2 Drafted by Blue and dated November 2. (Ibid., 770G.00/11–261)

136. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate General in Geneva 136. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate General in Geneva1

Washington, November 3, 1961, 9:51 p.m.

619. For Harriman from Ball. Would appreciate your seeing Tshombe Geneva soonest and making strong presentation USG views Congo. President is concerned at lack progress peaceful reintegration Katanga and threat spread hostilities.2

As you have not of course had opportunity follow developments Congo, hope Brussels can send David McKillop3 Geneva immediately brief you and be helpful during meeting with details background.

Please make following points with Tshombe: 1. Katanga independence has no future. Separate Katanga unacceptable to all other Congolese who will not rest until it is integrated. UN, supported by entire membership, favors integration and large number of nations including US will so direct their energies in Congo.

2. Opinion Leopoldville and UNGA clearly moving in favor UN active assistance present GOC military effort reintegrate Katanga. While USG hopes for peaceful resolution Katanga-Congo differences, this movement opinion may well become irresistible soon. FYI: this over simplifies situation UN but we see real difficulty in controlling developments there unless progress made bringing Tshombe Adoula together. End FYI.

3. USG has never wished removal Katanga and Tshombe from position political influence Congo. Katanga has constructive economic and political role play; however we believe role should be national one, and if Tshombe does not seize present opportunity collaborate with Léopoldville, he may alienate Congo opinion to such degree it will no longer be possible for him to join GOC on attractive terms. If Tshombe will make genuine effort negotiate reasonably USG will endeavor facilitate rapprochement at Léopoldville.

4. Tshombe should not be misled by isolated expressions opinion in US favoring Katanga. Present US policy Congo approved by President.

5. Urge Tshombe send message Adoula offering come Leopold-ville immediately order explore differences with Adoula, expressing assumption both sides will cease hostilities during negotiation. Preconditions should be avoided by both sides. UN will guarantee security.

You may also draw on British demarche to Tshombe sent you separately.4

You should make every effort seek avoid any publicity regarding your meeting with Tshombe, but if it unavoidable state sole purpose is to urge Tshombe enter into negotiations for peaceful reintegration Katanga. Urge Tshombe keep meeting confidential pointing out effective negotiations cannot occur in press.

For Brussels: Hope McKillop can proceed first available plane, after telephonic coordination with ConGen. Travel orders follow.

For Léopoldville: When meeting takes place you should inform Adoula Harriman has seen Tshombe and explain reason for and substance of approach.

With respect problem civil war and need Adoula be statesmanlike re negotiations, we fully aware difficulties (your 1114)5 presenting Adoula lines suggested Deptel 7346 on these two subjects in present highly charged atmosphere Léopoldville. However see no alternative to all out attempt convince Adoula along those lines.

More GOC attempts pursue military solution, more difficult it becomes seek peaceful means resolve Katanga impasse and if Mobutu attempts penetrate too far in direction hard core Tshombe area he clearly risks serious defeat, humiliation GOC and fall of moderate leadership. As long as action limited to permitting Léopoldville CNA blow off steam and as long as it permits Adoula and Mobutu pre-empt role champions Congo unity at expense Gizenga–Lundula, current action has some merit. These advantages clearly eliminated however if Mobutu's troops badly defeated as they almost certainly will be if attempt penetrate South Katanga without outside assistance.

Other addressees except Geneva should inform in confidence new UN SYG or Bunche as available and respective FonOffs this approach being made and purpose thereof.

Bowles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–361. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Vance and Woodruff; cleared in substance by Wallner, Burdett, Williams, and Ball; and approved by Vance. Also sent to Brussels and repeated to USUN, London, Paris, and Léopoldville. Ambassador at Large Harriman was in Geneva attending the Conference on Laos.

2 In a telephone conversation between the President and Ball that afternoon, Kennedy suggested that Harriman might see Tshombe. Notes of the conversation record Kennedy's remarks in part as follows: "This thing about his prestige does not matter. We should explain our concern that it is necessary he and Adoula work something out." Ball replied that he was not averse to this. Kennedy had raised the subject in a conversation with Ball on October 31, but Ball had told him the general feeling was that a high-level approach would "just inflate Tshombe's ego and make him more difficult to deal with." (Telephone conversations, November 3, 3:35 p.m., and October 31, 1:15 p.m.; Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Congo)

3 Embassy Counselor.

4 Sent in telegram 620 to Geneva, November 3. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–361)

5 In telegram 1114 from Léopoldville, November 2, Gullion stated that he had on three occasions suggested to Adoula that he meet directly with Tshombe but it was extremely difficult to urge this while fighting was going on in north Katanga between Congolese and Katangan forces. (Ibid., 770G.00/11–261)

6 Telegram 734 to Léopoldville, November 1, instructed Gullion to press Adoula to make a "statesmanlike gesture" by offering to negotiate directly with Tshombe. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–2761)

137. Telegram From the Consulate General in Geneva to the Department of State 137. Telegram From the Consulate General in Geneva to the Department of State1

Geneva, November 5, 1961, 10 p.m.

458. From Harriman. Reference: Department's telegram 619.2 Following is brief summary of my conversations with Tshombe, 1-1/2 hours yesterday afternoon, 2-1/2 today. More detailed report by airgram.3

Tshombe blames his bad health, heart and other internal difficulties to mistreatment during imprisonment. He is returning to Elisabethville where he will continue Swiss doctors recommended treatment for three months, after which he will return Geneva unless cured. He spoke vigorously, and appeared in good spirits, and clearly enjoyed renewing our acquaintance.

As British demarche had drawn a blank, I spent a good deal of time discussing the past and permitting him to unburden himself of his very deep-seated suspicion and resentment at UN policies and at US. Only UN official in whom he expressed confidence was Tunisian Khiari. He emphasized his American Methodist missionary education which had been used against him by Belgians during colonial period and prevented him and his brothers obtaining higher education in US in spite of his pro-American leanings.

He feels we are attempting to crush him and destroy Katanga, because of our misinformation and misunderstanding of nature of Congo problem. US Government's mistaken policies can only play into Communist hands. He was particularly unhappy that he was not permitted to come to US last winter or to have representative at UN where decisions being made without his having hearing. He considers Loi Fondamentale Belgian-imposed and proved bankrupt. Congo too big and trained Congolese too few to permit stable Government except on basis of confederation, as proposed at Tananarive Conference. In answer to my question he told me his relations with the Belgian Government were not good and he was suspicious of Spaak influence. He feels that Congolese too politically naive to understand difference between Socialism and Communism, which therefore plays into the latter's hands. He assured me that following UN pressure he had released all Belgian Government military personnel, totaling about 300, and paid them off in full. He maintained that he had reduced size of big Belgian concessions and had encouraged new private investment which had come from several European countries but not US. He considers himself bulwark against strong Communist influence in Léopoldville, pointing out Bocheley-Davidson, a Communist and Gizengist, had been sent to Elizabethville in September to take over in name of Central Government if UN attack had succeeded. Tshombe underlined disaster of Central Government and UN attempting military solution for both short and long run.

During course of conversation, I made all points covered Department's telegram 619 and other messages.4 I attempted to allay his unreasonable suspicions of US and assured him our interest was not in his destruction but rather in his participation in future integrated Congo, if peaceful solution could be negotiated.

Finally, he made following commitments: 1. He guaranteed "on my word of honor" to see to it that no military action would be taken by Katanga forces including air outside of Katanga or against UN installations within Katanga in violation of cease-fire agreement. In reply to my question, he agreed that Ambassador Stevenson could use this commitment at UN if it would assist him in handling Congo problem.

2. He agreed to meet Adoula any place outside the Congo without preconditions. He suggested New York, as he had heard Adoula might be going there and this would be a useful setting for negotiations. Although he agreed it was better for Congolese matters to be discussed on Congo soil, he had no faith in the word of Central Government account last spring's imprisonment and had lost confidence in UN guarantee account UN military intervention September. I declined to take this as his last word but suggested that neither of us had so far sufficient imagination to develop conditions to remove his concern over his security. I told Tshombe that Adoula was being informed of my approach to him and would be urged to create atmosphere Léopoldville to facilitate initiation of productive negotiations.

I recognized that in these few hours I have not been able to achieve immediately all Department's objectives. I do believe however for what it is worth that Tshombe has gained confidence in good will of our approach. I told him that our conversations should not be considered concluded and urged him to talk frankly with our Consul in Elisabethville, conveying any further thoughts he may have in the future on the subjects we had covered. When I said I hoped to see him again at some future time, he said I [he] can come back to Geneva on 24 hours notice.

David McKillop's participation has been invaluable. We both feel it worthwhile follow up with Tshombe as he is suffering from feeling of having been isolated and neglected. Throughout he showed responsiveness to any friendly comments on my part. He certainly appears deeply influenced by his early missionary education and moral and religious teachings. This may be one of reasons for his being somewhat emotional rather than practical in approaching political problems. On the whole I gained impression that he could be good friend and supporter of our objectives in an integrated Congo.

Rowell

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–561. Confidential; Priority. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to Brussels, London, Paris, and USUN.

2 Document 136.

3 Airgram Confe A–13 from Geneva, November 8. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–861)

4 Reference is to telegram 623 to Geneva, November 4, which repeated telegram 1136 to USUN, which instructed USUN to try to persuade Bomboko of the dangers of a Security Council meeting at that time. (Ibid., 770G.00/11–461)

138. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 138. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, November 7, 1961, 9:05 p.m.

771. Congo problems discussed in Department today between British Ambassador Ormsby Gore and Under Secretary Ball, Assistant Secretaries Williams and Cleveland and Ambassador Stevenson.2

Ormsby Gore stated that as Amb Riches visiting Elizabethville November 9–11 on other matters, he would attempt persuade Tshombe go to Léopoldville to discuss unification Congo in meeting with Adoula. Ormsby Gore believes in order convince Tshombe come Léopoldville Ambassador Gullion would have to persuade Adoula announce suspension military operations against Katanga during these discussions and Tshombe's safety must be assured. You authorized take appropriate action your discretion.

If meeting Léopoldville not acceptable to Tshombe, would in your judgment meeting at Kamina, in UN plane, boat, or some neutral area, be possible?3 Hope that in such discussion Adoula would be willing meet reasonable Tshombe demands for Katanga and that Tshombe would not ask too much. Have explained to Ormsby Gore that you feel you have come to brink in appealing to Adoula to meet and take reasonable attitude with Tshombe.

Ormsby Gore emphasized London concern that Congo situation will continue deteriorate and will necessitate throwing matter into Security Council which conceivably could pass resolution ordering UN troops into action. If this resulted there would be serious outcry in London and British Parliament would refuse vote money for UN-Congo operation. According Ormsby Gore, in such atmosphere UK and US might split in UN on Congo. Therefore he instructed to urge USG new strong approach both to Adoula and Katanga.

Amb Stevenson discussed with him at length necessity for bringing Tshombe to heel in order to solve problem. While British Amb recognized this eventually necessary he pointed out British public feel Tshombe is always blamed whether he is right or wrong. Stevenson and Ball made strong case that there are limits to which Adoula can go in dealing with secessionist Tshombe and emphasized that British must bring strongest possible pressure on Tshombe to cooperate.

Request you consult soonest with British Amb Riches on what you could do support Riches' planned approach and any other steps USG and UK could take to bring Adoula and Tshombe together in major effort bring about Central Gov't-Katanga settlement. Act in your discretion and advise Dept.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–761. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Sweeney, cleared by Eisenberg and in substance by Cleveland, and approved by Williams. Repeated to London, USUN, Brussels, and Paris.

2 Secretary Rusk was present for the first portion of the discussion of the Congo, according to a memorandum of conversation by Sweeney. (Ibid.)

3 According to Sweeney's memorandum of conversation, Rusk recalled that in 1947, when the Netherlands and Indonesia could not agree on a site for discussions, the United States had made the U.S.S. Renville available. Maybe in the Congo, he remarked, "we could use a plane and get them together in the air." Ormsby Gore suggested bringing Adoula and Tshombe to some neutral spot, and Rusk wondered whether an airstrip might be an answer.

139. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 139. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, November 9, 1961, 5:32 p.m.

1178. USUN's 1527, rptd Leo 191.2 Dept understands and sympathizes with Bomboko concern about need for GOC to demonstrate military superiority vis-a-vis Katanga but believes unilateral USG provision of jet fighters to Adoula government at this time would raise difficulties and might have unfortunate repercussions. Apart from the provision of UN resolutions intended to interdict bilateral supply of military equipment, these aircraft presumably would be flown by outsiders. Even if masked as "instructors," these pilots would in fact be "military or para-military personnel not under UN command" within meaning of Feb 21 SC res and would undercut vigorous action by UN to rid Congo of mercenaries. In this respect, res did not distinguish between secessionists and legitimate government of Congo, and to provide pilot "instructors" would be widely regarded as violation tending to justify Tshombe actions.

We believe GOC objectives can be advanced following way without bringing undesirable side-effects. If UN reaction favorable you should discuss with Bomboko along following lines.

1. US is prepared give appropriate support to program for UNOC retraining and strengthening of ANC capabilities, including air arm. We would assume such program would include provision of pilot instructors. Under this rubric US would consider making a few planes (probably trainers in first instance) available GOC at UN request. While such move would have no immediate effect on GOC capacity to cope with KAF threat, it would give morale boost to ANC, reaffirm UN recognition of GOC/ANC legitimacy, and have salutary psychological effect on Tshombe's assessment of situation.

2. Although UN cannot engage in "collaboration in police action against Katanga," UNOC now has will and capacity to cope with Katanga air threats. As we declared in statement released Nov 1, we understand UN acting in accordance with clear mandate, including if necessary military action against offending Katanga aircraft, and US fully supports this position of the UN in its effort restore the peace.3

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–761. Confidential. Drafted by Officer in Charge of United Nations Political Affairs Nathan Pelcovits, cleared by Eisenberg and Buffum and in substance by Colonel Greene of the Department of Defense, and approved by Wallner. Repeated to Léopoldville.

2 Telegram 1527 from USUN, November 7, reported that Bomboko had made an urgent plea that the Congolese Government be enabled to buy two jet fighters at once, arguing that Adoula needed to be able to demonstrate tangible U.S. support for his government in order to counter pressure to readmit Communist Embassies to Léopoldville. He further argued that the fighters were needed to counter Katangan air attacks on Congolese forces in Kasai. If the Congolese Government had such air power, the Katangan and Stanleyville secessions would collapse, but without it, the Adoula government would collapse within 3 weeks and be succeeded by a Gizenga government with Communist support. (Ibid.)

3 For text of the statement, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, p. 842.

140. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 140. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy1

Washington, November 11, 1961.

SUBJECT

Next Steps on the Congo

On November 13, the Security Council will begin a series of meetings on the Congo. This will be the first United Nations debate on this complicated question since the new Congolese Government was formed and since the new Secretary-General assumed office.2 Thus, the forthcoming meetings will open a new and important chapter in the history of the United Nations Operation in the Congo.

The fighting which broke out on September 13, 1961 between United Nations and Katangan forces was so unexpected in its violence and extent, and so indecisive in its outcome, that it left a large residue of doubt, both in this country and abroad, about the United Nations' capabilities and intentions.

We will be faced at the Security Council with demands for a solution by force to the problem of Congolese unity. Pressures from the Government of the Congo, the Soviet Union and the more extreme Africans and Asians will be directed towards adoption of a new United Nations mandate requiring ONUC to support the Congolese Army in a military operation designed to bring about the reintegration of Katanga. We will make every effort to resist these pressures. The United Nations and the Government of the Congo could only win a pyrrhic victory if it were to abandon the course of conciliation and persuasion.

We would prefer not to reopen the question of the United Nations mandate, but this is unavoidable. There is general agreement among United Nations Delegations in New York that the present mandate is deficient under present circumstances, and some refinement and change is desirable. The present mandate was adopted at a time when there was no generally-recognized Congolese Government. If interpreted literally, it would have the United Nations protect Katangan "independence" by halting any attempt the Central Government might make to enter the Province. Moreover, military equipment—particularly planes—have reached the Katanga within the past few months from some companies in several European countries. The United Nations was unable to prevent this traffic.

Our objectives in the Council meetings will therefore be threefold: to attain a revised United Nations mandate which reflects the political changes that have taken place in the Congo;

to bolster the position of the Central Government and to exert maximum pressure on Tshombe to accept the reintegration of Katanga into the Congo peacefully;

to deflect any unacceptable demands on the United Nations which would provoke a civil war.

In order to ensure that the session is kept under control, we are consulting widely in advance with friendly delegations, including the Congolese, to develop a formula which would enjoy broad acceptance before a resolution is tabled.

To meet the policy objectives outlined in the attached paper, we will seek a resolution which would: 1. assure the Central Government of continued United Nations support;

2. appeal to Tshombe to negotiate in good faith;

3. reaffirm the request to all States that military assistance not be provided to any faction in the Congo (Katanga or Stanleyville) except through the United Nations;

4. authorize the United Nations effectively to neutralize materials of war which have entered the Congo contrary to United Nations Resolution when necessary to prevent its use for military purposes;

5. reconfirm the existing United Nations mandate to take vigorous action to effect the evacuation of mercenaries.

Points 4 and 5 particularly might cause Katangan forces to renew hostilities against United Nations forces. However, we believe that Secretary-General U Thant will handle the new mandate with prudence and restraint and in accord with the peaceful purposes of the United Nations. We will urge such a policy on him. Bunche and Linner have told us it is their aim to give top priority to negotiations, and to move carefully against mercenaries only to the extent needed to encourage Tshombe to negotiate.

We believe the risks of inaction at this stage of Congolese history are even greater than those connected with the type of resolution we propose. The reasons for this belief are set forth in the attached memorandum.

Dean Rusk

Attachment

3 Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, November 11, 1961.

SUBJECT

Congo Policy

1. United States Objectives

Our aim in the Congo is the consolidation of the country with an essentially pro-Western orientation. Premier Adoula is the best available man to achieve this since he has the necessary intelligence, will power, nationwide stature and the appropriate political predilections. To succeed he has to overcome the secession of Katanga, the threat of ultra-nationalist anti-Western politicians whether in Stanleyville or elsewhere and the virtual breakdown of the national economy. Our policy is to build him up politically and to help him resolve the difficulties he faces. A defeat of Adoula would make civil war inevitable and open the country to Communist penetration.

2. Reintegration of Katanga

Tshombe's challenge to the territorial integrity of the country is the key to most of the difficulties faced by the Congo. By bringing Katanga back into the fold Adoula would gain the necessary additional political strength to deal rapidly with Gizenga and the other anti-Western politicians who now exploit nationalism for their own purposes. He could then also establish his authority on all parts of the Army and bring security and order into the remotest parts of the country. Reintegration of Katanga would also create a sound basis for economic recovery and reduce the need for foreign aid. Termination of the secession, of course, would not resolve all the problems of the Congo; considerable difficulties would still have to be surmounted. However, no real progress is possible as long as Katanga continues in secession.

There is no historical, economic or ethno-graphic basis for Tshombe's independence claims. Until 1960, Katanga was a province governed from Léopoldville like any other. The Congolese constitution of 1960 provided that all the provinces are parts of the new state and this was agreed by M. Tshombe. Katanga, moreover, does not have a homogeneous population different from that of the rest of the Congo—over 50 percent belong to tribes bitterly opposed to, and in fact repressed by, M. Tshombe and his Lundas.

To accept independence of Katanga would be political suicide for Adoula. Parliament would promptly replace him by an extremist leader (probably not Gizenga) and the new Congo government would ask for foreign military aid, first from the UN, then the US, and ultimately the Soviet Bloc to carry the war into Katanga. Whatever the military developments might be, such war would engulf the Congo in even greater chaos than it has experienced so far and Communist penetration of the country would be a near certainty. A Katanga reintegrated by military action of the Congo army would most likely be an economic wreck.

Reintegration of Katanga has also become a key objective of UN policy in the Congo and the UN could not accept defeat on this issue without serious damage to the concept of the UN as an instrument of the collective will of the member nations.

3. Program to Promote Reintegration in Katanga

At present, negotiations between Léopoldville and Elisabethville are at a deadlock. Tshombe does not want to give up any essential part of his independence while Adoula cannot stop military operations unless he could demonstrate clearly that the reintegration of Katanga will be assured through other means. This deadlock must be broken rapidly since time is not on our side. To move events in the right direction Tshombe has to be faced with a coordinated program of action containing credible deterrents which would demonstrate to him the futility of his refusal to re-enter the Congo. A system of escalation must be built into this program which would create adequate incentives for prompt negotiations and forestall any erosion of Adoula's political position. With the help of such a program pressure could also be exercised on the Léopoldville government to bring both parties into the frame of mind necessary for successful negotiations.

Tshombe must offer without conditions to take measures bringing Katanga back into the Congo at least in specific areas, e.g., the economic sphere, by sharing customs and tax revenues, re-establishing a common currency, etc. This should permit Adoula to engage in substantive discussions on reintegration without first obtaining satisfaction on the basic constitutional issue. Once arrangements of the kind described above are in effect Adoula could be more forthcoming and Tshombe would find considerable support for his claim of greater autonomy since Congolese political leaders are overwhelmingly in favor of greater states' rights.

The program we consider necessary to prevent a serious deterioration of the situation should contain the following elements: (a) Strengthening of the UN mandate. Under the various UN resolutions all states are requested to refrain from the provision of arms and military personnel to the Congo except at UN request, but the UN has no clear mandate to take corrective action. It is necessary that the UNOC be explicitly authorized to neutralize all military equipment which has entered the Congo illegally, to arrest and evacuate foreign mercenaries, and to control effectively and prevent the entry of further mercenaries and military materials. Such actions should be taken even if they might be interpreted by Tshombe and the Western European press as a breach of the cease fire. The principle that the cease fire agreement cannot over-ride the UN mandate has been accepted by Tshombe.

In the Security Council discussions there will be pressure for a more far reaching mandate to be given to the UN, in particular to authorize it to support the Congolese Army directly or indirectly. This we want to oppose.

(b) The measures which the UN could take under the new mandate might lead to Katanga's reopening hostilities against UNOC. However, we are confident from discussions with Bunche and Linner that the UN will act with prudence and restraint and will try to avoid provoking a fight. Should hostilities nevertheless flair up this would cause problems between the UN, US and our NATO allies. On balance, however, we have to take this calculated risk in order to avoid the much greater risk of full scale civil war.

(c) Economic sanctions against Katanga in the form of blocking of external assets, seizure of exports, etc. It would be undesirable to have the UN adopt such a policy at this time since it would create an instrument for possible use against South Africa or Portugal in situations in which the US would not want to support such action. However, the Western powers could increase pressure on Tshombe in all forms and apply measures which would be similar to economic sanctions but by taking them on their own decision and, judiciously, they would avoid creating a precedent for UN economic sanctions.

(d) Accelerated retraining and rearming of the Congo military forces loyal to the Central Government including its air branch with the implicit objective of eventually giving the Central Government enough power to crush Tshombe's military forces. The time element built into this measure would make it possible for Tshombe to enter into negotiations before large scale operations could be undertaken. The Congolese government has already asked us to sell them two to three jet fighters for which they would hire foreign pilots. We intend to deal with this problem by supporting a UN operated training program for the Congo Air Force.

4. Gizenga and Lumumbism

Lumumbism constitutes a threat to Adoula only to the extent to which Gizenga or other anti-Western politicians can exploit the nationalist fervor which permeates today's Congo. Gizenga, back in his Stanleyville retreat, with no legal basis for action and without his former colleagues who are now in the Léopoldville government, is apparently trying to build up a political organization which would bring him into power if Adoula should not succeed soon in resolving the Katanga issue. Adoula's intent is to isolate Gizenga politically and deny him the support of General Lundula and so prepare his political destruction. (Lundula was recently given a high rank and command in the National Congolese Army under Mobutu.) The prospects of Adoula's achieving this are good provided the Katanga issue does not blow up in his face. We are urging Adoula to take effective action against Gizenga promptly and we are also making sure that the new Security Council resolution will permit UN action against external military assistance to the Stanleyville group just as in Katanga.

5. Economic Reconstruction

The UN has developed import and export, public works and budget aid programs, which are financed in large part, about 75 percent, by US contributions. These programs show definite promise of success but funds have to be found to carry them further. Increased foreign aid is also needed in the form of technical assistance. The Adoula government is now drafting a medium range economic development program the promulgation of which would be of great political benefit to Adoula. It needs the help of the IBRD or some other international organization in its planning stage and later, foreign financial aid for implementation of the program. Large scale economic aid is necessary to prevent nation-wide economic misery and political unrest but economic recovery cannot make substantial progress before law and order are re-established all over the country and the Katanga issue resolved.

6. US Support for Adoula

Adoula's ability to obtain a parliamentary mandate had made it possible for the UN to give him wholehearted support. As a result we can channel our aid to Adoula's government through the UN and find the UN and UNOC in full agreement with our policy of building up Adoula.

We are now: (a) Cooperating closely with the UN and UNOC on all Congo matters and will attempt to obtain their full support for the intensive Katanga program described above;

(b) Stepping up our economic aid to the Congo, expanding the scope of the military aid to the UNOC operation and planning military aid to the Congo government through the UN;

(c) Planning to assist Adoula in his efforts to build for himself a solid political base in his country and to promote his international and domestic prestige through visits to Léopoldville of African dignitaries and a visit of Adoula to New York and to talk to you in Washington;

(d) Enlisting the support of the UK, Belgium, Rhodesia and other governments for our efforts to promote the peaceful integration of Katanga by creating from their side effective pressures on Tshombe while we, in turn, exercise pressure on Adoula to make a rapprochement possible;

(e) Attempting to assure military, financial and political support by the UN members for the Congo policy of the Secretariat and to have the Security Council pass a resolution in line with the intensive action program described above;

(f) Attempting to educate the American public and Free World about the basic facts involved in our Congo policy and its reasons and objectives and ask our allies to do the same at home.

Dean Rusk

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. The Department of State copy indicates that the memorandum was drafted by Buffum and Tron. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–1161)

2 U Thant was appointed Acting Secretary-General on November 3. (U.N. General Assembly Resolution 1640 (XVI); printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, p. 82)

3 Confidential. The Department of State copy indicates that the memorandum was drafted by Eisenberg. (Ibid., 611.70G/11–1161)

141. Memorandum of Conversation 141. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, November 20, 1961, 10:35–11:35 a.m.

SUBJECT

The Congo

PARTICIPANTS

The United States: The President

Mr. William R. Tyler, Act. Asst. Sec. for EUR

Mr. E.S. Glenn, LS

Belgium: Foreign Minister Paul Henri Spaak

Ambassador Louis Scheyven

Mr. Rothschild

The President said that he would like to ask the Foreign Minister for his opinion about the situation in the Congo. The US is greatly concerned about the situation arising from the secession efforts of Tshombe and Gizenga. There is also question of the Soviets having offered Prime Minister Adoula a bilateral agreement for direct Soviet aid.2

Mr. Spaak said that the situation in the Congo was also, of course, of great concern for him. At the present moment a graver cause for concern is the policy of the UN to use force against Tshombe. Such a policy may lead to disaster simply because the armed forces of the UN are very inadequate and any attempt to use force on their part may result in their defeat. What should be done is rather to bring together Tshombe and Adoula. This can be done if action is taken with urgency and if it's made clear to Tshombe that he must meet a certain number of conditions or otherwise he will have the entire world against him. As for the situation within the United Nations, it is by no means certain that any resolution will be voted at the present moment.3 If, however, a resolution concerning him is defeated in the Security Council, Tshombe, who is a very vacillating man may interpret this as a great triumph and become completely intransigent. What is needed is to persuade him that he must come to terms. In fact, the possibility exists for an accord which would establish the Congo on some sort of federal basis with unified economy, army, currency and customs. By recognizing Kasavubu as the President of all the Congo Tshombe, himself, has admitted that the Katanga is not a fully sovereign state. He has also accepted the principle of federalism. Therefore, there exists a basis for negotiations between himself and the Central Government. It is necessary, however, in order to bring about an actual negotiation, that someone lend his good offices to act as a mediator. Such a person could only be an African, as no European or American would be acceptable. An African, however, could probably be found among the members of the Brazzaville group, or perhaps even in Mr. Bourguiba.4

The President asked who could exercise the necessary influence on Tshombe to make him accept negotiation. The Foreign Minister said that it might, of course, be the Security Council. If, however, a clear action on the part of the latter is unlikely, it might be the US and the UK which, being those who would have prevented a drastic Security Council resolution against Tshombe, would then be in the position to tell him that he must negotiate.

The President said that there exists a body of public opinion which believes that the tough attitude of Mr. Tshombe is due to some economic interests.

Mr. Spaak said that such an explanation of the present situation is childish. Why should any economic group, for example the Union Miniere, get itself into difficulties by playing a political role? It is true, that at the beginning, that corporation may have provided Tshombe with funds. At the present moment, however, it has no interest in acting against the unification of the Congo as it can do business equally well in a unified Congo or in an independent Katanga.

The President said it was necessary to clarify what extent of sovereignty is demanded by Tshombe and in what manner and on what basis the latter could be brought to negotiate. With Prime Minister Adoula, the Foreign Minister said, it would be difficult to get Tshombe to come to Léopoldville for the simple reason that the latter fears for his personal safety. However, there are other places in the Congo where a meeting could be arranged especially if either the UN or rather the US and UK were to guarantee Tshombe's personal safety. An airfield not too far from Léopoldville, for example, could be used. However, bringing Tshombe and Adoula together would not be enough. Help should be provided to both of them in negotiating. There exists, of course, a United Nations conciliation commission, but it is not a very good instrument since its members do not see eye to eye. It would be much better to find a prominent personality such as President Senghor, President Houphouet-Boigny, Mr. Tsiranana, or even President Bourguiba.

The President said that the Nigerians also could be considered for such a role. The more so since Nigeria has experience with a federal regime. However, in approaching them to ask them to act as mediators, it would have to be made clear that Prime Minister Adoula speaks for a common Central Government and that there can thus be no strict equality between him and Tshombe. Whatever is done should be done rapidly, so as to make it possible to deal with the situation created by Gizenga. The President expressed the hope that the Foreign Minister would go into details on this question in his conversation with the Secretary of State.5

The Foreign Minister alluded to an exchange of telegrams between himself and Mr. Tshombe which started as a request for help on the part of the latter. Mr. Spaak replied immediately that Tshombe's situation was bad and that he must reiterate his recognition of President Kasavubu and prepare for meeting with Prime Minister Adoula. A little later a new telegram from Mr. Tshombe arrived; this telegram was very bad and expressed a totally intransigent attitude. It had been sent by Tshombe before Mr. Spaak's telegram had reached him. Still later, a new telegram came; this time it was Tshombe's reply to Spaak's telegram and it was entirely in the right direction. This shows to what extent Tshombe changes his mind and to what extent he is confused by the bad advice he is receiving.

The President expressed the hope that the Foreign Minister would discuss this question with the Secretary and suggested that the Foreign Minister meet the Secretary of Defense, who was at that time in the next room discussing problems very similar in nature to those which had been discussed with Mr. Spaak in the first part of the conversation.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Secret. Drafted by Tyler and Edmund S. Glenn of the Division of Language Services. The time of the meeting is taken from the President's appointment book. (Kennedy Library) The conversation also included discussion of Berlin; a memorandum of that portion of the conversation, along with additional material concerning Spaak's visit, is in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366, CF 1995.

2 Telegram 794 to Léopoldville, November 11, stated that Bomboko had sent word that the Soviets had offered the Congo all necessary aid. (Ibid., Central Files, 770G.00/11–1161)

3 Spaak had been in New York attending meetings of the U.N. Security Council, which discussed the situation in the Congo at eight meetings between November 13 and 24. Belgium and the Congo were among several non-Council members participating in the discussions by invitation.

4 Tunisian President Habib Bourguiba.

5 A memorandum of the conversation by Blue is in Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/11–2061.

142. Editorial Note 142. Editorial Note

A memorandum from Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs Harlan Cleveland to Secretary of State Rusk, November 22, 1961, records a telephone conversation that morning between Cleveland and President Kennedy. The portion of the memorandum concerning the Congo reads as follows: "The President asked whether we shouldn't be doing more in the way of bilateral aid to the Central Government in the Congo; he had noted a Russian offer of aid for Adoula. I told him that we had been chary of stepping up our bilateral aid too rapidly, wanting to maintain the principle that bilateral assistance was only rendered in agreement with and support of the UN operations in the Congo. However, we were reviewing the possibility of having relatively more bilateral aid and relatively less economic aid through the UN, partly in order to prevent the UN from bleeding to death financially.

"The President asked about the Russian threat yesterday in the Security Council to veto our proposed amendments to the Congo resolution. I gave him a brief summary of what had happened yesterday in the Council, emphasizing that a Russian veto threat was aimed particularly at our paragraph on conciliation, and indicating that we might need to start a conciliation arrangement either directly from the Secretary General without a new mandate on the subject or, if not, on a non-UN basis.

"The President asked for a report on any results from the discussions with Foreign Minister Spaak about additional pressure that might be put on Tshombe.

"The President asked whether the Lumumba investigation report probably had the true story, or whether it was all hearsay. He was particularly interested in any hard indications as to whether Tshombe was present at the time of the murder. He asked for some indication of what this investigation report looked like from a lawyer's point of view, mentioning Arthur Dean in this connection. I said there did not seem to be an authentic alternative description of how Lumumba met his death, but that one recent press report, allegedly based on eye-witness reports, corroborated some of the UN investigation report but did not place Tshombe at the scene of the killing. (The Legal Adviser's office is preparing a comment on the investigation report, which should probably be sent along to the President for his information.)" (Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149)

The "Congo resolution" was the revised version of a draft resolution submitted initially on November 14 by Ceylon, Liberia, and the United Arab Republic and in revised form on November 20. (U.N. documents S/4985 and Rev.1) The United States submitted several amendments to the revised draft resolution on November 20. (U.N. document S/4989) Stevenson set forth the amendments in a statement before the Security Council on November 21; the text is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pages 847–851.

The thrust of the draft resolution was to support the Congolese Government against Katangan secession and to expand the Secretary-General's authority to permit the use of force for the apprehension and deportation of foreign mercenaries. The thrust of the U.S. amendments was to extend the applicability of the resolution to permit U.N. support of the Congolese Government against any secessionist activities, by Stanleyville as well as by Katanga, to expand the Secretary-General's authority to permit U.N. action to neutralize aircraft or other weapons used against U.N. or Congolese Government forces, and to authorize U.N. encouragement of negotiation and conciliation to promote Congolese unity.

At the Security Council meeting on November 21, Soviet Representative Valerian A. Zorin announced his intention of vetoing several U.S. amendments. Telegram 1736 from USUN, November 21, states that the delegation's instructions required abstention on the draft resolution without the amendments, which would have ensured the defeat of the resolution. After consultation with the Department of State by telephone, the delegation was instructed to seek postponement of the vote until November 24. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2161)

A November 25 memorandum from Department of State Executive Secretary Lucius D. Battle to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs McGeorge Bundy summarized discussions with Foreign Minister Spaak's staff about possible steps to increase pressure on Tshombe and stated that the Department was preparing proposals for economic actions designed to force Tshombe into negotiations with Léopoldville. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

A comment on the Report of the Commission of Investigation, prepared in the Legal Adviser's Office, November 25, was enclosed with a November 28 memorandum from Battle to Bundy. (Ibid.) Concerning the Commission Report, see Document 6.

143. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 143. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, November 25, 1961, 11 p.m.

1803. Congo. Despite Soviet veto of key US amendments,2 SC action yesterday, as well as extensive negotiations and debate accompanying it, have produced several net gains for US position. Fol are some of highlights: 1. Bomboko (Congo-Leo) and all his associates were brought up against Soviet disregard of their views both in private and public. Bomboko at one stage believed his public appeals and private talks with Zorin would get Soviet agreement for US amendments covering rebuilding of Congolese armed forces and for tougher UN action against Katangan air force and other weapons in and out of Katanga. Zorin, of course, completely disregarded Congolese views on these two points. Even two of less receptive members of Congo Delegation, Mandi and Lema, went out of way to express appreciation for US efforts to strengthen res and then when these efforts partially failed, our acceptance of eventual text as gesture to Congolese wishes for whatever res could be obtained.

2. Sovs were effectively isolated in opposition to stronger SC action proposed by US. Liberia appealed to Sovs in debate to accept our amendments and expressed confidence unanimity was approaching, whereupon Zorin made his most violent speech in opposition. Ceylon tried in public SC session to get Sov agreement to modified version of retraining and conciliation paras and was rebuffed for his pains in sharp reply by Zorin. Indians, Ethiopians, etc., who followed behind scenes negotiations closely, saw and approved direction our amendments as contrasted with Soviet efforts to restrict res solely to Katanga and to mercenaries, despite wishes of other members of SC and Congolese themselves. Liberia voted for all US amendments and Ceylon for all but one.

3. Position of UAR became clearer as negotiations went on. UAR position stood out in contrast to that of other sponsors, Ceylon and Liberia. As general willingness to accept changes proposed by US (and favored by SYG and Bomboko) became clear, UAR forced to take clear stand in opposition to prevent inclusion by co-sponsors our proposals in text of res. Even India and Ethiopia finally realized "special" character of UAR position in trying to limit res solely to Katanga and prevent any provisions directed against events in other provinces. However, even Loutfi during final day became exasperated with Soviet obstructionism and ended by voting for all but one of US amendments. On para authorizing SYG "to remove or to prevent use" aircraft and other weapons which have entered Congo illegally, following defeat Soviet sub-amendment (for which UAR voted and which received only Soviet and UAR votes) which would have restricted para only to Katanga, UAR joined UK and France in abstaining.

4. Possibly most important result in long run was scarcely concealed duel which emerged between Thant and Zorin. Thant was receptive to US suggestions, strongly encouraged those relating to training ANC and to neutralizing aircraft and other weapons, and made effort with co-sponsors to obtain inclusion of them in some form in res. Despite failure of this [garble] due to rigidity of Loutfi (UAR) and pressure from Zorin, Thant made very forthright and clear statement of his intentions3 after res passed in which he put forward essentially same points covered by vetoed US amendments except for that calling for removal or prevention of use of aircraft, etc. Although focusing on Katanga, Thant said problem not limited to Katanga (as Zorin maintained) and UN would help in dealing with armed action and rebellion elsewhere; that UN would assist in retraining Congolese army; that UN would "continue and even re-double its attempts to achieve reconciliation" (which Zorin had in effect rejected). Thant also mentioned possibility of appointing special representative if desired by Congolese Govt to devote himself exclusively to that effort. (Bunche tells us he drafted statement but that Thant accepted controversial points without demur despite foreknowledge Soviet intention to veto, and even strengthened conciliation para.) In later statement Zorin gave obvious warning to SYG not to "deviate from the specific content of the resolution as adopted" and not to interpret it "in spirit of various statements by individual representatives who made proposals which failed of adoption." Zorin also expressed hope SYG would replace certain staff members because UN staff in Congo is "one-sided ... " "recruited in specific direction" . . . "a staff of a certain character".4 He also reminded SYG of his agreement before his election to consult certain of his immediate advisers on important questions.

5. UK and Belgian efforts to press ideas of "conciliation and negotiation" and resist reference to use of force had effect of differentiating US and UK positions; this became most clear in vote on res as whole in which UK abstained. UK Del somewhat embarrassed by their abstention, would have preferred to vote in favor, and did best to offset by statement after vote. We discussed with UKDel reasons for US position which they understood fully. In order to offset whatever damage done UK position by their vote, we suggested to them UK Ambassador in Leo call on Adoula and explain UK position. We will probably get incidental advantage in Leo by having separated from UK and French in final vote.

6. Spaak (Belgium) and Robiliart (Union Miniere) both observed debate and may help to bring home to Tshombe extent to which he isolated in UN and danger of force being used against him if impasse continues. Spaak after meeting told us "it was not a good resolution but it was not a bad resolution." He made similar comment about U Thant statement. Incidentally, Bunche reported Robiliart, following yesterday's talk with Thant, now "one of our agents" in trying to get Tshombe to negotiate with Adoula.5

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2561. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to London, Léopoldville, and Brussels.

2 At the November 24 meeting of the Security Council, the United States withdrew its amendment on negotiation and conciliation in order to prevent its defeat. Three U.S. amendments were adopted, two were vetoed by the Soviet Union, and one failed to receive sufficient votes. The amended draft resolution was adopted by a vote of 9 (including the United States) to 0, with 2 abstentions (France and the United Kingdom). For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 851–853. For the record of the Security Council meeting, see U.N. doc. S/PV.982.

3 For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 853–855, and Public Papers of the Secretaries-General of the United Nations, vol. VI: U Thant, 1961–1964, pp. 51–54.

4 Ellipses in the source text.

5 Stevenson met with Robiliart on November 22. Telegram 1769 from USUN, November 23, reported that Robiliart said his observations at the United Nations had led him to conclude that Tshombe had to come to an early negotiated settlement with the Congolese Government. Stevenson urged him to advise Tshombe strongly along those lines. Robiliart said he intended to send an emissary to Elisabethville for that purpose, but he emphasized that Union Miniere was "far from being able to control Tshombe completely." (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2361)

144. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 144. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, November 30, 1961, 4 p.m.

674. Senator Dodd, who departed 230 pm today for Luanda,2 asks that following message be delivered to President:3

"Situation in Elisabethville dangerously tense.4 I had hoped stay until tomorrow for further conversations with Consulate staff, UN representatives and Tshombe. However, I am leaving for Luanda at 2 pm because it is felt that as US Senator I should not be placed in position of having incident attributed to my presence.

Feelings on UN side and on side of Katangans are so tense that any incident might result in mass bloodshed.

Most disturbing aspect of situation is that liaison between UN and Katanga Government is extremely poor. I believe that new UN representatives here, Brian Urquhart and George Smith are splendid men but unfortunately they have been here too briefly to establish rapport with Tshombe under these circumstances. Our Consulate and British Consulate have been endeavoring to provide liaison between UN and Katanga Government, running back and forth between two sides, in an effort to reduce tension and misunderstanding.

In this exceedingly grave situation, suggest that consideration be given to direct wire from you to UN representatives and to President Tshombe urging both sides to attempt to resolve present situation without incident because of the danger of even minor incidents when passions are so inflamed.

I shall wire at greater length from Luanda later today.5 Hoffacker has read and concurs. Signed Thomas J. Dodd"6

Hoffacker

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo, 12/2/61–12/13/61. Confidential; Niact; Presidential Handling. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, Luanda, and USUN.

2 Senator Thomas J. Dodd visited Léopoldville November 26–28 and Elisabethville November 28–30. Telegram 1322 from Léopoldville, November 28, reported that he had seen Kasavubu, Adoula, and Mobutu, and that all the conversations had been "extremely cordial." (Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100–DO/11–2861) Telegram 678 from Elisabethville, December 1, reported that Dodd and Hoffacker had accompanied Tshombe to Jadotville and Kolwezi on November 29 and had talked to him almost continuously that day. (Ibid., 033.1100–DO/12–161)

3 Senator Dodd met with President Kennedy on November 20 before his departure. He wrote to Kennedy on November 21 that he agreed that an Adoula-Tshombe entente would be the best possible solution for the Congo and that he would discuss this with both Adoula and Tshombe. (Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Congo, General)

4 Dodd witnessed an incident on November 29 in which Katangan para-commandos seized and beat U.N. representatives Brian Urquhart and George Ivan Smith at a party at the home of an American businessman. Smith was rescued by Hoffacker, and Urquhart was released later that night. The incident was reported in telegrams 663 and 665 from Elisabethville and 1331 from Léopoldville, all November 29. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2961) For O'Brien's account of the incident, see To Katanga and Back, pp. 320–326. For Urquhart's account, see A Life in Peace and War, pp. 179–184.

5 A message from Dodd to Kennedy, sent in an unnumbered telegram from Luanda, December 1, stated that Dodd thought there was a basis for rapprochement, if Adoula and Tshombe could be brought together for discussions. He stated that Adoula insisted any talks be held in Léopoldville, while Tshombe said he feared for his personal safety in Léopoldville but would meet with Adoula anywhere else. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–161)

6 Kennedy replied in a message transmitted in telegram 119 to Luanda, December 1. The message indicated that the United States would continue to use all appropriate channels to urge calm and moderation on all sides and concluded: "In the circumstances, I think it wiser not to intervene personally, as this kind of personal intervention must be used sparingly." (Ibid.)

145. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 145. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, December 1, 1961, 9:16 p.m.

1322. Deptel 1374 to USUN2 outlines our views on current situation Congo and efforts which we believe should be made by UN and interested governments to help insure continuation moderate control GOC and solution Katanga problem. We appreciated receiving UK views in recent Washington talks3 and Belgian suggestions during Spaak visit.

Action posts should inform FonOffs we fully share their desire see Katanga reintegration achieved peacefully and we wish coordinate and encourage intensified efforts to this end. We urgently soliciting indication from SYG how he plans proceed on basis his SC statement and we also wish urge UK and Belgium exert fullest possible pressure on Tshombe phased to give fullest support to conciliation efforts.

Brussels requested approach Spaak stressing we share view redoubled efforts should be made arrange peaceful negotiations, but we persuaded Tshombe will never negotiate until he convinced by economic and diplomatic pressures that he has no other feasible alternative. We thus believe that, parallel with efforts at conciliation and phased to give full effect to these efforts, we should develop and coordinate a program of gradually increasing these pressures. While we will be consulting soon on such program believe following two steps could be taken now: a. GOB could publicly offer to GOC negotiations to settle outstanding financial questions announcing at once that key objective this negotiation would be ultimate transfer to GOC shares in Katangan companies now held in trust by GOB and that GOB will not recognize Kat legislation requiring transfer legal seat of corporations to Katanga. Spaak should be informed we would approach Adoula this sense and urge him be prepared re-establish diplomatic relations. Similarly, would hope GOB would enter such negotiations with overriding political objective in mind.

b. Another step we believe could be taken now, in conjunction with opening financial negotiations, would be for GOB to require Belgian companies operating in Katanga to pay dividends on Congo portfolio shares directly to GOC or at least hold in escrow monies to which GOC has title.

In preparation for possible later action, you should also inquire Spaak's intentions concerning withdrawal technical assistance personnel from Katanga which was suggested by Spaak's staff in Washington. Similarly, repatriation dependents Belgian residents in Katanga, which we understand being considered by Spaak, should also impress Tshombe.

London should raise with FonOff following:

Persistent reports from usually reliable sources indicate that Kipushi airfield which straddles Katanga-Rhodesia border, being used extensively by Katanga for logistic support, military personnel movement and safehaven for Katanga airforce. Rhodesian authorities will doubtless continue insist that they controlling border. However, airfield that crosses border too obvious target for criticism and in interests Federation and GOC such anomalous situation should be ended. We believe FonOff should urge Federation authorities close down Kipushi strip immediately to all Katanga traffic and take additional action in way calculated impress public opinion that Rhodesian authorities effectively sealing borders against military traffic.

Brussels, Paris requested raise with FonOff desirability European airlines servicing Elisabethville suspend such traffic. Dept raising same matter with Italians and Dutch. Sabena, KLM, Alitalia and UAT are presently involved. In accordance provisions Chicago Convention to which respective countries parties GOC can inform governments and airlines involved that flying into Elisabethville without appropriate authorization from Central Government not permitted. UN and GOC have attempted, with some success, to apply this rule to Stanleyville. In our view, same rule should also be applied in Elisabethville.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–161. Confidential. Drafted by Woodruff and Miller; cleared by Wallner, Burdett, and Cleveland; and approved by Fredericks. Also sent to London and Paris and repeated to Léopoldville, Rome, The Hague, USUN, and Salisbury.

2 Telegram 1374, November 28, stated that the U.S. position in the Congo was based on the overriding necessity of preserving and strengthening Adoula's position and moderate control of the Congolese Government and that rapid progress toward the reintegration of Katanga was essential to attaining this objective. It instructed the Mission to approach U Thant and discuss the problem with him. (Ibid., 770G.00/11–2861)

3 Deputy Under-Secretary of the Foreign Office Sir Roger Stevens and Deputy Under-Secretary of the Commonwealth Relations Office Sir Algernon Rumbold discussed the situation in the Congo with Williams and Wallner on November 21. A memorandum of the conversation is ibid., 770G.00/11–2161.

146. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 146. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, December 3, 1961, 2 p.m.

1920. Congo. SYG informed Yost last evening Adoula had rejected suggested appointment high-level mediator2 on grounds this would confer too much status on Tshombe. Adoula said he would discuss proposal with Cabinet but Thant agreed Cabinet most unlikely to take different stand.

Thant concludes that Adoula-Tshombe meeting on Congo territory is only means of conciliation which GOC will accept. He strongly urged US continue endeavor persuade Tshombe attend such meeting, perhaps at Kamina. He pointed out Tshombe still at Brazzaville, mentioned he understands French have persuaded Youlou press Tshombe to negotiate immediately and hoped we might also be able take similar action in Brazzaville.

SYG also expressed very grave concern at latest Gizenga speech3 of which he had just heard and which he feared would further seriously threaten Congo unity. He believes this development reinforces urgency settling Katanga problem.

Plimpton

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–361. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville and Brazzaville.

2 Thant told Yost on December 1 that he had approached Adoula through Linner urging efforts at conciliation and suggesting some people who might assist. (Telegram 1914 from USUN, December 2; ibid., 770G.00/12–261)

3 Reference is apparently to a speech given by Gizenga on November 29 in Stanleyville; extracts are printed in Verhaegen, Congo 1961, pp. 565–569.

147. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State 147. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State1

Paris, December 5, 1961, 3 p.m.

2918. Message contained Deptel 31702 delivered to Tshombe 11 a.m. Paris time. Tshombe listened attentively and then made following comments: 1. He could not understand USG which "lives on illusions." Katanga is natural friend of US. If Katanga fails US cannot hope save Congo.

2. He reiterated readiness meet Adoula anywhere outside Congo. "I would rather jump out of window than go Léopoldville."

3. Re Kasavubu, Tshombe had expressly recognized him as President Federation Congo in act of Tananarive. Recalled both Kasavubu and Adoula had signed that document and undertaken obligations therein.

4. Last time Tshombe had sent Katanga Parliamentarians to Léopoldville they had been threatened with arrest and had to flee to Brazzaville. He ready send them back to Léopoldville but must have guarantees their security.

5. Tshombe was very bitter re Stevenson speech in UNSC which he said had excited everyone. Tshombe had thought USG would try find way for reconciliation, "instead you supported Russians." If UN tries attack Katanga by force, no one will benefit "not even US."

In reply to Embassy officer's query, Tshombe said he had not yet decided whether to [go?] Brazil or not and refused be drawn out re future plans.

[1 paragraph (7-1/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

Gavin

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–561. Confidential; Niact. Received at 12:47 p.m. and repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, USUN, and Elisabethville.

2 Telegram 3170, December 4, instructed the Embassy in Paris to get the following message to Tshombe: "Tshombe's insistence on independence or even autonomy is stumbling block to useful dealings with central govt, and we suggest, for his own good, he drop it. This stumbling block, we believe, can be removed if Tshombe: (1) publicly acknowledges Kasavubu as President of a unified Congo and (2) takes steps to send Katangan representatives to Parliament." (Ibid., 770G.00/12–461)

148. Memorandum of Conversation 148. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, December 5, 1961, 5:05–6 p.m.

SUBJECT

Congo

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

The Honorable David Ormsby Gore, British Ambassador

Mr. Vance—AFC

The British Ambassador called on the Secretary regarding the Congo. He stated that his instructions pertained to bringing Adoula and Tshombe together and that these were not current in light of the fighting in Elisabethville.2 He added, however, that UK–UN had just reported that the Secretariat stated fighting had ceased towards the end of the day. The Ambassador was informed of the latest telegram from Elisabethville which also contained an indication that fighting had died down.3

The Ambassador raised Tshombe's attempt to obtain Costa Rican recognition which had been reported from Brussels and asked if the United States Government believed it would be able to persuade Costa Rica of the wisdom of avoiding such a course. The Secretary stated we had approached our Latin American friends generally and Costa Rica more specifically, and that we were hopeful none would take action which would subject them to criticism in the UN.

The Secretary asked how the British estimate chances of getting some sense into Tshombe's head. We have all endeavored to educate him of the need to drop his pretensions, apparently with little effect. The Ambassador stated that he believes Tshombe genuinely fears for his safety were he to go to Léopoldville under UN protection. This is why the British have sought some way to guarantee absolutely his safety, hoping that pressures would then be effective relative to his substantive position. The Ambassador added that he understands the United States is concerned that an attempt to bring the two together under present circumstances would be too dangerous for Adoula. The Secretary replied that we think pressure on Adoula to meet with Tshombe as two Chiefs of State would be politically dangerous for Adoula. In effect we seek an Adoula-Tshombe axis and believe that in order to make this possible, Tshombe must come to heel to a certain extent. If it were agreeable to both parties the United States presumably could help in arrangements for a meeting, such as in an aircraft at Kamina. The Ambassador commented that an aircraft would have less of a connotation of extra-territoriality than would a vessel.

The Secretary inquired whether the British and Belgian Governments believe they have been able to work out a memorandum outlining some basis for an Adoula-Tshombe meeting.4 The Ambassador replied that they had been trying to separate out reasonably acceptable aspects of Tshombe correspondence with the thought that they could then induce Tshombe to resubmit them as proposals to Adoula. They added that their effort had not got far to date.

The Ambassador referred to Home's letter to the Secretary5 which described the British impression that the GOC was of the opinion it could conquer Katanga, a notion the British regard as desperately dangerous. The Secretary remarked that no conquering is needed or desirable and that it would probably be impossible for the GOC and difficult for the UN. Adoula wisely recognizes the limitations of the Congo army. His efforts to obtain an air force are indications of this. The Secretary indicated his belief that Adoula would not be inflexible if Tshombe would meet with him on a basis less than as Chief of State or its equivalent.

The Ambassador indicated his understanding that Adoula had informed U Thant that mediation would be undesirable. The Secretary indicated this probably was because mediation has the connotation of being between two sovereign states, which is unacceptable. In the Secretary's view, a quiet behind-the-scenes intermediary is more what present circumstances call for, perhaps Khiari, who is already in the Congo with the UN and apparently is acceptable to both sides. The Secretary expressed hope that today's events might persuade Tshombe that he had better abandon his pretensions and accept reintegration.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/12–561. Confidential. Drafted by Vance and approved in S on December 20. The time of the meeting is taken from Secretary Rusk's appointment book. (Johnson Library)

2 On December 5, U.N. troops forcibly removed a roadblock set up by Katangan forces on the road between Elisabethville and the airport. There had been a number of incidents in the Elisabethville area in the previous days. For Linner's December 6 report, see U.N. doc. S/4940/Add.16. A December 6 memorandum from Williams to Ball summarizing these developments was sent to Bundy with a covering memorandum of the same date from Battle. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

3 Telegram 733 from Elisabethville, received at 4:19 p.m., referred to "sporadic firing." (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–561)

4 Spaak told MacArthur on November 28 that he had concluded the best way to bring Adoula and Tshombe together was to draw up a memorandum setting forth the elements that would provide the basis for an agreement and then sell the solution first to Adoula and then to Tshombe. (Telegram 948 from Brussels, November 28; ibid., 770G.00/11–2861) On December 1, he told MacArthur that he had discussed this proposal with Lord Home in London the previous day and that he was sending an officer from the Foreign Office to London to participate in drafting such a memorandum. (Telegram 976 from Brussels, December 1; ibid., 770G.00/12–161)

5 In the November 29 letter, Lord Home declared that the United Nations could not "take over the task of government in these huge and unruly countries where the primary task for years ahead will be to prevent civil war" and predicted that the U.N. operation in the Congo would "end in disaster unless U Thant can bring Tshombe and Adoula into alliance with each other." He urged closer U.S.–U.K. consultation "on these U.N. matters which can broadly be lumped under the heading of colonialism," declaring that "if in our desire to please some of the Afro-Asians we get every element of stability pushed out of East and Central Africa we shall have done a great disservice to the African continent." (Ibid., Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204, UK Officials Correspondence with Secretary Rusk)

149. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 149. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, December 5, 1961, 8 p.m.

1391. Linner asked me to participate in telex held with SYG today at 1530 hours. I had appointment with Adoula and therefore arrived late but Margolies, AIRA and other Embassy Officers present from beginning.

Linner outlined developments at Elisabethville and his plans for sending reinforcements as follows; 1. 300 Swedish troops plus 6.20 MM anti-aircraft guns sent this morning.

2. USAF to be asked fly directly to Elisabethville with only brief stopover Léopoldville incoming Swedish and Irish reinforcements. Emphasized USAF assistance required to save time and also because likely charter pilots would not be prepared fly into Elisabethville. Furthermore desired send five armed personnel carriers from Léopoldville which are urgently needed in Elisabethville and cannot be lifted in C–119 aircraft.

3. Alerting Nigerian battalion in Léopoldville for move to Elisabethville to be carried by UN aircraft as far as possible but might ask for USAF assistance as well.

4. Swedish Sabes and Indian Canberras alerted to go in after first light tomorrow with principal targets troop movements toward Elisabethville from Jadotville, plus others to be designated by local Commander. Jets being moved forward from Luluabourg to Kamina where jet fuel prepositioned.

SYG replied he fully supported action taken by Linner and directed move reinforcements of all kinds into Katanga to extent considered necessary. He endorsed employment jets and moving jets forward to Kamina if Linner and Elisabethville Commander felt necessary. He gave full approval use USAF aircraft for moving reinforcements to Elisabethville and said he was requesting most urgently USG approve use US aircraft for lifting reinforcements.

At this point I joined telex as USAF aircraft had been placed at disposition UN subject to condition they should not be used to break cease-fire, which broken by Katangan forces, authorized use US aircraft for lifting reinforcements to Elisabethville provided US lives not unreasonably endangered.

This was communicated by Linner to SYG with request USUN be informed my action. SYG said Linner should go ahead and he would immediately inform USUN.

USCINCEUR representative working out details with UNOC air staff and assuring jet support.2

For Hoffacker: Bear in mind presence US C–124's which of course can be used evacuate Americans and Europeans on space available basis.

USCINCEUR representative and Embassy Officer Devlin probably accompanying first C–124 tomorrow.

Godley

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–561. Official Use Only. Also sent to USUN and Salisbury and repeated to London, Paris, Brussels, and Elisabethville.

2 A December 5 memorandum for the files by Rusk's Special Assistant, Theodore C. Achilles, records a telephone conversation with Deputy Director of the Joint Staff Rear Admiral J.H. Wellings concerning a U.N. request for the use of U.S. aircraft to transport troops from Léopoldville to Elisabethville. After discussion, Achilles and Wellings agreed that JCS telegram 1559 (see footnote 1, Document 117) authorized the use of U.S. transport aircraft if the USCINCEUR representative was satisfied the flights could be made without undue risk. (Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/12–561) Telegram JCS 2476 to USCINCEUR, December 5, directed the use of U.S. aircraft for intra-Congo airlift during the emergency under the terms of reference in JCS 1559. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo Cables)

150. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 150. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, December 6, 1961, 1 p.m.

739. British Consul Dunnett has just come from Kimba (12:30 p.m.) with following message which he was asked deliver to me. I called Kimba, who in violent state, repeated much same and said I should not try to communicate with him further.

"Because of American planes bringing UN reinforcements to Katanga and because of American planes bombing Kolwezi, American Consul will be arrested if he leaves his Consulate. Attitude of U.S. Government [garble—repugnant?] because it claims represent free world but practicing racial discrimination and racialism here. UN protection will not be adequate to protect American Consul."

GOK mortar now being placed in front of Presidential Palace, which adjacent to Consulate.

Dunnett agreed send written message from me to Kimba immediately along following lines: 1. I looking urgently into matter of American bombing Kolwezi, first I have heard of this.

2. I have not considered asking for UN guard, relying as always on expectation that GOK will render me, my staff, Consulate, and subjects normal protection.

3. In interests of clarity and precision, believe written GOK statement to be transmitted to Washington would be helpful. (Kimba has already refused such message to me saying he too busy.)

4. I would be pleased send any other message, as always, to Washington or to Senator Dodd.

5. Would be happy call on him or any of his Ministers any time anywhere.

Dunnett asks that this message be transmitted to UK sources London, New York, and Washington.

Dunnett says Kibwe said last night to Frenkiel (Rector of [garble—University]) that Tshombe, who would probably agree to cease fire with UN, is being prevented return here by military and other [garble] who want keep on fighting to bloody end. Believe Tshombe must be induced, despite this report, return immediately to attempt restore some sort of order, which diminishing hourly.

Shall see what Consular Corps may be able do regarding my personal case.2

Hoffacker

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–661. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, London, Paris, Salisbury, and USUN.

2 Telegram 742 from Elisabethville, December 6, reported that the Consuls had agreed the best course was to await Tshombe's return. (Ibid., 770G.00/12–661) Telegram 444 to Elisabethville, December 6, stated that the Department had asked the British Foreign Office to contact Tshombe through Salisbury if possible, inform him of the threat to Hoffacker, urge its repudiation, and stress the possibility of serious consequences if it was not revoked. Concerning Kimba's allegations, the telegram stated that U.N., not U.S., planes had strafed, not bombed, Kolwezi after a Katangan plane based there had bombed Elisabethville. (Ibid., 770G.00/12–661)

151. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State 151. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State1

Brussels, December 6, 1961, 9 p.m.

1005. Congo. Department telegram 1322;2 Embassy telegrams 988 and 995.3 I discussed proposals to bring economic pressure on Tshombe (Department telegram 1322) with Spaak last evening.

1. He confirmed Van den Bosch statement (Embassy telegram 995) that when negotiations with Congo re financial problems are successfully completed following restoration of diplomatic relations, GOB will transfer to Congolese Government portfolio which includes shares in Katanga companies now held in trust by GOB.

2. He said while GOB does not apparently have legal authority to prevent private Belgian companies such as Union Miniere from agreeing to transfer of legal seat of corporations to Katanga he would do everything in his power to persuade them not to go along with Katangese Government on this as he agrees with us and is totally opposed to it.

3. I also suggested A) possibility of requiring Belgian companies operating in Katanga to pay dividends on Congo portfolio shares directly to GOC and B) withdrawal technical assistance personnel from Katanga and repatriation dependents of Belgian residents. Spaak was non-committal, saying these matters under study but they raised problems.

4. In conclusion, I mentioned desirability of European airlines servicing Elisabethville suspending such traffic. He said this new idea which he had not considered and he would want it studied before making any comment.

MacArthur

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–661. Confidential. Repeated to USUN, Léopoldville, Elisabethville, London, Paris, The Hague, and Salisbury.

2 Document 145.

3 Telegram 988, December 5, reported that Spaak had told MacArthur that evening that the Belgians and British had almost agreed on a memorandum that they hoped would serve as a basis for agreement between Adoula and Tshombe. Telegram 995, also December 5, reported that MacArthur had taken up the proposals in the first two paragraphs of telegram 988 (Document 145) with van den Bosch that morning and had asked him to bring them to Spaak's attention. (Both in Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–561)

152. Special National Intelligence Estimate 152. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, December 7, 1961.

SNIE 65–2–61

POSSIBLE DEVELOPMENTS IN KATANGA

The Problem

To assess (a) the possibilities for negotiation between the Central Government and Katanga; (b) the consequences of Tshombe's departure or ouster from Katanga; (c) the consequences of a continued impasse between the Central Government and Katanga.2

The Estimate

I. Introduction

1. The reintegration of Katanga province into the Congo Republic is now becoming such a critical issue as to threaten the position of Prime Minister Cyrille Adoula. At the moment, negotiations between Adoula and Katanga President Moise Tshombe are stymied by the inability of either to bring effective pressure to bear on the other. The essential issue is the form of political organization for the Congo: confederation as demanded by Tshombe or a federal-type arrangement with a fairly strong central government as held by Adoula and the moderates. However, the strict limitations on their bargaining powers—imposed by conditions beyond their control—make each reluctant and indeed unable to offer concessions to the other. Moreover, the fighting which has broken out during the past several days in the Elisabethville area probably will affect the possibility of initiating systematic discussions of the constitutional issue. Exactly how, it is as yet too early to tell.

II. Sources of Tshombe's Strength

2. Tshombe receives strong backing throughout much of the province from his own Lunda tribal groups, and, in association with his chief lieutenants, Interior Minister Munongo and Foreign Minister Kimba, enjoys tribal support throughout southern and eastern Katanga among the predominant non-Baluba peoples. Tshombe also obtains important financial resources from Katanga's mineral properties, which account for about 50 percent of the Congo's budgetary income and which are still largely owned and operated by Belgian interests. Katanga presently receives about $44 million annually in tax revenues and dividends from the Union Miniere and related companies. These contributions are paid to Katanga, via Brussels, and are used for Tshombe's military and other expenditures. Tshombe also receives considerable advice and guidance from the Union Miniere managers in Katanga; they, in turn, are to some extent dependent upon him for protection and for the right to continue to operate.

3. White settlers in Northern Rhodesia and Angola fear an extension of the Congo's disorder into their areas. To prevent this, they are willing to give some political support and to countenance the passage of some military supplies, mercenaries, and advisers to Tshombe. They are also willing to grant Katanga continued access to the sea for its exports. In Katanga, the remaining Belgian colons—upwards of 15,000—contribute to the comparatively healthy economy and provide badly-needed technical and administrative assistance. Moreover, some 500 Belgian colon "minutemen" and a 400-man European mercenary force constitute an effective core of military strength and in addition provide leadership to Katangan troops. The latter, up to the present at least, have proved superior to the Central Government's unruly army.

III. Tshombe's Attitude Toward Negotiation

4. Tshombe harbors grave doubts about the wisdom of negotiating with Adoula. In his eyes, Léopoldville lacks sufficient political strength and administrative ability to govern effectively. He is afraid that the radicals holding important positions in the present administration will soon prevail over Adoula. In these circumstances, and recalling Lumumba's fate and his own earlier mistreatment at the hands of Congolese politicians, Tshombe fears for his personal safety should he go to Léopoldville. He fears for his political future should he accept any offer for high office in the present Central Government. He is also suspicious that any arrangement he might make with the Central Government concerning Katanga's revenues would fail to survive for very long once he gave up his "independence."

5. In Elisabethville, Tshombe is the strongest leader, but he is dependent upon the political support of his aides. It would be difficult for him to go far to meet Adoula's demands without incurring strong opposition from Munongo, Kimba, and their followers, the Lunda tribes, and the Europeans. Neither Munongo nor Kimba, the more extreme of the Katanga separatists, would be acceptable to the strong radical elements in the Central Government on whom Adoula must depend, even if he personally could accept Tshombe.

6. In these circumstances, it is unlikely that Tshombe will undertake serious negotiation with the Central Government unless significant new pressures can be brought to bear on him. We explore below the various pressures which might be employed, including diplomatic and economic measures, moves by the Central Government, and actions by the UN.

IV. Katangan Vulnerability to Pressure

7. Diplomatic pressure on Tshombe has been notably unsuccessful. The Belgian Government itself can exercise only limited authority over the many private Belgians and Belgian interests involved. There is probably little more that Premier Spaak can accomplish in view of his own political problems in Belgium. Because large sectors of public opinion in Europe are favorable to Tshombe, and because some moderates within African colonial and ex-colonial areas feel likewise, most of the European colonial and ex-colonial powers are unenthusiastic about applying pressure on him. In any case, we do not believe that mere persuasion, in the absence of strong military or economic pressure, will have any decisive effect upon Tshombe's position.

8. Presumably, economic pressure on Tshombe could be exercised through attempts to force the Union Miniere, for example, to pay taxes to the Central Government instead of to Katanga, and to permit the Central Government to acquire dividends paid by commercial interests operating in Katanga. However, we believe these measures would take many months to prepare, and their usefulness would depend heavily on the willingness of the Belgian Government and other European commercial interests to cooperate fully in their execution. While these measures would—if effectively applied—substantially reduce the financial resources available to Tshombe, they probably would not in themselves force him to accept Adoula's terms. Moreover, Tshombe could take countermeasures in Katanga itself which might blunt their effect.

9. Tshombe is weak in the northern half of Katanga, largely populated by the Baluba tribes. The Central Government is attempting to establish a Baluba state there, and has succeeded in stirring up some sentiment to that end. It has been assisted by some 2,000 troops from Stanleyville, whose entry into the region has been facilitated by the UN. However, even if such efforts should achieve some success, they would not get at the major sources of Tshombe's strength, would perhaps strengthen Gizengist influence in Katanga, and would open up the prospect of uncontrollable tribal warfare.

10. There would be a strong incentive for Tshombe to accommodate to the Central Government's terms if real strength and order developed in the areas now only nominally under Central Government control. If Tshombe ever came to realize that he was becoming isolated because the Central Government had effective armed forces, a functioning economy, and strong international support, then he would find it very difficult to hold out against negotiating some kind of arrangement satisfactory to the Central Government. However, the problems confronting the Central Government are so enormous that it would be many months before it could project so strong an image.

11. The greatest threat to the Katanga Government is that posed by UN military operations now going on in the province. Whatever may have been the immediate cause for the collapse of the cease-fire, the UN now appears to be attempting through a show of military force to convince Tshombe and his lieutenants that the die is cast and that he had best come to terms while he can still bargain. Given their present strength and deployment, UN forces will probably have great difficulty in accomplishing this, and may be able to do little more than maintain their present positions. With some reinforcement, which now seems to be taking place from within the Congo, they may be able to establish limited control in certain areas. However, the withdrawal of forces from other parts of the Congo is leaving those areas dangerously exposed to new disorders arising from army indiscipline, tribal enmities, and political intrigues.

V. The Consequences of Tshombe's Departure or Ouster

12. It appears that pressure upon the Katanga Government for a negotiated agreement with Léopoldville will be very difficult to apply effectively. It is, of course, conceivable that Tshombe and his lieutenants might be removed by more forceful and direct means—assassination, accident, or full-scale UN intervention. In such an event, there would be a virtually complete political vacuum in the area. There is no obvious local leader who would be generally acceptable throughout Katanga. There would be aspirants for leadership, including some in the present Katanga Government, and a number of tribal enclaves might be established.

13. The most serious problem which would be posed by the destruction of the Katanga regime would be the danger of large-scale tribal warfare, either as a natural consequence of confusion in the wake of Tshombe's removal, or as the result of an attempt by the Central Government to impose an administration unacceptable, on tribal or other grounds, in considerable portions of Katanga. If it were to avoid complete chaos, the UN would almost certainly be forced to exercise extensive, if not virtually complete, governing authority in Katanga for an indefinite period.

14. In the event that Tshombe should be eliminated through assassination or an accident which left his principal lieutenants unharmed, the latter would attempt to continue the Katanga regime and to carry out essentially the same policies which Tshombe has pursued. However, they would be more erratic and extreme, and would probably be confronted with more internal dissension and conflict, partly of their own making.

VI. Consequences of a Continued Impasse

15. Adoula has been under great pressure to solve the Katanga problem ever since he became Prime Minister. He has always been vulnerable because he lacks strong political or tribal support in his own right, and he has been dependent upon a variety of political forces, extremist, moderate, and tribal, whose support might be withdrawn at any time. If he fails to reintegrate Katanga soon he may be ousted by the extremists; moreover, he runs a similar risk should he lower his sights and come to an accommodation with Tshombe on essentially the latter's terms. His political position would obviously be greatly strengthened, not only against his political enemies in the Léopoldville Government but against Tshombe as well, if he could demonstrate that he had access to substantial funds, military supplies, and foreign assistance not available to other Congolese politicians.

16. At the moment, Adoula is probably hoping that the UN will rescue him from his difficulties. If the UN should fail to resolve the Katanga problem in the present context, he himself may feel compelled to undertake military operations against Katanga, and to obtain military assistance from non-UN sources in order to do so. If he cannot get this from the West, he will probably accept offers already made by the Soviet Bloc. Ironically, even if the Katanga problem were settled on Adoula's terms, his political future would still be in jeopardy. Opposition to Tshombe has been a unifying force; it has brought moderates and extremists alike together under Adoula. Once this force is removed the radicals would be disposed to try to overturn Adoula.

17. Whatever may be done to resolve Katanga's separatism, the Congo as a whole seems likely to remain in turmoil for many months to come, with UN presence required for an indefinite period if a minimum degree of order is to be maintained. Aside from the problems of Katanga and the Gizengists, the Congo seems likely to remain plagued with the problems of lack of army discipline, massive unemployment, lack of national consciousness, tribal rivalries, and lack of leadership and training at all levels of government and in the economy as a whole.

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency Files. Secret. A note on the title page reads in part as follows: "Submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence. The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff."Concurred in by the United States Intelligence Board on 7 December 1961." The representatives of the AEC and FBI abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

2 This estimate was prepared in the early days of renewed fighting between UN and Katangan forces. Accordingly, it is possible that assessments (a) and (c) may be overtaken by events. [Footnote in the source text.]

153. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 153. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy1

Washington, December 9, 1961.

SUBJECT

Courses for the United States in View of Fighting in Katanga

Our objective, like that of the United Nations, remains the restoration and maintenance of law and order and the territorial integrity and the political independence of the Republic of the Congo. Following Katangan military attacks against UN forces, the latter are taking action to defend themselves, to place the UN in a position of military superiority and thereby bring about conditions conducive to reconciliation between Tshombe and Adoula.

Our action is directed along these lines: a) Assure the UN of our support, political and material, for its operation in Katanga;

b) Encourage the UN to keep its military operation limited as indicated above;

c) Reassure the British, Belgians and French of UN intentions and ours in order to obtain the maximum cooperation from them for the UN operation;

d) Continue to exercise pressure on Tshombe to bring him to negotiate and discourage a last ditch fight by the Katangan army;

e) Ensure that efforts at conciliation go forward to the extent possible parallel with military action.

Ambassador Stevenson conferred on Wednesday2 with UN Secretary General U Thant3 and assured him of our support for UN objectives and operations within the framework of our course of action as outlined above. The Secretary General was appreciative of our support and defined UN objectives in the present operation as a change in the relative power position of the UN and Katanga which would induce the latter toward negotiations. The Secretary General stated his belief that the current military activity must be paralleled by conciliation. He has sent a special representative to Léopoldville to make a second approach to Adoula to consider negotiating with Tshombe. To achieve the necessary position of strength, the UN has undertaken operations designed to achieve quickly control of the key points in Elisabethville, retain control of Kamina and deny the Katangan air force use of Kolwezi, Kipushi and Jadotville air strips. The Secretary General said the UN will take steps to prevent the reinforcement of Katangan troops in Elisabethville and that the UN should also control communication centers, power stations, small air fields, etc. They also recognize the need to protect the industrial centers of Kolwezi, Jadotville and Kipushi in the interest of the Congo's economic future. Finally, the Secretary General assured us that he was working out a comprehensive plan which would assure coordination of the measures taken or envisaged toward achievement of the UN objectives in Katanga.

The Department of Defense believes the UN has the military capability for the tasks outlined above if: 1) it is determined and has the will to succeed,

2) there is a comprehensive UN military plan,

3) the UN military commander has full support from UN headquarters, and

4) the UN command knows its efforts have U.S. support.

(See Enclosure A for details of Defense views.)4

Given the present situation in Katanga, we are convinced that there are no satisfactory alternatives to the actions outlined above. We cannot urge the UN to cease its military activities in Katanga. To try to force the UN to let Katangan military opposition again prevent it from implementing its mandate would destroy for good the image of the U.S. as a supporter of the UN's collective efforts and would open the door to communism in central Africa by destroying all possibility for continued moderate control in the government in Léopoldville. Nor would such a policy assure the security of the European population in Katanga or its industries since a defeat of the UN effort would be likely to result in a left-wing extremist takeover in Léopoldville or the breakdown of the Congo into three or more parts. In either case, the extremists, with the help of the Soviet and Casablanca Blocs, would continue warfare until Katanga was brought under their control. Their efforts could eventually result in a direct military confrontation of East and West in the Congo.

At the same time, there can be no question of urging the UN to apply its entire military means in an all-out effort to occupy Katanga and destroy the Tshombe regime. Such a policy could result in serious damage to the industrial potential of the province, gravely risk the lives of the European and African populations, and might require considerable time and troop reinforcement on the UN side. The UK, France and Belgium would certainly oppose such action.

We should attempt to persuade certain friendly governments to join with us in taking the following actions: a) Prevent effectively the use of their territories as bases for military, governmental or diplomatic operations by the Katanga government;

b) Apply such economic pressures as can speedily be put into effect and prepare other measures along these lines;

c) Advise Tshombe of the economic and political measures they are undertaking and impress upon him that negotiations with Adoula in good faith offer his only prospect of survival as a political leader and of peace and stability for Katanga;

d) Announce that their nationals involved in the fighting in Katanga will be denied any protection, lose their passports and face repatriation.

The Western powers should urge the UN to continue its present policy of striving to bring about conciliation between Adoula and Tshombe so long as Tshombe does not resort to all-out war against the UN and so long as he retains such measure of political power as is required to make him a legitimate party to such negotiations. The Western powers should emphasize to the UN the dangers of destroying the provincial authorities of Katanga and the Conakat party, in view of their role in maintaining law and order and the desirability of balanced political representation of Katanga. We should continue to keep in close contact with our Western allies on Congo policies and give fullest attention to ideas on conciliation methods as well as on elements of a possible solution they might produce.

In the contingency of a breakdown of the Tshombe government, there would appear to be no alternative but for the UN to assume responsibility for continued administration wherever necessary and exhort the Belgian technicians remaining in Katanga to cooperate with the UN. We will also urge the UN to make every effort to protect the political rights of the population until peace and order have been re-established and the stage set for new elections.

We must be ready to urge Adoula to give serious consideration to any reasonable approach which would permit conciliation and to work out the integration of Katanga in a peaceful way.

Dean Rusk5

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. Drafted by Eisenberg and Canup, according to the Department of State copy. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.00/12–961) A handwritten note on the source text reads: "Bundy has original."

2 December 6.

3 Gullion, Williams, Yost, Bunche, and Narasimhan were also present. The conversation was reported in telegram 1995 from USUN, December 6. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–661)

4 The enclosure, not printed, summarized the U.N. operations in Katanga and Department of Defense views.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this stamped signature.

154. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 154. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State1

Paris, December 11, 1961, 10 p.m.

Secto 9. Congo discussed December 11 tripartite meeting.2 British expressed strong dismay with course of events in Congo contrasting U Thant statement3 with that made by Linner who interprets his role as duty to get rid of Tshombe and has so stated to Swedish journalist. Desire for revenge particularly on part of Indians is another factor. Stressed problem UK confronted within today's Commons debate. Said UK believes UN must take an initiative to obtain a cease-fire and then its role must be re-defined. If fighting continues and spreads into heart of Elisabethville, UK may have to withdraw its suport of UN effort. He added UK will suspend delivery of bombs until it assured U Thant in control of situation.

Home expressed hope three could approve now taking some sort of action, perhaps in Security Council or perhaps through approach to U Thant which would give UK Government better posture in Commons. Suggested possibility drafting of resolution for Security Council which, even if vetoed by Soviets, would set forth Western position. Elements of resolution could include: Unification of Congo, recognition of Kasavubu authority, cease-fire, and re-definition UN role.

Secretary replied it difficult make determination on this point in Paris, as we not aware all elements of problem and latest developments. Three delegations in New York could study matter.

Couve reserved on French action in UN stating French delegation could not vote for a resolution but could express views and be helpful.

During lengthy discussion of Congo Secretary stressed necessity supporting Adoula and limiting possibilities for Gizenga to profit. We do not believe UN should or can take on extensive military mission. Future calls for cease-fire and contacts between Adoula and Tshombe with aim of unified Congo with provincial autonomy but Central Government in effective enough control to prevent shift to Gizenga government. Question before us is what sort of pressures can be put on Tshombe and who can apply them.

Home replied Welensky might be induced to persuade Tshombe to meet with Adoula if cease-fire obtained and UN role re-defined. Home doubted Union Miniere could exact [exert?] pressure in view its fear of nationalization.

Couve said West faces real dilemma in Katanga. Should UN be defeated, would be most difficult to come to terms with Tshombe and very process of fighting can create nation in Katanga. If Tshombe defeated, only result may be extension chaos. Perhaps loss of face UN would suffer through cease-fire is least costly.

Possibility of a discreet approach to U Thant was discussed. Hope would be for general cease-fire. Secretary said some sort of parallel approach to Tshombe would also be needed.

Agreed to discuss subject further after Secretary had opportunity talk to Department.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1161. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to USUN, Léopoldville, London, and Brussels. Rusk was in Paris December 10–15 for quadripartite Foreign Ministers meetings and a NATO Ministerial Meeting. Documentation is ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366, CF 2002 and 2003.

2 A memorandum of the meeting among Secretary Rusk, Lord Home, and Couve de Murville is ibid., Central Files, 396.1–PA/12–1161.

3 Reference is to a statement issued on December 10. For text, see Public Papers of the Secretaries-General, vol. VI, pp. 57–59, or American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 860–861.

155. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Paris 155. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Paris1

Washington, December 11, 1961, 9:33 p.m.

Tosec 16. From Ball for Secretary. In light our most recent info from Katanga and following our telephone conversation,2 we have reviewed current situation. Our conclusions are: 1. Our information is that so far, UN military action has not proceeded beyond attempt to achieve limited military objectives set forth in USUN's 2060 (rpt Paris 256).3 However, we are watching situation carefully and have insisted on getting from UNNY and UNOC not only current situation reports but forward operational plans.

2. We are persuaded here that the UN should continue its effort to achieve these limited military objectives. Seems essential for UN to arrive at least to stage where its forces solidly entrenched at key points, demonstrating impossible for Tshombe's Government to dislodge them by harassment. If this can be accomplished by ceasefire negotiations, so much the better, but to accomplish this it would be necessary for Tshombe to accept conditions substantially equivalent to those U Thant has transmitted to him via the British.

3. We should continue press for beginning conciliation process. We believe efforts at negotiation must follow parallel track with military efforts achieve limited objectives outlined by U Thant. On this, it largely up to our allies—it is particularly UK, Belgians and French who have leverage with Tshombe to make him see he has no reasonable alternative but to negotiate in good faith with Adoula. We also continue stress this point in our discussions with UN officials.

4. Latest information from New York (being wired to you separately4 suggests Union Miniere is pressing Tshombe to go with Bunche to meet Adoula. If this actually happens, we would then reappraise ceasefire conditions in light of military situation then prevailing around Elizabethville.

5. We do not believe that forcing the UN to capitulate by agreeing to premature cease-fire or by withdrawing Western political support provides a real alternative. To do so would have direct consequences on the UN organization itself, on our relations with a number of African and Asian countries, would invite prolonged civil war in the Congo itself with probable eventual Soviet involvement and would result in the fall of the Adoula Govt and the re-emergence of Gizenga in Stanleyville.

Following are brief specific observations regarding current developments which may be useful to you in any further conversations you may have.

Current Military Position: The UN has virtually completed buildup of forces in Elizabethville which now total nearly 5,000 men. UN expects to make major move in city by Wednesday. We now attempting clarify UN plans but we believe major component UN attack will be encirclement of military camp near city and attempt capture its garrison. Apart from this contemplated action, UN has largely neutralized Katanga Air Force by strafing airfields and has prevented re-enforcements from arriving Elizabethville.

Linner Statement: We know UK concerned that statement attributed to Linner has made it appear that UN going far beyond limited objective outlined to us. We have checked this carefully with Parsons, and we find that Linner misquoted, that Linner himself issued categorical denial Saturday night. UK, by now should be reassured since, according to Yost, reporter who reported Linner statement has also stated publicly that Swedish newspaper did not print his report accurately as he had sent it. Parsons is repeating from Stockholm full details this aspect to you.

Brigading of ANC troops with UNOC: We are instructing Emb Léopoldville, as well as USUN, to express hope there will be no ANC participation in UNOC operations in Katanga. We would regard such participation as undesirable since joint ANC–UN operation would be heavily criticized by European allies as evidence UN objectives not of limited character but rather to impose political solution by military means.

Activities of Indian Charge: Indian Charge Rahman, now in Elizabethville, reportedly goading Indian General Raja to take severe measures against Katanga. We will discuss this problem with Bunche who arrives in Elizabethville Dec 12 on conciliation and political and military fact-finding mission. Unless he able remedy situation, we can expect hear more and more from Belgians and British of nefarious Indian influence in Congo.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1161. Secret. Drafted by Tron, Buffum, Sisco, and Ball; cleared by Vance and Burdett; and approved by Ball. Repeated to USUN, Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and Paris.

2 Rusk had expressed concern about the situation in the Congo in two telephone conversations with Ball that day, pointing out British concern and inquiring about the possibility of a U.N.-declared cease-fire. (Telephone conversations, December 11, 9:10 a.m. and 2:40 p.m.; Kennedy Library, Ball Papers)

3 Telegram 2060 from USUN, December 11, reported that Narasimhan had told Yost that he had sent a message to Tshombe [text not declassified] with the U.N. terms for ending military operations in Katanga: 1) U.N. occupation of the strong points in Elisabethville it had occupied in September, such as the post office and fire station; 2) all other troops on both sides to be confined to barracks, with law and order to be maintained by police armed only with truncheons; 3) U.N. establishment of garrisons in Jadotville and Kolwezi; and 4) U.N. forces to have freedom of circulation throughout Katanga. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1161)

4 In telegram 2070 from USUN, December 11. (Ibid.)

156. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Paris 156. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Paris1

Washington, December 12, 1961, 9:27 p.m.

Tosec 35. In full review Congo situation with President2 following viewpoints developed and actions projected: 1. Information from UN NY indicates UN military objectives in fact more limited than cease-fire terms summarized in USUN's 2060 (256 to Paris).3 UN intends establish position of strength in Elisabethville, but attempt to put UN troops into Jadotville and Kolwezi is not part of current military plan. UN NY indicates major operation Elisabethville will start as soon as local commanders feel re-enforcements are adequate to do the job "painlessly with little loss of life". This will probably be before end of this week.

2. President reconfirmed US policy to go ahead on present lines, supporting UN in achievement its limited military objective. We want to push for Adoula –Tshombe talks, but agree with UN that cease-fire should not precede actual beginning of talks since important maximize Tshombe's incentive to talk in good faith.

Wire service reports of alleged US-UK-French cease-fire call promptly shot down here.

3. British and Belgians have drafted a possible basis of negotiations between Adoula and Tshombe (Brussels 1024; repeated USUN 288).4 Its main feature is emphasis on advance agreement to scrap Loi Fondamentale in favor looser federal or confederal structure. Its main omission seems to be any reference to fact Adoula is head of national government. We are asking Gullion to consider (with Bunche who is now in Léopoldville) what minimal changes could be made in Belgian-British draft to make it acceptable to Adoula and Tshombe as basis negotiations.

4. Continuing contact with Admiral Kirk of Union Miniere (by Stevenson re-enforced by telephone call Bundy-Kirk) indicates Union Miniere really trying get Tshombe turned toward negotiations. Stevenson reports Dean (UK) in response hourly urgings on telephone from London, very anxious for US and UK make joint suggestion to U Thant for some kind of cease-fire arrangement. Stevenson has taken line that cease-fire not possible until Tshombe brought to water and drinking.

5. We prepared to facilitate Adoula-Tshombe meeting in every possible way, including assistance in protection to extent that is possible. We are convinced that way can be found assure Tshombe's security on an airfield or a ship. Pervasive misunderstanding of rationale for USG support of UN Katanga operation, combined with static from Europe, will require us give more attention to briefing press here. Ball holding press briefing with prepared statement ten-thirty December thirteenth.5

7. Recommend you make general lines of this cable especially paragraph 2 clear to British, French and Belgians.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1261. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Cleveland, cleared by Vance and in substance by Miller, and approved by Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs McGhee. Repeated to USUN for Stevenson and to London, Brussels, and Léopoldville.

2 No other record of the discussion has been found.

3 See footnote 2, Document 155.

4 Telegram 1024 from Brussels, December 7, transmitted the text of a Belgian-U.K. memorandum. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–761)

5 For text, see Department of State Bulletin, January 1, 1962, pp. 12–13; extracts are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 862–863.

157. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Embassy in France 157. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Embassy in France1

Léopoldville, December 13, 1961.

616. Paris for Secretary.

1. Prime Min Adoula summoned me before breakfast this morning to plead that US refrain from any move for cease-fire in Katanga operations and that it discourage other powers from doing so. He had been alarmed by reports received during night that US had joined with UK and France calling for cease-fire.

2. Adoula said such move would plunge country into full crisis. His govt was already severely tried and would surely fall.

3. Adoula insisted cease-fire would turn Congo over to "East." He said fact USSR "silent on Gizenga's activities" while falling back on operations clearly showed it hoped profit by cease-fire push Gizenga into power.

4. Adoula went on say generous US actions had "finally" begun register even with mass mind and was one of his govt's assets. He would regret see all US aid wasted and US moral credit exhausted.

5. Adoula insisted his govt had no intention subduing or enslaving Katanga; it merely wished bring Katanga back "within law." Fundamental Law already being modified and Constitution being drafted, and he wanted Katanga participate this process. Moreover statute of Katanga itself would be only that which Katanga Provincial Assembly should develop. He had no punitive intentions.

Told Adoula I would pass along his views urgently. Said I could not deny that out of understandable concern, there were diplomatic pressures for cease-fire but that I knew of no tripartite declaration such as he had cited.

6. Took occasion to say that it would contribute greatly to confirming support for his policies in my country if he could make even more categoric his views on Gizenga in public declaration and, if possible, in visit to US. Also urged him expand on his intentions with respect to Katanga in a public address, and also in tracts addressed to Katangese soldiers. (I referred him to Lincoln's post-war policy, Second Inaugural, etc.)

7. Adoula prepared denounce Gizenga but has again run into trouble in form of rift with Gbenye (Embtel 1477 rptd Paris 613).2 Said he had already undertaken explain break with Gizenga to African countries partly through Julien Kasongo mission. Read me telegram from latter from Cairo claiming Nasser promised withdraw support from Gizenga and remove UAR mission from Stan to Leo. Adoula agreed with me Gizenga certainly had other sources support. He did confirm no further financial advances from central govt were being made Gizenga.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1461. Secret; Niact. Received at 10:26 a.m. on December 13 and repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, and the Department as telegram 1480, which is the source text. The source text, which is incorrectly dated December 14, does not indicate the time of transmission.

2 Telegram 1477 from Léopoldville, December 12, reported that Gbenye had tried to dismiss Surete chief Nendaka, but that both sides seemed to be willing to put the quarrel aside for the time being. The Embassy commented that if Adoula backed Gbenye it would risk the breakup of the coalition government. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12– 1261)

158. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation 158. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation1

December 13, 1961.

SUBJECT

Congo

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Secretary Rusk

Acting Secretary Ball

The President and Acting Secretary Ball spoke to Secretary Rusk in Paris over the open telephone line. Before the President joined the conversation Mr. Ball said that he wished to give a situation report on the Congo. The Secretary interjected that he understood the UN offensive was to start today. He went on to say that there had been a heated discussion in NAC on the subject. He though that we should not accept responsibility for all that the UN was doing in the Congo. It was estimated in Paris that there could be real trouble in London in Parliament on the issue. Mr. Ball confirmed that the UN offensive was set to start on Thursday.2 The Secretary thought that this was bad timing. Mr. Ball stressed that the UN intended to seize just the key points, then there would be a cease fire. The Secretary inquired whether on Thursday there might be a call for a cease fire and then the UN might be given two or three days to get its military action over with while arrangements for the cease fire were being worked out. Mr. Ball suggested that the UN operation might take longer than two or three days. The Secretary expressed the hope that it would be done fast and that it would succeed.

The President joined the conversation at this point. The Secretary said the Congo was the most pressing item of business in Paris. He was having dinner that evening with Spaak, Lord Home and others. The Congo operation was considered our war. The President suggested that he might talk by telephone to Prime Minister Macmillan. He could mention the Volta Dam decision3 which might help. He said it was difficult to get a precise understanding about Congo matters. The Secretary cautioned against overestimating the UN military capabilities. The President expressed the view that while we had an understanding with the UN in New York, other UN personnel wished to go much further than was in our interests. He said our Western friends should use their influence with Tshombe. The Secretary agreed that they should work on Tshombe while we worked on Adoula, then Bunche might get the two parties together. The President concurred. He expressed the opinion that the Belgian-British proposal for an agreement between Tshombe and Adoula was a good basic document; however, it did not include mention of Adoula. If this were added it could become a basis for agreement. The trouble was the military action in the next few days.

The Secretary thought the Congo could be a major question in London on Thursday; it could really topple the government. Prime Minister Macmillan might have to say some pretty extreme things. The President said that he understood that. The purpose of the operation was to get Tshombe to move. Everyone seemed to agree on this objective.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Burdett. Filed with an undated covering memorandum from Battle to Bundy. The conversation apparently took place between 4:35 and 5 p.m. Washington time. The President's appointment book indicates that Ball, Cleveland, Williams, and Dungan were with him at that time. (Kennedy Library)

2 December 14.

3 Documentation concerning this is scheduled for publication in volume XXI.

159. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation 159. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation1

December 13, 1961.

SUBJECT

Congo

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Prime Minister Macmillan

After discussing the Congo with the Secretary in Paris, the President called Prime Minister Macmillan on the secure line. He first informed the Prime Minister that we were going ahead with the Volta Dam and were sending Randall2 to see Nkrumah. The decision would not be announced for a day or so in order that certain steps might be taken here.

The President then called the Prime Minister's attention to the statement on the Congo issued by Acting Secretary Ball at a press conference today. He said we had sent instructions to Ambassador Gullion to see Ralph Bunche to ask him to get together with Adoula. Bunche was requested to determine if the Belgian-British document3 could form the basis for an agreement with Tshombe. The document failed to mention Adoula; some such reference would have to be included. If Adoula was receptive, Bunche would see Tshombe. We would arrange for a secure meeting place for Tshombe and Adoula.

The President laid great stress on the sharply limited nature of the UN operation in the Congo. He said the UN intended to seize only key points. The Belgian-British document could be used as the basis for an agreement. We were trying to get Bunche to see Adoula today. It would be most helpful if the UK would use all its influence on Tshombe to accept the Belgian-British document as a basis for agreement. Tshombe should be given great autonomy but should not insist on independent status. The Adoula government must be kept from collapsing. The US would use its influence on Adoula to secure his agreement. Only limited time was available. Prime Minister Macmillan agreed.

The President said we had emphasized to the UN that the only military operation we can support is a limited one aimed at securing key points in Elizabethville and free communications. We were not supporting land operations against other communities. It was necessary to try to get Tshombe to accept Adoula as Prime Minister and to agree to a single state. The Prime Minister agreed. The President said that if nothing were done militarily we would not be able to get Tshombe to make this concession. Once he agreed to this the military operation would cease.

The President expressed the view that there was no doubt certain of the UN military wanted to go much further; they were much more ambitious. This was especially true of the Indians. Some wished to crush Tshombe. It was necessary to use our influence to prevent that.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12– 1361. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Burdett and approved by the White House on December 20. The conversation took place after President Kennedy and Ball spoke to Rusk in Paris; see Document 158.

2 Former Chairman of the Council on Foreign Economic Policy Clarence Randall.

3 See footnote 3, Document 156.

160. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 160. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, December 13, 1961, 9:28 p.m.

1017. For Ambassador Gullion. Confirming telephone conversation with President2 believe we must move forward promptly toward reconciliation between Tshombe and Adoula. Steps to this end should accompany present limited UNOC military action. We hope that military operations may be concluded quickly as soon as political objective, i.e., obliging Tshombe enter into meaningful negotiations with Adoula, is accomplished.

Accordingly you should get in touch with Ralph Bunche soonest and urge that he impress upon Adoula importance of early discussions with Tshombe. You should urge Bunche to attempt persuade Adoula that document developed by Belgium and UK, with addition of appropriate mention of Adoula as Prime Minister, could form basis for agreement. If Adoula is receptive Bunche should then see Tshombe. We are prepared to arrange for secure meeting place for Tshombe and Adoula, for example by providing plane or ship if desired by both. You should explain to Bunche our understanding of strictly limited nature of UN operations.

Request you support approaches by Bunche to Adoula as appropriate.

FYI. President has asked General Norstad to send to Léopoldville immediately high ranking military officer to assist you in assessing and reporting on military activities particularly relationship UNOC activities to limited objectives we seek support.3 End FYI.

For Stevenson: Please inform U Thant of this action taken pursuant his policy and in process soliciting his views underscore importance we attach to Bunche's proceeding along above lines.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1361. Secret; Niact. Drafted and approved by Burdett and cleared in substance by Williams, Wallner, Dungan, and McGeorge Bundy. Repeated to USUN, Paris for Rusk, Brussels, and London.

2 No record of the conversation has been found, but see Document 161. Ball told Stevenson in a telephone conversation at 5:50 p.m. that day that "the President is terribly concerned that this business has gotten out of control locally and the local UN command may have bigger ambitions than the Secretary General has in New York." Ball told Stevenson that Kennedy had talked to Gullion that day and that "the President wants to make sure that our objective is very limited and well defined and adhered to and not exceeded." (Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Congo)

3 JCS telegram 2616 to USARMA Léopoldville, December 15, appointed Major General Mercer C. Walter, USA, as Assistant to the Ambassador. (Ibid., National Security Files, Congo Cables) A December 11 memorandum from the President's Military Representative General Maxwell D. Taylor to the JCS Chairman had inquired as to the adequacy of information on U.N. military operations in the Congo. (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Box 17, Folder 8: Papers, Military Representative) Walter was in the Congo only briefly however; telegram 1635 from Léopoldville, December 23, reported that he and Gullion agreed that the presence of an officer of his rank was no longer necessary. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.5811/12–2361)

161. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 161. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, December 14, 1961, 3 a.m.

1489. Department for President. London for Ambassador. Paris for Secretary and Ambassador. Brussels for Ambassador. USUN for Ambassador.

1. Following telecon with President2 returned to late evening sessions with Prime Minister Adoula, Bunche and Linner, then adjourned to Linner's house further conference with latter two. Discussions under three heads upon which I understood President wished clarifications: (A) Prospects negotiation between Tshombe and Adoula; (B) Command arrangements to ensure civil control and prevent excess by certain elements UN forces; and (C) Scope of UN operational objectives.

2. Discussion with Adoula largely confined to prospect of negotiations. To influence him I drew more from Presidential guidance than was explicit in telecon. Told him that support of UN action to benefit of GOC was enormous political decision; that certain quarters in Washington could well have doubts with respect to readiness of GOC to assume reasonable negotiating posture, post-hostilities. Insisted it imperative that Adoula government at long last formulate and declare its political objectives in conciliatory and constructive sense; Adoula grateful for US support and stated desire to cooperate with US and maintain reputation for flexibility and moderation. He promised to proclaim in radio discourse tomorrow night these "aims" to include reservation voice for Katanga in all local councils and of Katangan institutions and provincial assembly. (President of Chamber of Deputies who sat with Adoula showed some concern lest post-hostilities cease-fire be premature but Adoula checked him.) Followed this conversation with Bunche and Linner who agreed completely and promised to pursue in discussions with Adoula tomorrow.

3. I then discussed UN attitude on negotiations separately with Bunche and Linner with special reference to so-called British-Belgian draft memorandum. Bunche stated purpose of UN was provide environment for meeting Adoula –Tshombe and for useful negotiations. His view of UN role is however limited. He does not consider that UN should or could provide detailed formula. Claimed he was unable comment in detail on UK, Belgian draft, which he said was seeing for first time and which to his knowledge had never been submitted U Thant. Remarked that formula for various modus vivendi too detailed and thus inappropriate for UN comment. Very importantly, however, Bunche indicated Gardiner, also U Thant emissary, was making progress with Adoula. Latter had previously rejected proposal brought by Gardiner for nomination of an Africa "conciliator." Today Adoula had withdrawn an earlier letter rejecting mediator and promised new constructive reply. Bunche assured US that UN's ears attuned for earliest overture from Tshombe, he appreciated importance of parallel thought and action on negotiation while operations in progress. However, neither he nor Linner think prospect good unless military operations quickly successful. In this connection Bunche remaining in Léopoldville two or more days and also indicated Gardiner would remain.

4. We emphasized US concern for command arrangements. Bunche confirmed that General MacEoin (Irish) leaves 2 a.m. this morning to take over Elisabethville operations, with Raja (India) in command. Bunche telephone MacEoin as we were leaving at 1 a.m. to pass our concern along. We expressed worry about revenge-minded Indians (who, however, best combat troops) and need for keeping them under control as well as keeping all responsive to civilian authority. He deplored declaration made earlier by Urquhart that responsibility was being passed military command. We expressed hope that civilian authority and MacEoin supreme command would be made clear in kick-off press conference and in any published command arrangements.

5. I have also discussed role of ANC with Bunche during last two days. He understands American revulsion at any large scale or joint operation. Situation now is that no ANC would take part except upon granting by UN of GOC request which could be delayed. There would be no joint action but very small select group with Stanleyville troops might be placed under UN command; these would be officered by UN. Further it is UN's private view that this would be means for heading off large scale Gizenga participation and would take heat off Adoula. Bunche did say that ANC has some excellent armored cars which are in short supply in UN forces.

With respect to campaign objectives, Bunche categorically confirmed these were limited in sense U Thant declaration. We do not believe that UN plans a wide sweep of province or beat up of population moreover, UN interprets objectives not so much in terms of geography as in relation to SC resolution, especially re mercenaries. Adoula is pressing UN to eschew any cease-fire until mercenary problem is settled. UN believes, however, that if tomorrow's operations successful the eventual deal with Tshombe would include undertakings by him with respect to mercenaries which would be more practical than UN man-hunt. However UN does envisage setting up some kind of council to consider who is mercenary.

In sum, following conversations tonight am relatively satisfied insofar as unknowns can be calculated, that UN will try to carry out President's wishes. Regret exceedingly that neither UN nor GOC seem able to make adequate operational plans for political objectives, and propaganda, psychological warfare. Nevertheless President's conversation has given us opportunity to make strong pitch which we hope will be able to bear some fruit. I can at least say that UN–GOC both disposed to constructive political approach as soon as city of Elisabethville secured.

Military action will as far as possible be confined to military objectives.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1461. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London, Paris, Brussels, and USUN.

2 See Document 160.

162. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 162. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, December 14, 1961, 9:23 p.m.

1028. You will have seen by separate telegram unclassified message President has received from Tshombe offering apparently without conditions negotiate with Adoula together with President's reply informing Tshombe he is urgently exploring possibilities and would again communicate soonest.2

Hoffacker should deliver following message to Tshombe3 from President Kennedy when you obtain Adoula's concurrence. Understand Adoula has already told Bunche he would meet Tshombe in Kitona. Accordingly, President is confident he will concur in effort face Tshombe with opportunity demonstrate preparedness negotiate immediately and reasonably.

Believe Tshombe offer should be looked upon as having been motivated by firm policy UN has been following with full support USG and GOC. Recognize that acceptance by Adoula would call for large measure of statesmanship but believe circumstances which have led Tshombe to make this offer should permit Adoula take this action without undue political risk.

Begin text.

I have received your message, and have been in touch with Acting SYG U Thant and Prime Minister Adoula about it.

I am glad that you are prepared to enter immediate talks with Prime Minister Adoula.

I have designated Ambassador Edmund Gullion to act for me in facilitating rapid arrangements to this end. Secretary General U Thant is making Dr. Ralph Bunche and Mr. Robert Gardiner available to participate on behalf of the United Nations.

My hope is that you can proceed to Kitona for this purpose within a matter of hours.

I am asking Ambassador Gullion to fly to Elisabethville in a United States plane to escort you to Kitona and return you safely to Elisabethville. I am assured that your personal safety at Kitona and throughout the trip will be guaranteed both by the United Nations and by the Central Government. I have full confidence in these assurances.

End text.

For Hoffacker: In delivering message you can make clear privately to Tshombe that UN would be willing to have a truce in the fighting just as soon as Tshombe sets off for talk with Adoula. FYI. In short, U Thant's view is that while UN will not offer truce in exchange for talks result of beginning of talks would be cease fire. In these circumstances, Thant has assured us privately that truce would result. End FYI.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1461. Official Use Only; Niact. Drafted and approved by Ball. Also sent to Elisabethville and repeated to USUN, Paris for Rusk, Brussels, and London.

2 Telegram 461 to Elisabethville, December 14, transmitted Tshombe's message, which offered to negotiate with Adoula and requested Kennedy's intervention "to designate a suitable negotiator and to stop at once useless bloodshed." The telegram also instructed Hoffacker to inform Tshombe that the President was exploring possibilities. (Ibid.) Tshombe's message, in French, is in Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. The text of a translation is in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, p. 863. Bundy told Ball of the message's arrival in a telephone conversation at 2:50 p.m. that afternoon. (Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Congo)

3 Notes of Ball's telephone conversations on December 14 with Bundy, Stevenson, and the President reflect discussions in New York with U Thant about the reply that should be sent to Tshombe. Kennedy initially wanted to name Bunche as negotiator and wanted Thant to announce a 48-hour cease-fire. (Ibid.)

163. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 163. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, December 15, 1961, 8 p.m.

834. In accordance with Léopoldville telegram 380,2 saw Tshombe 6 P.M. and delivered message contained last paragraph Deptel 461.3 Said I may have something further later this evening. He replied he may not be in palace "because Gurkhas may wish kidnap me" but that I could reach him indirectly through his office.

Subsequently received British Consul who had this to say: Three Ministers (US, UK, France) agreed Paris try for Kitona meeting, which might be attended also by leading international figure. US would work primarily on Adoula and cease-fire aspects. Lambroschini, French ConGen (whom I have not been able contact), is said by Dunnett to have seen Tshombe last night and is now again with Tshombe. Understood Lambroschini had discussed at length with Tshombe possibility of Senghor's joining in talks, which might even be proposed for Senegal. During first interview Tshombe expressed fear of security at Kitona. Tshombe, during Dunnett's call today, asked for British security guarantee and Dunnett trying work out something satisfactory in lieu formal guarantee.

Optimistic that proposed message and assurance from President Kennedy may also help Tshombe overcome his fear for such safety. Also optimistic Tshombe willing negotiate seriously if Adoula conditions not humiliating in Katangan eyes.

Somewhat concerned that British and French diplomacy seems be ahead of US in Elisabethville. If Adoula position could be known soonest, we would probably be able take advantage of Tshombe's apparently favorable frame of mind and see him take that long-awaited last step to negotiating table.

Have foreseen also difficulty of Elisabethville airport, but know from British Consul that there would probably be no difficulty re Tshombe's catching plane at Ndola. Hope that Ambassador Gullion can be escort because this would be additional opportunity for US and Ambassador have good influence on Tshombe.

Re paragraph seven of Léopoldville telegram 381.4 UN had not taken underpass and has not been firing in city since around 5 p.m.

Hoffacker

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1561. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, Paris, Salisbury, London, and USUN.

2 Not sent to Washington.

3 See Document 162 and footnote 1 thereto.

4 Sent to the Department as telegram 1517 from Léopoldville, December 15; paragraph 7 concerned U.N. operations in Elisabethville. The telegram contained Gullion's report of conversations with Bomboko and with Bunche and Linner. Bomboko insisted that no talks could take place if a cease-fire preceded them but agreed to ask Adoula to return to Léopoldville from Kivu. Bunche also emphasized that Adoula would not negotiate if the talks were preceded by a formal cease-fire but said that U.N. forces would hold fire if Tshombe actually left for negotiations at Kitona. Gullion stressed that the U.S. role "should be played down and limited to good offices" and that his role should be described as "facilitating arrangements." (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1561)

164. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 164. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, December 15, 1961, 9 p.m.

1525. On basis two conversations with Bomboko and one with Kasavubu can anticipate numerous difficulties to be surmounted before we can bring Adoula to the table. I am confident he eventually go along with us. Kasavubu at first obdurate but was highly impressed with four points made by President in telecon to me:2 1. Appeal had come from Tshombe not President;

2. Operations continue;

3. US supports UN;

4. No change unless Tshombe shows reason.

Pulled out all stops with Kasavubu. Said US had made enormous decision in favor of Congo with considerable strain on our alliances. We had undertaken dangerous and costly mission flying thousands of UN troops and munitions to Katanga without which success impossible.

It was Tshombe who was asking for terms and Tshombe who would be coming to spot dictated by GOC. Here was finally opportunity for Congo to gain its aims. There could be no excuse for continuing war merely for revenge and blood, US could not support this. I strongly counselled Kasavubu to urge colleagues act now because US could do no more.

Told Kasavubu as head of state he responsible for integrity of state. He was also above faction and man of known charity. It was up to him to act like Lincoln.

Kasavubu insisted Adoula could not meet unless there was some understanding about mercenaries and some agreement about what they were to meet about. On second point I reiterated situation had nothing comparable to September nor to various maneuvers by Tshombe since that time. UN/GOC were winning and therefore could afford to receive Tshombe for talks, holding of which did not commit GOC. Kasavubu said something vague to effect peoples here and in Katanga had to decide on peace. I replied Parliaments declared war but it was envoys who made peace. (I hope but am not confident we can keep this out of Parliament.)

None of these points impressed Kasavubu as much as my statement that U Thant and UN were in unison with US on proposed negotiations.

It will therefore be necessary for Bunche and me to act in closest support of each other and perhaps in concert. Trust Amb Stevenson can keep up parallel work on U Thant. With both Adoula and Kasavubu I shall continue emphasize that President Kennedy has taken audacious moves in these interests, and this is time when they must stand with US.

Meeting with Kasavubu was exceedingly friendly, despite all its arguments.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1461. Secret; Niact. Repeated to London, Paris, Brussels, USUN, and CINCLANT. The source text is incorrectly dated December 14.

2 Apparently on December 15; no other record of this conversation has been found.

165. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Venezuela 165. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Venezuela1

Washington, December 16, 1961, 5:14 p.m.

706. For President from Acting Secretary. Congo. Gullion reported by telephone today Dec 16 at noon here and nightfall there that Adoula cannot now return to Léopoldville from Kivu until tomorrow because he has grave domestic political crisis with Gizenga attempting again take over Kivu Province and 2 or 3 ex-Gizengists in cabinet including Gbenye again threatening return Stanleyville. As Gullion could also not get to Adoula and communications with him not secure he could not send Adoula full text of proposed message to Tshombe.2 However, Gullion has had exchange messages with Adoula3 leading Gullion be confident that once he sees PM he will be able talk him into our proposal on meeting Kitona, although Adoula still mentions desire obtain assurances on mercenaries. Gullion has had satisfactory meetings with Kasavubu and Bomboko. View excitement prevailing in Léopoldville consider Gullion has brought GOC long ways towards conciliatory mood. They now tend recognize need preserve Tshombe's political structure locally, avoid carpetbaggers and be more reasonable.

Gullion states he fully aware urgency getting meeting started but has simply not been able do more than described above. He states our retaining Adoula's good will and even more importantly Adoula as PM would be prejudiced if message to Tshombe delivered or released before Gullion can show to Adoula and get his concurrence. Gullion emphasizes essential his own role be that of facilitator, not mediator (which word has come there to imply Tshombe's equality), that it is Tshombe who initiated request for talks and that UN prepared continue pressure with US support if Tshombe not reasonable and refuses profit from arrangements you and UN prepared make.

Tshombe has been approached by British, French and US consuls, latter drawing on unspecified portions but not entirety your message to Tshombe which as yet undelivered, urging him agree meet Adoula at Kitona. Tshombe told British Consul he would be willing do so if British give written guarantee his personal safety and truce effective upon Tshombe's departure Elisabethville for meeting. Accordingly, elements necessary to meeting are beginning to coalesce although not as rapidly as we had hoped.

Gullion also reported UN military operations Elisabethville virtually completed. City practically surrounded, Camp Massart, tunnel and Lido taken and Kipushi road cut with small number casualties either side. Stories civilian casualties and damage installations exaggerated by Katangans as usual. Massart is principal Katangan military camp Elisabethville.

We recognize fact Adoula in very real domestic political difficulty which may necessitate his stay in Kivu but do not exclude possibility he stalling while military operations continue in Elisabethville.

UNNY Narasimhan tells us military objectives have already been largely achieved. UN now intends to "rest on our oars" on purely military grounds (ONUC troops need rest after 12 days fighting). It will return any fire on its troops and will not tolerate any interference with its movements in Elisabethville, but it does not at present plan further military action beyond securing the objectives previously set.

British are pressing UN for some kind of forward declaration that it is ceasing hostilities. Africans and Asians in the SYG's Congo Advisory Committee (which held long meeting today) are urging the UN to press on and carry out by military means the purposes set forth for the UN by Security Council resolutions, i.e., elimination of mercenaries and unity of Congo. UN's quite practical way of dealing with these conflicting pressures is to stop fighting de facto but make no formal moves toward cease fire. This posture will probably also suit Adoula better than any more formal cease-fire arrangement.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.11–KE/12–1661. Confidential; Presidential Visit Eyes Only. Drafted by Vance, cleared in draft by Williams and Cleveland, and approved by Ball. Repeated to USUN, Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and Paris. President Kennedy visited Caracas December 16–17.

2 The draft message transmitted in Document162 had been revised. Telegram 1036 to Léopoldville, December 15, transmitted the text of a new draft message written in the third person, which was thought preferable in order to avoid inflating Tshombe’s position by a personal message from the President. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12-561) Telegram 1049 to Léopoldville, December 16, made further changes, incorporating suggestions from Bunche. (Ibid., 770G.00/12-1561)

3 Telegram 1547 from Léopoldville, December 17, transmitted the text of a message Gullion had sent to Adoula stating that the U.S. Government had received a message from Tshombe proposing a meeting with Adoula, that there was no question of a cease-fire before a meeting, and that Kennedy had instructed Gullion to ask Adoula to meet him for consultation. In the telegram, Gullion added that he “drew a very long bow” in some of his statements in order to obtain Adoula’s consent to a meeting then being described on the radio “in terms he could not possibly accept (prior cease-fire; mediation; no prior consultation GOC, etc.)” (Ibid.,770G.00/12-1761) Gullion reported in telegram 1546, December 17, that Adoula had agreed to a meeting with Tshombe. (Ibid.)

166. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Colombia 166. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Colombia1

Washington, December 17, 1961, 4:35 p.m.

502. For the President from Ball.2 The last minute reports3 indicate the following situation regarding the Congo: 1. UN has substantially achieved its limited military objectives Elisabethville.

2. As a practical matter, de facto suspension of hostilities will probably have occurred even before Tshombe leaves for Kitona. British and French understand clearly that hostilities are to stop in this de facto way rather than by formal cease-fire agreement. Believe they have already made this distinction clear to Tshombe.

3. In any event, from what British tell us Tshombe has expressed his agreement to meet with Adoula apparently without conditions.

4. At 2:00 p.m. Washington time Gullion advised that he and Bunche were waiting to begin conversation with Adoula who had just arrived from Kivu by airplane. Gullion will telephone us promptly on conclusion discussions and I shall pass on information to you.

5. If Adoula concurs in plans Gullion plans to fly tomorrow to Elisabethville to pick up Tshombe and deliver him at Kitona before nightfall.

6. Will try to advise you by telephone as soon as results of Adoula-Gullion meeting received.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1761. Confidential; Niact. Drafted and approved by Ball and cleared by Williams and Cleveland. President Kennedy visited Bogota December 17.

2 A December 17 message from Kennedy to Ball reads as follows: "I believe it vital that Adoula be obliged to respond immediately to cease-fire telegram. Would appreciate a report on situation there as soon as possible." (White House message 171515Z, apparently sent from the Presidential plane en route from Caracas to Bogota; ibid.) The "cease-fire telegram" is apparently a December 17 message from Tshombe to Kennedy stating that he was ready to meet with Adoula but requesting an immediate cease-fire. (Katangan Delegation in Brussels to Kennedy; ibid.) Later that day, Bundy sent a message from Bogota to Ball, which reads as follows: "President desirous proceed cease-fire and negotiations as rapidly as possible. Do not let GOC delay us. Advise soonest plans and progress." (White House unnumbered message; ibid.)

3 Telegram 1548 from Léopoldville transmitted a report from Hoffacker that he had delivered a message from Gullion to Tshombe, that Tshombe had agreed to meet Adoula at Kitona, and that he had not raised the question of a cease-fire. Telegram 1553 reported that Gullion was to see Adoula that evening but Adoula had called a Cabinet meeting at 8 p.m. Gullion stated that it would be "made perfectly clear" to both Adoula and Tshombe that "hostilities will suspend de facto while they talk," but he stated that Adoula "will never be allowed to go to meeting" if a cease-fire was announced or made a condition of the meeting. (Both December 17; ibid.)

167. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 167. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, December 17, 1961, 10 p.m.

1556. Following just received from Hoffacker through CAS. My comments appended.

Begin text: Conveyed contents Léopoldville telegram 3842 to Tshombe during UN aerial bombardment virtually in front his palace. He received message reasonably well but said he could not leave his people for Kitona while fighting going on. Replied that while UN not likely prepared agree to formal cease fire at this time, our conception is that with meeting in progress fighting would die down or possibly stop. He would like more precise assurances this score. Believe if we can assure him that de facto cease fire (i.e., hold fire and hold positions) would take place as he went to airport, he willing to go ahead. Because of this need to accommodate his extremist ministers and others, hope UN can agree to this position. Tshombe would like Ambassador come to Elisabethville see for himself what situation is. Replied Ambassador, who has all my reports, anxious get meeting underway and probably would not be able do more than meet Tshombe at airport and to talk during flight to Kitona. He seemed satisfied re security assurances. Tshombe said, in answer, he believes Ambassador should still hold to ETA 1000Z tomorrow if clarification on de facto cease fire can be given before then. End text.

1. Although Hoffacker is in better position to judge I am inclined believe that when Tshombe got fuller version of President's message than hitherto he sniffed possibility of salvaging something. I note Hoffacker's earlier report of last previous contact with Tshombe re meeting stated latter made no mention cease fire.

2. I am saying to Hoffacker "re your message on Tshombe and cease fire will try to send you suggestions following Adoula's showdown with cabinet and my conferences with UNOC. In meantime, possibility occurs to me that Tshombe trying to salvage what he can. Doubt we can be much more precise but will try come up with formula. In any case do not think suspension possible until meeting assured. Department being informed. Your message seems indicate Elisabethville is confirmed as destination. If Ndola were chosen this might have advantage that Tshombe's departure less noticeable by his people. What is your view?"

3. I anticipate Hoffacker and we will have to be responsible for formula in view time pressures but would nevertheless appreciate instruction most urgently since Tshombe may try last minute sit down blackmail after our plane arrives Elisabethville (or Ndola).

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1761. Secret; Niact. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, and Paris.

2 Sent to the Department as telegram 1551, December 17. It transmitted the text of the message to Tshombe as transmitted in telegram 1036 to Léopoldville and revised in telegram 1049 to Léopoldville (see footnote 1, Document 165). (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1761) For text of the message as delivered, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, p. 864. Telegram 385 from Léopoldville to Elisabethville, sent to the Department as telegram 1559, December 18, instructed Hoffacker to deliver the message. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1861)

168. National Security Action Memorandum No. 120 168. National Security Action Memorandum No. 1201

Washington, December 17, 1961.

TO

The Honorable George Ball, The Under Secretary of State

(SUBJECT

Intelligence on Operations in the Congo)

In your capacity as local Commander-in-Chief of Congo Affairs, you may be interested in this short memorandum from Max Taylor.2 It suggests that our military information from the Congo comes in a variety of ways, none of which is first-rate. I wonder if it would be worthwhile for you to ask the Joint Staff to report on ways and means of providing up-to-date, coordinated and accurate information on the situation in that unhappy country.3 It may be that we need to tighten the lines of communication to our military liaison officers both in New York and in Léopoldville, and perhaps also we ought to ask them to work out a directive to Gullion, to be carried out on his behalf by General Walter.

Someone will also have to pull the CIA on board on this.

McGeorge Bundy4

1 Source: Department of State, NSAM Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 120. Confidential.

2 The memorandum from Taylor to Bundy, December 15, stated that, since the United States was not a part of the U.N. force in the Congo, "we must get our information as we would from a sovereign but allied power." It stated that recent U.S. participation in an intra-Congo airlift had persuaded U.N. officials to provide for the first time detailed information on their planned operations in Elisabethville. If this cooperation continued, the situation should improve, especially with the assignment of General Walter as special military adviser to Ambassador Gullion. (Ibid.)

3 In a December 29 letter to U. Alexis Johnson, Lemnitzer stated that he had discussed with the other JCS members the question of military representation in the Congo, which Johnson had raised. In addition to the three service attaches in the Congo, CINCEUR and CINCLANT had representatives to handle airlift and sealift problems. Because of reluctance by the U.N. Command to divulge its military plans, trained observers were needed more than senior officers. The JCS view was that if the assignment of a more senior officer was desirable, he should be assigned as an attache. Dungan sent this letter to Bundy with a January 4 note, which reads: "I've been pressing them on getting better on-the-scene intelligence and since this letter military attache staffs are being augmented." (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

169. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 169. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, December 18, 1961, 3 a.m.

1560. Paris pass CINCEUR.

1. In two-hour conference with Adoula, Bomboko, Bunche and Linner have received Adoula's agreement meeting Tshombe at Kitona tomorrow or following day depending on whether all flying necessary can be accomplished in daylight. I take off early tomorrow landing either at Ndola or Elisabethville depending on result consultation Hoffacker.

Prior to our conference Adoula had had meeting with Cabinet and I had been tipped off they insisting string of political conditions to it.

2. As I entered conference which had already been proceeding between Adoula and UN officials, Linner indicated that Adoula was making conditions and his attendance at meeting doubtful. I rehearsed for Adoula US assistance and said that US had taken most difficult decision in support of GOC and UN with resulting great strain on our friendships and alliance. Moreover US revolted at non-combatant casualties Katanga. President Kennedy had now put his prestige and important material means (aircraft)2 into effort facilitate negotiations. I told Adoula that if he did not go to the meeting US continued support could not be promised. Adoula claimed he intended to go to a meeting, but at the proper time. He could not turn down the US which had proved its friendship. He said, however, that his Cabinet had obliged him to pose a number of conditions to the meeting. After considerable argument he appeared accept concept that he should not lay down conditions to holding meeting but should reserve these for meeting itself. He adamant, however, on his government's insistence that ANC troops be stationed Katanga. These would consist of battalion and six armored cars (possibly 900 men in all). They would not be farther south than Kamina.

3. I explained to Adoula misgivings US and world opinion on discipline ANC troops, danger of stiffening Tshombe's resistance, strain between US and allies, etc. Since, however, it is my judgement that my government wants above all early meeting and a suspension of useless bloodshed, and that it won't get the meeting without some understanding on ANC role, I told Adoula that I had recommended to my government that it accept the idea of token ANC participation. I am assured by the UN that it would be tightly controlled and would be under UN command with UN officers. Mobutu would be the commander and Stanleyville troops would not participate. Troops in question are near Luluabourg and would not require lift. There need be no big publicity. In this connection Bunche is making strong parallel recommendation to U Thant.

4. Adoula seemed satisfied with my statement that I was making the recommendation re ANC troops and refrained from saying recommendation had to be acted upon before he would go to meeting.

5. I then showed Adoula Tshombe's note and proposed President's message to Tshombe as amended. He made little objections except to observe he hoped we realized Tshombe's communication was nothing new.

6. Next big hurdle was the idea of a tacit cease-fire during parley which Adoula said was quixotic misplaced chivalry. I countered that since UN action had succeeded GOC held the trumps; that UN troops actually needed a rest; that a cease-fire during the parley could not and did not mean application of SC mandate was at an end; that US and world opinion would not support war of revenge or unnecessary bloodshed. Adoula was skeptical but impressed with agreement that UN mandate not nullified. He repudiated any desire for war of revenge. He did not press point further.

7. Finally I told Adoula that I expected to see him and his advisers in Kitona sometime tomorrow night and he might go in either UN plane or US attache aircraft. He said he would do so. I told him I had still some worries about Tshombe who trying to make it look as if cease-fire agreed as condition precedent to talks but I hoped to handle this.

8. As Department will observe, situation is not as clear-cut as I would like especially since difficult to judge Tshombe's reactions at long range. Since I understand, however, that there is great desire in the US that this meeting come off soonest I shall set off tomorrow in the hope of rounding up the participants. No one should, however, regard it as absolutely certain that the meeting will take place as we plan it.3

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1861. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to Rome, USUN, Brussels, London, Salisbury, and Paris.

2 Kennedy had sent the Presidential airplane Columbine to the Congo. Gullion was planning to use it to bring Tshombe to Kitona.

3 Telegram 503 to Bogota, from Ball to Kennedy, sent December 17 at 8:01 p.m., stated that Gullion had reported the meeting with Adoula by telephone and that the results were "generally satisfactory." It further stated: "Our understanding is that fighting will be suspended the moment Tshombe leaves for Kitona if it has not already ceased as a result of UN's having substantially achieved its limited military objectives." (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1761)

170. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 170. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, December 19, 1961, 12:54 p.m.

1064. Kitona for Ambassador. Department has been directed by President stress to you strong US interest in successful outcome Kitona conference. You are requested do utmost persuade Adoula and Tshombe conference must lead to agreement. Neither US people nor world opinion would understand why agreement could not be worked out. Breakdown of negotiations could only favor extremists and would lead whole country into chaos.

Stress to Adoula US expects him to demonstrate his statesmanship and leadership by seizing this opportunity unify Congo without further bloodshed. US has gone to extreme lengths to support UN operations notwithstanding opposition from numerous quarters in US and opposition most NATO allies. Stress impossible situation US would be placed in if doctrinaire approach led to breakdown of current talks and difficulties which would result for our ability support him in future.

Stress to Tshombe in particular that present conference presents last opportunity for him lead his people to peaceful future. Alternative clearly is civil war and chaos. View UN control Elisabethville choice for Tshombe is cooperate with Adoula or go into oblivion.

Recognize complex problems faced by conferees. Agreement in present meeting might cover only principle of reintegration and definite agreement on further approach and perhaps first integration steps to be taken while constitutional details would be deferred to subsequent negotiations.2 Whatever scope of present negotiations there must not be a break down.3

The President has asked the Department to commend you personally on your excellent work in bringing about Conference.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1961. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Eisenberg; cleared by Williams, Cleveland, McGhee, and Bundy; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Brussels, Paris, and USUN.

2 Telegram 1068 to Léopoldville, December 19, conveyed the Department's views on the substance of a possible agreement. It reads in part as follows: "Dept believes both substance and timing solution these problems must be worked out by Congolese themselves. Nevertheless in view special responsibility and relationship we have assumed toward Congo and Kitona in particular we have major stake in outcome negotiations. It in our interest extend best efforts see that final agreement contains at least minimum necessary for workability in new central govt with on the other hand enough local autonomy for provinces to satisfy Tshombe's reasonable demands and interests." (Ibid.)

3 At a meeting of the National Security Council from 4:10 to 5:10 p.m. on January 19, the President asked what the United States should do if the negotiations broke down. According to a telephone call from Bundy to McGhee earlier that day, the President was especially concerned with U.N. plans for further military action in Katanga, which he opposed. (Memorandum of a debriefing on the NSC meeting in Rostow's office shortly after the meeting, unsigned and dated December 21, and attached memoranda of telephone conversations between McGhee and Cleveland and McGhee and Bundy, both dated December 19; ibid., S/S–NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Meeting, December 19, 1961)

171. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 171. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, December 19, 1961, 11 p.m.

1594. Paris pass CINCEUR unnumbered. Kitona. From Godley ron [in] Leo. Returning Kitona early December 20.

Tshombe arrived Kitona 12:00 local after several near misses in addition to those already reported by Hoffacker.2 Last night December 18 at Kitwe he posed four conditions.

1. Promise safe return Eville. Ambassador and Lord Alport (British High Commissioner Northern Rhodesia) gave round trip ticket.

2. Details re security. Ambassador said he was certain UN handling all details but promised also U.S. Marines. These met group on arrival and remained within Tshombe's sight most of time. Tomorrow when international press arrives will, at Bunche's request, merely guard bedroom serving as small U.S. office.

3. Cease-fire should have begun once he left Eville. Ambassador took tough line pointing out his original understanding fire would be suspended once Tshombe airborne and that it was none of our business that he refused board Columbine Eville as offered. Nevertheless Tshombe's attitude presented certain difficulties for informal arrangements with UNOC were as set forth above despite fact Tshombe had begun travel yesterday afternoon. Ambassador dodged this issue to Tshombe's satisfaction by drafting his presence message requesting firing stopped forthwith to be effective when airborne about 0730 local December 19. (Tshombe most touchy on this for he alleged that when he was departing his residence Eville heavy firing broke out which Bunche this afternoon attributed to die-hards from Union Miniere causing trouble.) Matter settled when Ambassador received on aircraft this morning flash from Emb reporting U Thant's statement re suspension firing.

4. Tshombe requested U.S., French, U.K. Consuls accompany him to assure security. This disposed of by Hoffacker indicating Ambassador spoke for USG and that he was more valuable Eville and by Alport stating he would not authorize Dunnett proceed Kitona without HMG's permission since assurances already given. Re French, Hoffacker told Tshombe that once airborne message would be sent French Emb Leo from Lambroschini requesting French Emb off Kitona to guarantee safety (this done; no French Emb off appeared).

Last evening, admittedly first time Ambassador had met him, Tshombe gave impression of being manic depressive. First irrationally attacked US but then shifting unexpectedly to extremely friendly attitude. These changes occurred several times during his conversation and he showed signs of exhaustion. On aircraft this morning, however, got sleep, food and was much more relaxed. Had lunch alone with Ambassador who gently made usual remarks re necessity collaboration GOC. On arrival Kitona group taken directly base hospital which surrounded barbed wire, security guards and two lines hastily dug foxholes manned Nigerians full battle dress.

Department already aware composition parties. Munongo's and Kimba's absences noted as indication Tshombe not free agent and would have to report to government. When Ambassador showed Tshombe on aircraft list Leo participants he commented adversely on inclusion Mwamba and Bomboko calling latter "Belgian stooge."

On arrival junior UN authorities Kitona indicated impression gained from UNOC Leo that meeting would be extremely short and Adoula might return this evening. Ambassador therefore left hospital and met Adoula and Bunche upon arrival about 1:30 and indicated that Tshombe desired avoid substance and wished keep today's conversation to generalities and administrative arrangements. Succeeded in obtaining their concurrences. When Adoula reached hospital, Tshombe had retired but junior members friendly with some back slapping. Tshombe appeared and Adoula ostentatiously retired without greeting. Tshombe held ground and remarked to several "he didn't even say hello." Situation slightly tense for twenty minutes but Adoula reappeared and effusively greeted Tshombe throwing arms around his shoulders. Tension broke as both parties took refreshments and UN photographers were busy. Leo group after forty-five minutes retired for lunch with Ambassador, Bunche, Gardiner, Khiari and Dumontet. Agreed that afternoon would be devoted informal palavers between staffs and non-Congolese would absent themselves. This took place and Bomboko and Kibwe observed departing alone arm in arm for walk. Adoula did not confer with Tshombe. General atmospherics difficult to assess but undoubtedly Adoula arrived prepared to take extremely tough line. Somewhat dissuaded during luncheon but as of 1800 local it not known whether he will be meeting Tshombe alone this evening. Tomorrow morning and early afternoon it is believed delegates will meet formally. No UN personnel will be present but will stand by. Prognostications difficult but current betting is that Tshombe will probably depart noontime December 21 for Ndola.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1961. Confidential; Niact. Received at 10:36 a.m. on December 20 and repeated to USUN, Brussels, Salisbury, London, Paris, Brazzaville, Elisabethville, and CINCLANT.

2 Telegrams 1574 from Léopoldville and 465 from Salisbury, both December 18, reported messages from Hoffacker. (Both ibid., 770G.00/12–1861)

172. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 172. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, December 20, 1961.

1604. Kitona. Following received by courier at 2000Z from Ambassador at Kitona

1. As of noon, 12th, Adoula-Tshombe conference going into second day with prolonged 3-hour working session now in progress.

2. I continue to urge Adoula to moderation. I said while UN mandate could not be suspended and there could hardly be a change in policy unless Tshombe's attitude altered, I was personally somewhat worried about the mounting disquiet and confusion in Western public opinion and effect it might have on continued support of military operations. I suggested that a private Adoula–Tshombe meeting would be desirable at some stage (both agree).

3. Various formulas are under discussion whereby constitutional issues might be solved. These are principal difficulty not details of administration. Adoula prepared promise joint revision of Fundamental Law especially Article 7.2 Encouraging that Tshombe apparently accepts Fundamental Law's basis of negotiations.

4. Still too early to say how conference will result but atmosphere is good, personal relations cordial.

5. Except for our work in corridors UN officials and I at this stage leaving the official meetings to the Congolese which is essential. Toward closing hours and certainly before any break I would work intensively with Adoula and Tshombe separately.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2061. Confidential; Niact. The source text does not indicate the time of transmission; it was received at 11:30 p.m. Repeated to USUN, London, Paris, Brussels, and Rome.

2 Article 7 of the Loi Fondamentale provided for the continuation of the six existing provinces.

173. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 173. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, December 20, 1961, 11 p.m.

2209. Fol telecons from Dept, Stevenson called on Thant to discuss reports of continued fighting in Eville. Before Stevenson-Thant conversation, we discussed problem with Rikhye. We emphasized to him need for UN to get its story to press in view danger that UN appear be responsible for continued fighting. He promised arrange immediately for briefing of New York Times and other key reporters in UN press corps. Fol is UN's account of recent situation in Eville as given us by Rikhye:

UN agreed to hold fire when Tshombe left for negotiations and after achievement of immediate objectives (which now achieved). At time of Tshombe's departure from Eville, UN held fire for one hour while he left town. Fol that there were exchanges of fire, principally around Union Miniere HQs, and other places as well. Fighting resulted after heavy fire from Union Miniere HQs killed 6 or 8 Ethiopians and wounded many more. Such fighting ended as far as UN concerned at 7:00 on morning of Dec 19 when Tshombe got on plane and left Ndola for Kitona.

UN has kept letter of their agreement with US by establishing hold fire when Tshombe got on plane for Kitona. Since then there have been, as far as UN HQs is aware, no fire fights of any size. There has been, and there continues to be, sniping. UN's position is that it will fire back when fired upon (and will maintain freedom of movement) but it will do no more and will treat such firing as local incidents.

Secretariat has no reports of any cases of molestation of women by Ethiopian troops. There have been cases of what U Thant calls "theft," and appropriate action against guilty soldiers has been ordered.

As for Union Miniere offices, UN retaliated with heavy attack after several Ethiopians were killed and many wounded by heavy fire against UN forces.

When Stevenson saw Thant he checked foregoing account with Thant who confirmed it (Stevenson said we wished to get it confirmed as basis for discussion with US congressional reps and within State Dept, etc.).

Stevenson then raised with Thant question of mercenaries. Thant confirmed UN had no intention of engaging in mass arrests, etc., and said dealing with mercenaries would require lengthy screening and implied would be carried out systematically and carefully over period of time. He said he did not yet know what best process would be in screening out mercenaries. He mentioned Raja (UN-Eville) has list.

Stevenson asked about possible future UN action against Gizenga. Thant said UN prepared to act when there are visible signs of secessionist activities by Gizenga and after request from PM Adoula. He said so far UN not aware of overt secessionist activities but only of two reckless speeches Gizenga had recently given.

Stevenson asked Thant whether UN intended to provide constitutional advisor for GOC, and noted that Nigerian would be appropriate in view successful federal structure of that country. Thant said he hoped present mtg might produce agreement that Loi Fondamentale should be "reviewed in light of present circumstances." He said he thought Adoula would accept such formulation if Tshombe would, and suggested we and anyone else who might have influence on or access to Tshombe urge him to take such position.

Thant noted Tananarive results not acceptable to Adoula and Loi Fondamentale unacceptable to Tshombe, but he thought Adoula would be willing to agree that objective should be constitutional revision in accordance with Loi Fondamentale if Tshombe would. If such agreement reached, Adoula could request UN to provide assistance in form of constitutional expert. Thant said he would then sound out Nigerian if we and UK agreed. Stevenson encouraged Thant in this course.

Thant said Bunche has not reported in detail on talks at Kitona; Bunche says atmosphere very much improved second day and relations now friendly and informal; he has added cryptic comment that he expected talks to end today "one way or another."

At end of conversation Stevenson recalled Thant's recent comment that Kibwe best alternative to Munongo should Tshombe for any reason fall from political leadership in Katanga. Thant said there might be advantage in taking steps to build up Kibwe's public position in way which in no way involved UN or USG. For example, he said private US foundation or university might invite Kibwe to US. This would give him important public prestige within Katanga.2

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2061. Confidential; Priority; Limited Distribution. Received at 5:58 a.m. on December 21 and repeated to Léopoldville and Brussels.

2 Stevenson apparently reported this meeting with Thant in a telephone conversation with President Kennedy that evening. Telegram 2210 from USUN, December 20, states that after that conversation, USUN proposed to Narasimhan the issuance of a U.N. statement that U.N. objectives had been achieved and U.N. forces would not fire except in self defense, since such a statement might lead to a similar statement by Tshombe and lessen the danger of renewed hostilities. (Ibid.) A U.N. statement released to the press on December 21 stated that the hold-fire ordered on December 19 was still in force. (Tosec 23 to Bermuda, December 21; ibid., 770G.00/12–2161)

174. Editorial Note 174. Editorial Note

The negotiations at Kitona concluded at 2:30 a.m. on December 21, with an agreement embodied in an exchange of letters between Katangan provincial President Moise Tshombe and U.N. Under-Secretary for Special Political Affairs Ralph J. Bunche. Tshombe's letter to Bunche transmitted an eight-point declaration acknowledging Congolese unity, but his letter stated, "I would however draw your attention to the fact that the haste with which my journey was made did not allow me the time to consult the competent authorities of Katanga so as to be authorized to speak on their behalf. I accordingly propose to do this on my return and to inform the Central Government of the steps to be taken with a view to the application of the enclosed declaration."

The declaration reads as follows:

"The President of the Government of the Province of Katanga: "(1) Accepts the application of the Loi Fondamentale of 19 May 1960;

"(2) Recognizes the indissoluble unity of the Republic of the Congo;

"(3) Recognizes President Kasa-Vubu as Head of State;

"(4) Recognizes the authority of the Central Government over all parts of the Republic;

"(5) Agrees to the participation of representatives of the province of Katanga in the Governmental commission to be convened at Léopoldville on 3 January 1962 with a view to study and consideration of the draft constitution;

"(6) Pledges himself to take all necessary steps to enable deputies and senators of the province of Katanga to discharge, from 27 December 1961, their national mandate within the Government of the Republic;

"(7) Agrees to the placing of the Katanga gendarmerie under the authority of the President of the Republic;

"(8) Pledges himself to ensure respect for the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council and to facilitate their implementation." (American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, page 871)

The texts of Tshombe's letter to Bunche, Bunche's reply, and Bunche's letter to Prime Minister Cyrille Adoula, all dated December 21, are printed ibid., pages 871–873, along with extracts from Acting Secretary-General U Thant's report on the negotiations (U.N. document S/5038).

175. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 175. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, December 21, 1961, 2 p.m.

1615. Paris for CINCEUR. Following is first take evaluation and comment on Adoula-Tshombe accord. Chronological highlights follow in subsequent message:2 1. The eight points indicated by Tshombe in his letter to Bunche as agreed between him and Adoula center on key constitutional issues, e.g. Loi Fondamentale, unity of Congo, Katangan participation in constitution making and in Parliament.

In addition a hard-fought compromise was achieved on maintaining gendarmerie in existence by placing it under Pres of Republic; there was also a significant undertaking by Tshombe with respect to application of UN resolutions.

2. The biggest monkey wrench thrown in works at late hours was Tshombe claim he had no full powers to negotiate despite some measure of accord reached during two days. Meeting actually broke down on this point at midnight, plane engines warmed up, cars aligned and baggage stowed when Tshombe agreed to negotiate on points enumerated which are essentially a paring down and editing by Bunche and me of Adoula's formulations to make them more palatable. Tshombe insisted on adding first an additional point indicating agreement was ad referendum his govt. This he eventually watered down to footnote saying he intended to explain his personal acceptance to his assembly. Adoula govt spotted this as characteristic Tshombe formula for welshing (vide Coquilhatville), would have none of it. Conference was again in collapse. Participants informed UN and me jointly of their inability to agree. Then in one of series of feverish last minute huddles Khiari and Gardiner came up with idea of including Tshombe's reference to consulting Katangan authorities in a transmittal letter to Bunche. Adoula accepted this formula with regret and under pressure from US only because he said it was "en dehors de moi."

3. It is possible that Tshombe may say he was coerced by US and UN and may actually court repudiation by his govt. Nonetheless he has been brought to a negotiation at his own request. He has committed himself before UN and US reps to integration of Katanga in Congo. It should be hard for him to get out from under this undertaking and still retain credence especially among groups in Western Europe and US which have been sympathetic to him.

4. Thought expressed in above para is also that of UN. Bunche has commented on agreement for press in most glowing terms and considers it a great triumph for UN (as well as for US, the Congo and Katanga) showing that peacemaking capacity of organization is not less than its police ability.

5. All participants at close praised "initiative" and good offices Pres Kennedy. Adoula and Tshombe somewhat grudging toward each other, although former made a good Lincolnian speech to close the engagement.

6. This meeting of minds although admittedly precarious can be considered as milestone in US policy re Congo. This policy has been pursued not without risk and some alienation of our allies. It has involved a) refusal to put wraps on UN military action when in retaliation Katangan provocation Dec 5; b) prognostication that this would result in control of Eville and breaking Tshombe's teeth appears to have been correct although process has been attended by regrettable afflictions on civilian population, c) bringing operations to close at just right time, which was practical result of Pres Kennedy's initiative in seizing upon Tshombe peace feeler; and e) finally the accord itself which resulted from bitter and arduous marathon negotiation.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2161. Confidential; Niact. Received at 2:49 p.m. and repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, Paris, Elisabethville, Brazzaville, and CINCLANT.

2 Telegram 1622 from Léopoldville, December 21. (Ibid.)

176. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Bermuda 176. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Bermuda1

Washington, December 21, 1961, 5:02 p.m.

Tosec 16. For President and Secretary. Should be delivered even if in session with UK. Our preliminary analysis of statement by Tshombe accepting reintegration of Katanga follows:

If agreement carried out, it spells end of Katanga secession, full justification firm US support for UN actions, and provides opportunity for Léopoldville moderates cope conclusively with Gizenga problem. Bunche's comment that this most encouraging event in Congo since Adoula Government approved by Parliament last August is most apt. According to unofficial text available, Tshombe accepts application of present Constitution, unity of Congo, President Kasavubu as Chief of State, authority of central government over all parts of Congo, and Katangan participation in parliamentary commission on Constitution. He also places Katanga gendarmerie under President Kasavubu. Such a complete capitulation on Tshombe's part goes far beyond our expectations.

However, Tshombe has apparently left himself one important escape possibility. Press reports foregoing represents proposals he will put to Cabinet and provincial assembly for their approval. He has performed this routine before. Moreover, we all too well aware that most pressures on him in Elisabethville will be to go back on present commitments.

Major difference between this and previous occasions is the presence of the UN in Elisabethville and its demonstrated capacity to stay there. Its continued presence is an important part of the pressure on Tshombe to abide by his agreement. This could, if necessary, be made even more effective by insisting that Katangan tax revenues go to GOC Government thus depriving Tshombe's government of its financial strength. We are insisting with UNNY (and Thant agrees) that UN troops maintain their "hold-fire". We expect him to make statement in NY on this later today.

It is important, however, that we not give impression that our resolve to maintain UN in Elisabethville has weakened. It is equally imperative that there be no fighting, since any substantial incidents might only give Katanga extremists opportunity to find a way out.

On other hand desirable maximum effort be made by UK, Rhodesia, Belgium and France to support Kitona agreement and give Tshombe assistance in defending it against criticism of radical ministers and advisers.

As additional form of moral suasion, we hope President and Prime Minister will issue joint statement along lines suggested below as means making clear both governments regard agreement as binding. This parallels position taken by UN which has applauded agreement as major step in establishment of unity, peace and stability in Congo. Department has also issued statement today (sent addressees in separate message).2

Attention should be paid to fact that too great emphasis on identification of Kitona action as joint UK–US effort might impair influence of each nation at Elizabethville and Léopoldville.

Suggested statement follows: "The governments of the US and the UK are gratified by the agreement reached at Kitona for resolving the Congo's differences and for turning the energies of the Congolese to the task of building a nation, united in its independence, proud in its peaceful pursuits and respected in the eyes of the world.

The agreement to reintegrate the Katanga under the national government of the Congo is a most important building block of the Congo's freedom and independence. The leaders participating in that agreement have shown notable statesmanship. Tribute should also be paid to the United Nations which by its presence in the Congo has contributed to peace and unity.

There will undoubtedly be practical details to be settled. We hope they will be resolved with vigor and urgency in the spirit of cooperation which the participants in the Kitona meeting have demonstrated so commendably."3

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2161. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Cleveland and Tron, cleared by Vance, and approved by Ball. Repeated to London, Léopoldville, USUN, Paris, and Brussels. President Kennedy and Secretary Rusk met with Prime Minister Macmillan and Foreign Secretary Home in Bermuda December 21–22.

2 Tosec 17 to Bermuda, December 21. (Ibid.) For text of the statement, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, p. 873.

3 The joint communique issued by Kennedy and Macmillan on December 22 included a paragraph on the Congo in which they noted with satisfaction the "useful meeting" of Adoula and Tshombe at Kitona, expressed the "strong hope" that further progress would be made, and agreed on the importance of avoiding any renewal of armed action while "genuine efforts" at consultation went forward. The joint communique is printed ibid., pp. 547–548.

177. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 177. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, December 28, 1961, 9:42 p.m.

1160. Following is partial report of Bermuda talks between Sec and Lord Home bearing on Congo based on uncleared memcon:2

"Lord Home stressed that UN had gotten itself in bad way in Congo. Thing was to get UN troops out, and to substitute advisory, training and administrative UN personnel, with Congolese police to keep order led and advised by white, French-speaking elements. He said that this should be emphasized at expense of present military functions of UN. He said UN could never have attempted carry out its present role without US support. It was due to US planes and transportation facilities that UN was carrying out its military operations. He asked how long USG intended continue playing role. Unless agreement between Tshombe and Adoula was reached and observed, fighting would be renewed and UN forces would then have to be strengthened even more. The situation was very disquieting. For example, the Ethiopian troops had been running amok and shooting people. What was needed was kind of "pro consul" such as the British had established in last 5 years in Nigeria. Such official was responsible for establishing effective chain of command and seeing to it law and order were preserved. Ormsby Gore also spoke along foregoing lines and asked how long the US thought UN should stay on after danger of secession by Katanga had subsided. He thought it not possible for UN troops to stay on permanently to maintain law and order.

The Secretary pointed out that large proportion of reported violent incidents had been manufactured on paper by interested parties, and that actual number of people killed was of order of 18 or 20. He asked Lord Home who could be expected to have influence on Tshombe. Lord Home said he thought no one. Tshombe had wealth behind him and resources on which rest of Congo depended. He thought Tshombe would not agree to terms he didn't like. He felt UN would not be able to settle things and US would be on spot and would have to face prospect of increasingly supplying UN troops indefinitely."

Following are highlights Congo discussions President's meeting with Macmillan Bermuda December 21–22, as communicated other posts via cirtel. "UK reiterated concern at possible prolongation UN military involvement which they believed should be replaced soonest by purely civil affairs training role. We reiterated view Katanga must remain part of Congo, that there must be agreement between Tshombe and Adoula and that fundamental Congo unity must be preserved in framework permitting suitable local powers. We believe role of UN is to keep open path to conciliation and not to impose a political solution."3

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2861. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Officer in Charge of U.N. Congo Affairs Charles S. Whitehouse; cleared by Tyler, Vance, and Cutler; and approved by Fredericks.

2 Drafted by Tyler. The discussion was held during a luncheon given by Lord Home on December 21 at 1:45 p.m. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366, CF 2021)

3 No other record of discussion of the Congo at Bermuda has been found. Telegram 3375 to London, December 21, stated, "British have agreed at Bermuda to continue exercising pressure on Tshombe to implement Kitona agreement and to continue UK representations to Welensky in same sense." (Ibid., Central Files, 770G.00/12–2161) Notes by General Taylor's assistant Colonel Lawrence Legere of a White House staff meeting on December 26 record a summary of the Bermuda talks by Bundy, which describes the Congo discussions as follows:"Bundy described the Congo discussion as having indicated 'submerged disagreement.' The British said they were skeptical of the Kitona agreement, and seemed to feel that the UN was a damned nuisance. The President countered by saying that we (presumably the US) could only keep the heat on Adoula if the others (presumably the dirty imperialist powers) kept the heat on Tshombe." (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Box 24, Daily Staff Meeting)

178. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 178. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, December 21, 1961, 8:07 p.m.

1536. Léopoldville Pass Elizabethville. Ref: Embtel 1107; Deptel 1479.2 For Ambassador from Acting Secretary. Convey to Spaak at earliest opportunity our full appreciation for his restrained and statesmanlike position in face aroused Belgian parliamentary and public feelings during recent difficult events in Congo. Express to him also our appreciation for his remarks regarding US efforts to bring about Adoula-Tshombe talks, result of which efforts is UN announcement that its forces in Katanga will hold fire unless fired upon and Tshombe's declaration emerging from Kitona talks. Anything GOB can do to ensure that Tshombe's extremist associates do not undermine progress already made or block implementation agreement would be greatly in Western interests.

Above should be supplemented by following presentation to Spaak:

In response Tshombe's appeal, President has been instrumental in bringing about Adoula-Tshombe talks. Goes without saying important reason for this extraordinary US effort is strong desire avoid further hostilities in Katanga. Kitona agreement offers promise for resolution Katanga problem and achievement objective our two governments have supported and worked for: peaceful restoration integrity of Congo.

US concerned, however, that Tshombe may still not be convinced absolute necessity for implementing Kitona agreement and that on his return Elizabethville he may submit to pressure by his extremist advisers to renege. His apparent intention pretend Kitona agreement requires ratification by Katanga regime is further cause for concern. Thus, present precarious truce between UN and Katangan forces could break down and readily lead to resumption fighting. Therefore, while we will continue press Adoula to be conciliatory and realistic regarding further negotiations with Tshombe, we believe it imperative Tshombe be made understand that present UN stance Katanga, backed by majority world opinion, leaves him no alternative but to see negotiations through to successful conclusion. Specifically, Tshombe must realize UN now in position effectively isolate Katanga economically from rest of world, and that if he stalls on negotiations with Adoula, his economic and financial position will only deteriorate.

Belgium is key to getting this message across to Tshombe. US therefore hopes GOB will give serious consideration to developing convincing program strengthen economic position GOC which includes measures having effect of exercising strong economic pressures against Katanga if Tshombe or his advisers refuse implement basic Kitona agreement. US experts are working out program which involves UN, GOC and other countries, particularly Belgium and UK, and will transmit it when completed to GOB with earnest hope it will be given urgent and positive consideration. This program developed after useful talks with Spaak's advisers during Washington visit. US experts in Embassy intend consult with GOB experts on this matter.

An important element this program is regularization GOC–GOB financial and diplomatic relations. On basis Kitona results, US suggesting to Adoula he should move quickly to regularize GOC relations with Belgium and initiate long-delayed financial negotiations. US hopes, if Adoula willing to enter into the negotiations in near future and to reestablish diplomatic relations, GOB will respond favorably with over-riding political objective in mind rather than from purely financial point of view. Public GOC–GOB announcement of opening these negotiations should have important immediate psychological impact on Tshombe.

In making this presentation to Spaak, you should stress US conviction that this type planning will be key to preventing recurrence hostilities; therefore it must be worked out urgently and GOB must be prepared implement it urgently if necessary.

For London: Dept [will] transmit copies US study to you when completed. On their receipt, you should discuss urgently with UK Government at senior level, drawing on above presentations as appropriate.

FYI. We are mindful of risk Tshombe learning such program being worked out, thus permitting him adopt posture of being victim of US- or UN-inspired financial machinations and economic warfare. Believe, however, US objective integration of Katanga would not be hampered and might be furthered by his learning of unspecified plans strengthening economy of Congo. For your background, program includes measures secure that tax obligations and foreign exchange earnings arising from Katanga become available strengthen financial position whole Congo, and steps to transfer to GOC appropriate powers to control economic institutions. End FYI.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2161. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Miller; cleared in draft by Deputy Assistant Secretary for European Affairs Richard H. Davis and by Wallner, Vance, and Williams; and approved by Ball. Repeated to Léopoldville, Paris, London, USUN, and Bermuda for the Secretary.

2 Telegram 1107 from Brussels is dated December 19. (Ibid., 770G.00/12–1961)

179. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 179. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, December 22, 1961, 1:50 p.m.

1098. Following is program put economic pressure on Tshombe. Separate telegram contains your instructions regarding implementation.2

Program to put economic pressure on Katanga requires prior consultation among US, Belgian, British Governments and UN. Program consists of three stages: (1) stage one measures to be taken immediately; (2) stage two measures for implementation as soon as is made feasible by progress effectuating first stage; (3) stage three contingency measures for implementation if and when previous actions seen to be insufficient.

Intention first stage this program place Tshombe's financial supporters in financial and legal jeopardy threatening Katanga government future loss tax receipts and foreign exchange earnings. First stage measures have effect only revert to fiscal and foreign exchange control status of Loi Fondamentale.

Stage one measures are: (1) In order to establish that transfers by companies to Katanga government do not discharge their tax and dividend obligations to Congo Government, following needed: (a) Reopen Congo's pre-independence company-tax assessment office in Belgium.

(b) Reopen Congo's pre-independence customs office at Antwerp to assess duties on commodities destined for import by Katanga.

(c) GOB promulgate fiscal ruling that Belgo-Congolese companies discharge income and dividend tax obligations under Belgian law only upon presentation evidence Congo part of assessed tax actually received by GOC.

(d) GOC legislation legally closing customs posts, tax and Treasury offices located in Katanga.

(e) GOC legislation making all Congo direct taxes including all chapters impots sur les revenues and dividends owing Congo portfolio legally payable only at Treasury office Léopoldville.

(2) In order to establish that sales of foreign exchange proceeds by Katanga exporters to Katanga national bank do not discharge legal obligations under Congo foreign exchange regulations, following needed: (a) Congo Monetary Council circulate announcement to all central banks specifying existing regulation under which all foreign exchange earnings Congo residents and firms located in Congo must be sold to Monetary Council and requesting advice balances held abroad by Congo residents; British, Belgian and US Government and GOB insure respective central banks notify their financial communities existence this circular.

(b) Congo Monetary Council enforce existing foreign exchange regulations requiring Congo commercial banks sell to Monetary Council all foreign exchange acquired by their Katangan branches.

(c) GOC and GOB restore pre-independence authority of agency in Belgium to effect repatriation to Congo foreign exchange earnings of Belgo-Congolese companies.

(3) In order to establish GOC authority over companies operating in Congo, following needed: (a) GOB immediately collect all dividends and other earnings owing on all securities contained in Congo portfolio.

(b) GOB exercise voting rights associated with portfolio in accordance GOC instructions during period portfolio in GOB possession.

(c) GOB and GOC initiate negotiations for transfer Congo portfolio to GOC soonest.

(d) GOB initiate legal action to speed liquidation Comite Special du Katanga and transfer CSK porfolio to Congo portfolio soonest.

(4) In order to convince Katanga authorities new sources financial assistance not available, following needed: (a) US, British and Belgian govts notify respective international investment houses their official view inadvisability marketing Katanga public security offerings or facilitate management Katanga govt accounts.

(b) US, British and Belgian govts discuss with Swiss govt desirability similar announcement to leading Swiss banks.

Stage two measures are: (1) At soonest date activate Congo tax offices in Belgium, transfer Congo portfolio to GOC, transfer CSK assets to Congo portfolio, GOC exercise portfolio voting rights in Forminiere, UMHK and other companies to obtain termination their financial collaboration with Katanga govt.

(2) GOC terminate payment part salary to Belgians employed by Katanga govt and subject to Belgian technical assistance program.

(3) GOC initiate legal action abroad to seize overseas assets of companies operating in Katanga in arrears tax obligations to GOC and failing sell foreign exchange earnings to Monetary Council.

Third stage measures are: (1) US, British and Belgian Govts advise nationals depart from Katanga.

(2) ONUC assist enforcement Congo law in Katanga employing UN forces close tax offices, customs posts in Katanga and branches and agencies Katanga national bank; interrupt exports and imports on which customs duty not paid to GOC.

Ball

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo Cables. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Robert L. West of the Office of Central African Affairs, cleared by Williams and in draft by Ball, and approved by Vance. Also sent to USUN, Brussels, and London and repeated to Bermuda for Rusk and to Paris.

2 Telegram 1108 to Léopoldville, also sent to Brussels, London, USUN, Paris, and Elisabethville, December 22, stated that as long as there was hope that Tshombe would live up to the Kitona agreement, no approach should be made to obtain the Congolese legislation envisaged in stage one of the program outlined in telegram 1098, but other steps in stage one should be initiated at once. The telegram instructed the Consulate in Elisabethville to inform Tshombe of the plan as soon as the Embassy in Brussels reported a favorable Belgian reaction and to warn him that it would be implemented if he did not carry out the Kitona agreement in good faith. It also instructed the other recipient missions to enlist U.K., Belgian, and U.N. cooperation in the plan and to seek French diplomatic support. (Department of State, Central Files, 870G.00/12–2261)

180. Telegram From the Department of State to President Kennedy, at West Palm Beach, Florida 180. Telegram From the Department of State to President Kennedy, at West Palm Beach, Florida1

Washington, December 23, 1961, 8:17 p.m.

Following represents Department's current planning in Congo together with attempt to foresee possible difficulties that might arise.

1. Agreement between Tshombe and Adoula based on results Kitona talks would be fully satisfactory to US and could make possible fulfillment major US and UN objectives in Congo. We therefore making every effort maintain pressure on Tshombe to live up to agreement. These pressures taking three forms as outlined recent cables being repeated to you: (a) attempt mobilize Belgian, British and Congolese economic measures designed convince Tshombe that if he does not carry out agreement sources of revenue and outside aid will dry up; (b) attempt to secure Western diplomatic cooperation to convince Tshombe his future can only lie in unified Congo; and c) continue UN military presence in E'ville, without any renewal of hostilities except in self-defense.

Additionally, we should request senior UN representative, such as Khiari or Gardiner, approach Tshombe, expressing view Kitona agreement binding and expectation Tshombe will follow through. UN rep might also point out that UN intends see agreement carried out by every means its disposal and will assist Tshombe resist extremist Katanga and outside pressures. Should be made clear to Tshombe referral Kitona agreement to Katanga parliament for approval legally irrelevant. If UN spokesman unable secure Tshombe's assent, he might make clear UN intention take practical steps support GOC integrate Katanga without him.

2. Tshombe committed himself at Kitona to return his representatives to Léopoldville parliament (27 Dec) and to participate in a constitutional review commission (3 Jan). Bunche has proposed allow him 10 days to 2 weeks from date conference (21 Dec) to implement those portions of agreement dealing with UN. Should he fail at least to meet (Jan 3) date, we should approach UN and GOC urging UN action in Elisabethville to initiate steps towards economic integration of Katanga. UN would: (a) close the Katanga national bank; (b) ensure the collection of taxes on behalf of the Central Govt; (c) assume control over means of road and rail routes to and from Angola and Rhodesia. Foregoing measures would deny to Tshombe control over tax revenues and export proceeds. Details timing and priority can be subject later discussion. Measures (a) and (b) would be greatly facilitated by Belgian cooperation but can be taken independently. We convinced that based on UN position strength Elisabethville, these steps can be taken without risk use force and without major troop movement. In particular, it would not appear necessary UN invest Jadotville and Kolwezi militarily since we believe any Katanga hold-out forces those towns could be reduced by process attrition and isolation.

We believe foregoing program should be offered UN and GOC as substitute for military action.

3. If it becomes clear Tshombe has no intention of negotiating in good faith, we believe it inevitable meeting of SC would be called at which Soviets, Africans and Asians would insist on intensified military action against Katanga. Since these demands would be vetoed by UK, French and possibly others, we would most likely find ourselves in an emergency special session of the GA as in Sept 1960. Although we would in such case hope to be able achieve res confirming previous mandate and endorsing U Thant's phased program to reintegrate Katanga, the parliamentary situation would be extremely difficult.

4. An immediate consequence of a clear posture of intransigence by Tshombe would be a sharpened desire of Léopoldville Govt to step up military operations by the Congolese Army. We would make every attempt to delay and divert ANC action recognizing that failure to act would jeopardize stability of present moderate govt. If tangible progress is made on integration of Katanga along lines para 2 without cooperation of Tshombe, Adoula would have better possibility keep extremists under control and limit military operations to scope acceptable to us.

5. If, despite our best efforts, there is renewed heavy fighting in Elisabethville, there would most likely be disintegration of Tshombe Govt. We would then hope the UN would move energetically to maintain peace and stability and would take steps to promote establishment more cooperative but popularly-based Katanga Govt. (UN has already asked us what we would think of FonMin Kibwe as a possible alternative to Tshombe.)

6. There is distinct possibility Katanga troops, under influence mercenary extremists, might re-open hostilities against UN forces. We would in such case insist that UN confine its reaction purely to self-defense. Again, progress on integration, whether with or without Tshombe, would facilitate our task of limiting UN military activities.

7. In meantime we will take all possible measures to strengthen Adoula politically so that he is better able resist nationalist extremist pressures. These measures include: (a) increased US financial grants ($15,000,000) and budget aid; (b) pressure on UN to initiate training of Congolese National Army; (c) supply of transport planes and training of Congo Air Force as long-range project; and (d) grants for increased education program.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2361. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Woodruff and Tron; cleared by Wallner, Miller, and in substance by Davis and McGhee; and approved by Fredericks. Repeated to Léopoldville as telegram 1117 and to Brussels, London, Paris, and USUN.

181. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 181. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 1

Washington, December 26, 1961, 6:59 p.m.

1128. From Secretary for Ambassador. I am greatly pleased by adroit and effective way in which you brought US influence to bear during course Kitona discussions to avoid breakdown. There is no doubt in my mind that this was done without undue pressure on either party.

It is vital to our interests that Kitona agreement be implemented. You aware of program of pressures we preparing apply on Tshombe if needed to bring him along to its implementation. On other hand it is very important that Adoula continue conciliatory attitude both in order that he be prepared accept Tshombe effort implement agreement if Tshombe reasonable but also to avoid giving Katangan extremists excuses for urging non implementation.

You have in past made very clear to Adoula what risks and difficulties US Govt has been up against in giving him and UN support which made Kitona agreement possible. He will therefore understand importance his avoiding statements or measures at present juncture which might jeopardize the peaceful reintegration of Katanga we both seek. Measure of success which Kitona represents for Adoula should facilitate his adopting public posture of firmness but forebearance toward Katangans and Belgian business interests that area.

I am greatly impressed by Adoula's statesmanship and I trust that, given mutual confidence and esteem which you have been able to build up with him, Adoula will continue be receptive to our advice even where personal feelings and political pressures might suggest somewhat different course.

Suggest in your talk with Adoula you draw in general terms upon recent telegrams outlining nature of pressures we prepared apply on Tshombe in attempt convince Adoula resort to force should not be required and threats thereof could play into hands of extremists in Katanga.

Suggest you also reiterate to Adoula assistance he could give to our efforts marshal widespread support behind our Katangan policy and his if he were to move definitively against Gizenga.

Finally, it is of utmost importance that Adoula not be tempted to overreach himself in expectation of more US and UN support than can be furnished. He is not in driver's seat to extent he supposes and must assume a statesmanlike approach to a Congo settlement.2

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2661. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Eisenberg; cleared by Fredericks, Vance, McGhee, and in substance by Wallner; and approved by Rusk (McGhee initialed for him). Repeated to London, Brussels, Paris, USUN, and Salisbury.

2 Gullion reported in telegram 1661, December 26, that he had met the previous day with Adoula, who "seemed more flexible and conciliatory than previously." Gullion commented, "We hope to be able to keep Adoula in this conciliatory frame of mind but past experience teaches us how volatile and sometimes elusive even the most stable Congolese politicians can be." He stated that within a week the United Nations would move a "small number" of ANC troops to Kamina, which was supposed to be their southern limit of advance, and he had prepared Adoula for a U.S. refusal to move the troops in U.S. aircraft. (Ibid.)

182. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 182. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom1

Washington, December 29, 1961, 7:57 p.m.

3505. Following based uncleared memcon.2

During conversation with British Amb Dec. 28, Secretary asked him summarize UK policy and objectives in Congo. Secretary said US and UK were diverging on details. Ormsby Gore replied UK as anxious as US to see Katanga rejoin Congo and come under authority central government. However, necessary proceed slowly to prevent local collapse; destruction local government would be very serious; without Tshombe there would be no local administration. UK would not like ad hoc UN administration. If reasonable pressure maintained Africans will reach modus vivendi in their own fashion. Too much pressure may lead to collapse. Amb doubted economic pressure on Katanga would have much effect as economy already in bad shape.

Secretary said objectives agreed but US was less sanguine than UK if Tshombe left to drift. Western action necessary to balance advice, aircraft, arms, leadership for forces, and propaganda from private "Western" sources. Amb. interjected these have counterbalanced advice Tshombe has received from governments. Secretary agreed time required, but too much time would convince Tshombe secession or something like it possible.

Ormsby Gore affirmed Tshombe must be convinced secession is out. Amb did not know who could convince him full consequences his activities. HMG had told its Consul to tell Tshombe he must comply with Kitona agreement, but Amb. said we cannot really expect full compliance in a few days.

Secretary said our hope was we could keep Adoula on right track and on his feet while British, French and Belgian pressure on Tshombe would bring them together. Pointed out US unpopular with Tshombe.

Ormsby Gore emphasized UK concern re UN officials on ground. Ivan Smith has no control over Brig. Raja who gets advice from Krishna Menon.3

In discussing Kitona agreement British Amb said that as end product of extensive negotiations it would have been fine, but coming after only 36 hours of negotiations it was obviously unlikely Tshombe could get approval in Eville in time allowed. UK was concerned US thought Tshombe must be held to letter of Kitona.

Secretary responded that only a few points were of immediate importance: 1) financial arrangements; 2) Adoula's and Tshombe's armies should not fight each other; 3) constitutional talks; 4) mutual support against Gizenga.

Amb said he would query London on how hand was to be played in detail. British Consul Elizabethville had already told Katangese Tshombe ought to observe eight points fully.

Secretary then raised question of Sir Roy Welensky's statements in view HMG's responsibility for foreign relations of Federation. British Amb. pointed out Sir Roy's responsibility for internal security. Consequently, Welensky feels he has right to speak out on questions, e.g., those involving border, affecting internal security. HMG has considered giving more direct orders to Northern Rhodesian authorities but this would lead to tremendous rows.

Secretary summed up by saying US would welcome candid and detailed interchanges on Congo. Expressed concern that words sometimes don't mean same thing. Recognized possibility disagreements might exist, but did not want to see them arise accidentally.

Ormsby Gore reiterated HMG concern over UN reps. Said did not wish to see UK policy identified with them. UN military people in Elizabethville not under civilian control from New York.

Secretary agreed difficult to underwrite some of things UN has done, but we were highly satisfied with UN New York. Pointed out that if UN weren't in Congo US and UK would have to be there with forces and money.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2961. Confidential. Drafted by Alf E. Bergesen of the Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs and approved by Vance. Also sent to Léopoldville, Brussels, Salisbury, USUN, and Paris.

2 Drafted by Bergesen and dated December 28. (Ibid., 770G.00/12–2861)

3 Brigadier K.A.S. Raja, commander of the U.N. forces in Katanga, and Indian Defense Minister V.K. Krishna Menon.

January–November 1962: Efforts to find a Peaceful Solution to the Katanga ProblemJanuary–November 1962: Efforts to find a Peaceful Solution to the Katanga Problem

183. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (McGhee)

Washington, January 2, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 870G.00/1–262. No classification marking. Drafted by Ball. Filed with McGhee's memorandum in reply, also dated January 2, which states that much of the information in Ball's memorandum was covered in McGhee's conversation that day with the Belgian Ambassador (see Document 184), but that he was taking the remaining points up with AF and IO.

184. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, January 2, 1962, 9:24 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–262. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Miller, cleared by Whitehouse and Wallner, and approved by McGhee. Repeated to USUN, London, and Paris.

185. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, January 2, 1962, 9:25 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–262. Confidential. Drafted by Miller, cleared in draft by Vance and Wallner, and approved by McGhee.

186. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (McGhee) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, January 5, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 870G.00/1– 562. Confidential. Drafted by Miller. Also sent to Under Secretary Ball, who initialed and forwarded it to Rusk.

187. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, January 6, 1962, 11:27 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.70G11/1–662. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Whitehouse and Carlucci, who was now in the Office of Central African Affairs; cleared by Williams, Wallner, Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations Frederick G. Dutton, NSC Executive Secretary Bromley K. Smith, and McGhee; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Brussels and USUN.

188. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, January 13, 1962, 5:47 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1362. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Tron, cleared by Williams, and approved by Cleveland. Repeated to USUN and Brussels.

189. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, January 16, 1962, 1:01 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1562. Secret; Niact; [distribution indicator not declassified]. Drafted by Whitehouse and Carlucci, cleared by Williams and by Deputy Director for Coordination in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research Joseph W. Scott and in substance by Wallner, and approved by Rusk.

190. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, January 16, 1962, 2:46 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/1–1662. Confidential. Drafted by Colonel M.J.L. Greene, of the Office of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense; cleared by Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs Haydn Williams, Deputy Politico-Military Adviser in the Bureau of African Affairs Lynford Lardner, and Buffum; and approved by Wallner. Also sent to USUN and USCINCEUR.

191. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, January 17, 1962, 7:36 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1762. Confidential. Drafted by Tron, cleared by Fredericks and United Nations Adviser in the Bureau of European Affairs Henry J. Kellerman, and approved by Wallner. Also sent to USUN and repeated to London, Brussels, and Paris Topol.

192. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, January 17, 1962, 10:20 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1362. Confidential. Drafted by Assistant Legal Adviser for African Affairs Alan W. Ford; cleared in draft by Robert M. Beaudry of the Office of Western European Affairs, Williams, Wallner, and McGhee; and approved by Fredericks. Also sent to USUN and repeated to London, Léopoldville, Salisbury, and Paris.

193. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, January 21, 1962, 1:36 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2062. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Ferguson; cleared by Wallner, Williams, and Eisenberg; and approved by McGhee.

194. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, January 23, 1962, 4:36 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2362. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Stanley M. Cleveland of the Under Secretary's office and George R. Kenney of the Office of Central African Affairs and approved by Ball.

195. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, January 25, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2562. Secret. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, Paris, and London.

196. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, January 26, 1962, 8:16 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2662. Confidential. Drafted by Sisco and Buffum; cleared by Harlan Cleveland, Eisenberg, Kellerman, and in substance by Ball; and approved by Wallner. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to London, Paris, Taipei, Caracas, Santiago, Dublin, Cairo, and Accra.

197. Editorial Note

198. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, January 31, 1962, 4:14 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2862. Confidential. Drafted by Eisenberg and Kenney; cleared by Fredericks, Burdett, Ford, and Wallner; and approved by McGhee. Repeated to London, USUN, Elisabethville, and Léopoldville.

199. Editorial Note

200. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, February 5, 1962, 2:30–4:15 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. Drafted by Glenn. The source text is labeled Part I of two parts; Part II is printed as Document 201. Both are filed with a covering memorandum of February 12 from Battle to Bundy. The time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is taken from Kennedy's appointment book. (Kennedy Library)

201. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, February 5, 1962, 2:30–4:15 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. Drafted by Glenn. The source text is labeled Part II of two parts; Part I is printed as Document 200.

202. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Williams) to the Under Secretary of State (Ball)

Washington, February 7, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.70G11/2–762. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Vance.

203. Memorandum Prepared in the Department of State

Washington, February 8, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. Notes on the cover sheet indicate that the paper represented a consensus in the Department of State of steps that might be taken with regard to the Congo and that it was submitted for discussion to the NSC Standing Group on February 9. The Record of Actions at the Standing Group meeting states that Williams presented the proposed program and it was discussed and "approved in general." (Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Standing Group, February 9, 1962) For information concerning the NSC Standing Group, see Bromley K. Smith, Organizational History of the National Security Council During the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, p. 51.

204. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, February 9, 1962, 10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–962. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, London, Paris, Salisbury, and USUN.

205. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, February 16, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–1662. Confidential. Repeated to Léopoldville and Brussels.

206. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, February 19, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/2-1962. Confidential. The memorandum bears Rusk's initials, indicating that he saw it.

207. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, February 20, 1962, 6:37 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–2062. Confidential. Drafted by Kenney, cleared by Stanley Cleveland, and approved by Eisenberg. Repeated to Brussels, London, Paris, Elisabethville, and USUN.

208. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, February 21, 1962, 9:21 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.55/2–2162. Secret. Drafted by Beaudry; cleared by Tasca, Acting Director of the Office of Dependent Area Affairs R. Austin Acly, and Stanley Cleveland; and approved by Tyler. Repeated to USUN, Léopoldville, Usumbura, London, and Paris.

209. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, February 22, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–2262. Confidential. Repeated to USUN, London, Paris, Brussels, Elisabethville, and Brazzaville.

210. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State

Brussels, February 24, 1962, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–2462. Confidential. Repeated to Léopoldville, Elisabethville, London, Paris, and USUN.

211. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, March 3, 1962, 5:02 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–162. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Vance; cleared in draft by Tasca, Fredericks, Williams, Burdett, Wallner, and McGhee; and approved by Ball, who initialed for Rusk. Also sent to London and Léopoldville and repeated to Elisabethville, USUN, and Paris.

212. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State

Brussels, March 4, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–462. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Léopoldville, London, Paris, Elisabethville, and USUN.

213. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, March 14, 1962, 9:19 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.5/3–1462. Confidential. Drafted by Buffum and Pelcovits, cleared by Eisenberg and Sisco, and approved by Wallner. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and Paris.

214. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, March 15, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–1562. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to USUN, Elisabethville, London, Paris, and Brazzaville.

215. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, March 24, 1962, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–2462. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, Elisabethville, Paris, and Brazzaville.

216. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, March 24, 1962, 5:01 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–2462. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Buffum; cleared by Ford, Wallner, in draft by Tasca, by EUR, and by McGhee, who cleared it with McGeorge Bundy by telephone; and approved and signed by Ball. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, and London.

217. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, March 26, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–2662. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and Paris.

218. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, March 30, 1962, 2:58 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–3062. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Ford, Buffum, and Vance; cleared by Williams, Wallner, Tyler, and McGhee; and approved by Rusk. Also sent to USUN and repeated to Brussels and London.

219. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, April 18, 1962, 11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–1862. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to London, Paris, Brussels, and USUN.

220. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, April 20, 1962, 9:50 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–2061. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Vance; cleared by Fredericks, in draft by Burdett, and in substance by Wallner; and approved by McGhee. Repeated to USUN, Paris, London, and Brussels.

221. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, April 24, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–2462. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and Paris.

222. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, April 26, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4-2662. Confidential; Priority; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and Paris. The source text does not indicate the time of transmission; it was received at 4:10 p.m.

223. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, April 28, 1962, 12:35 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–2862. Confidential. Drafted by Andrews; cleared by Tasca, Burdett, and Wallner; and approved by McGhee. Also sent to London and repeated to Léopoldville, Paris, New Delhi, Elisabethville, and USUN.

224. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 28, 1962, 3:30–5:15 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2084. Secret. Drafted by Burdett and approved in the White House on May 4. The meeting was held at the White House.

225. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, April 29, 1962, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–2962. Secret. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, Paris, Elisabethville, and Brazzaville.

226. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Athens

Washington, May 2, 1962, 5:23 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–262. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Vance and Carlucci, who at this time was Officer in Charge of Congo (Léopoldville) Affairs; cleared in draft by Fredericks, Wallner, and Burdett and cleared by McGeorge Bundy (see footnote 2 below); and approved by Ball. Repeated to Léopoldville, London, Brussels, USUN, Paris, New Delhi, Lagos, Tunis, Khartoum, and Usumbura.

227. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, May 4, 1962, 1:31 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–462. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Robert J. Barnard of the Office of South Asian Affairs and Carlucci; cleared by Director of the Office of South Asian Affairs Turner Cameron, Vance, Officer in Charge of Sudan Affairs Cleo A. Noel, Jr., and McGhee's Staff Assistant Alan L. Campbell, Jr.; and approved with revisions by Tasca. Also sent to Khartoum and repeated to Léopoldville, USUN, Elisabethville, Brussels, London, Paris, Salisbury, and Athens for Secretary Rusk.

228. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, May 5, 1962, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–562. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, USUN, London, Paris, Elisabethville, and Brazzaville.

229. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Athens, May 6, 1962, 3 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–662. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London, Brussels, Paris, New Delhi, Tunis, Khartoum, USUN, Lagos, Léopoldville, and Usumbura.

230. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 11, 1962, 8:58 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–1162. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Buffum and Eisenberg; cleared in draft by Fredericks, Wallner, Burdett, and Ford and in substance by Edmond C. Hutchinson, Assistant Administrator for Africa and Europe at the Agency for International Development; and approved by McGhee. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, New Delhi, Paris, and USUN.

231. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, May 11, 1962, 7 pm.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–1162. Confidential; Priority. Received at 10 p.m. and repeated to London, Brussels, and Léopoldville.

232. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 14, 1962, 1:56 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–1462. Secret; Niact. Drafted and approved in the Executive Secretariat and cleared by Ball and by Bromley Smith at the White House. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, and USUN. The letter transmitted here was drafted in the Department of State, sent to the White House with a May 13 covering memorandum from Battle to Bundy, and approved with revisions by Dungan and the President. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

233. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, May 16, 1962.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Files. Secret. According to a note on the title page, it was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by the U.S. Intelligence Board on May 16. A note on the reverse of the title page listed the organizations that participated in the preparation of the estimate (CIA and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense, the three military services, and the Joint Staff), all the directors of which concurred. The AEC and FBI representatives to the USIB abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

234. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State

London, May 16, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–1662. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Brussels, Paris, USUN, and Léopoldville.

235. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State

London, May 16, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–1662. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Brussels, Paris, USUN, and Léopoldville.

236. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State

London, May 18, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–1862. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Received at 9:08 p.m. and repeated to Brussels, Paris, USUN, and Léopoldville.

237. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, May 18, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–1862. Secret; Limit Distribution. Received at 2:08 a.m. on May 19 and repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, Paris, and London.

238. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, May 19, 1962, 5:16 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–1662. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Eisenberg and Buffum; cleared by Williams, Burdett, Cleveland, and McGhee; and approved and signed by Rusk. Also sent to London, Brussels, and USUN and repeated to Paris and New Delhi.

239. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, May 21, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Files, Congo, May–July 1962. Secret. The source text does not indicate the drafter, but according to the Department of State copy, the memorandum was drafted by Eisenberg. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–2162)

240. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State

Brussels, May 23, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–2362. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, London, Paris, New Delhi, and USUN.

241. Message From Prime Minister Macmillan to President Kennedy

London, May 25, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo General, Tripartite Congo Talks, May 1962. Secret. Filed with a covering note from Ambassador Ormsby Gore to the President.

242. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, May 30, 1962, midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–3062. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, Paris, London, New Delhi, and Lagos.

243. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, June 1, 1962, 9:28 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 870G.10/5–3162. Confidential. Drafted by William C. Harrop of the Office of Central African Affairs and Beaudry; cleared by Fredericks and Harlan Cleveland, in draft by Tyler, and in substance by Hutchinson; and approved by McGhee. Repeated to Léopoldville, London, Paris, and USUN.

244. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, June 2, 1962, 3:51 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–262. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Cleveland, Vance, and Carlucci; cleared in draft by Williams and Wallner and in substance by Tyler; redrafted in the White House and approved by the President on June 1; and approved by McGhee. Repeated to USUN, Léopoldville, and Brussels.

245. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 9, 1962, 1 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Belgium. Secret. Drafted by Glenn and MacArthur. The meeting was held at the White House during a lunch for Spaak, who visited Washington on June 9. He was in New York heading the Belgian Delegation for the U.N. General Assembly discussion of Ruanda-Urundi.

246. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, June 10, 1962, 2:08 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–1062. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Vance, Williams, Hutchinson, and Spaak's private secretary Viscount Etienne Davignon; cleared by MacArthur and McGhee, in draft by Wallner, and in substance by Hutchinson and Rusk; seen in draft by Rothschild; and approved by Williams. Repeated to Brussels, USUN, London, and Paris.

247. Letter From the British Ambassador (Ormsby Gore) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, June 11, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204, UK Officials' Correspondence with Secretary Rusk, 1962. Secret.

248. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, June 25, 1962, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–2562. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, Paris, and London.

249. Editorial Note

250. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, June 26, 1962, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–2662. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, Paris, and London.

251. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, June 27, 1962, 8:55 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–2762. Confidential. Drafted by Sisco and Pelcovits; cleared by Cleveland, Burdett, Tasca, Ball, and Dungan; and approved by McGhee. Repeated to Brussels, London, Léopoldville, and Paris.

252. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, June 28, 1962, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–2862. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, Paris, and London.

253. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 29, 1962, 2:33 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/6–2962. Confidential. Drafted by Coote and approved in S on July 24. The time of the meeting is taken from the Secretary's appointment book. (Johnson Library) Other topics of discussion were recorded in separate memoranda of conversation. Documentation concerning Foreign Minister Wachuku's visit to Washington is scheduled for publication in volume XXI.

254. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, July 2, 1962, 8:18 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–262. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Ford; cleared by Fredericks, Wallner, and Burdett; and approved by McGhee. Also sent to USUN and repeated to Léopoldville, London, Paris, and Elisabethville.

255. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, July 3, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–362. Confidential. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, Paris, and Elisabethville.

256. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, July 7, 1962, 5:03 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–762. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Vance, cleared by Wallner and Fredericks, and approved by McGhee. Repeated to Brussels, London, Paris, and USUN.

257. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, July 10, 1962, 2:03 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–1062. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Ford; cleared in draft by Fredericks, Wallner, Burdett, and McGhee; and approved and signed by Rusk. Also sent to Brussels and repeated to USUN, London, Paris, and Elisabethville.

258. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, July 13, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–1362. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to USUN, Elisabethville, Paris, London, and Brussels.

259. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State

London, July 17, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–1762. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, Paris, USUN, Léopoldville, Elisabethville, and Lagos.

260. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State

Brussels, July 19, 1962, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.15–WI/7–1962. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, USUN, Elisabethville, London, Paris, and Bonn.

261. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, July 21, 1962, 6:38 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2162. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Buffum; cleared by Cleveland, Tasca, and Burdett; and approved and signed by Ball. Also sent to Geneva for Rusk and repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and Paris. Rusk was in Geneva for the conclusion of the conference on Laos.

262. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Geneva, July 23, 1962, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2362. Secret; Niact. Received at 1:21 p.m.

263. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, July 23, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2362. Confidential; Priority. Received at 9:39 p.m. and repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and Paris.

264. Letter from Prime Minister Adoula to President Kennedy

Léopoldville, undated.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Secret. The source text is an English translation prepared in the Department of State and sent to the White House with a July 24 covering memorandum from Brubeck to Bundy, which states that Adoula had given the letter to Gullion just before Gullion left Léopoldville to return to Washington for consultations. A copy of the original letter, handwritten in French, is in Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2462.

265. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, July 24, 1962, 9:59 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2462. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Andrews, cleared by the Executive Secretariat, and approved by Cleveland. Also sent to Brussels, Léopoldville, London, and Paris and repeated to Elisabethville and to Geneva for Rusk.

266. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, July 26, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2662. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, Paris, and London.

267. Record of Understanding

Washington, undated.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Files, Congo, August 1962. Confidential. The source text is unsigned and includes no drafting information, but it was evidently prepared in the Department of State. It is filed as an attachment to a memorandum of August 2 from Brubeck to Bundy headed "Progress Report on the Congo," which summarized developments since July 25 and stated that a detailed report would be submitted to the President the next day.

268. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to President Kennedy

Washington, August 3, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Congo Security 1962. Confidential. The source text includes no drafting information, nor does the Department of State copy. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–362) A covering memorandum of August 3 from Brubeck to Dungan states that the memorandum reflected revisions directed by Ball but that he had not seen it in its final form. Another covering memorandum of August 3 from Dungan to the President states that he had reviewed the memorandum, found it consistent with his understanding of the President's wishes, and recommended approval.

269. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (McGhee) to the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Fredericks)

Washington, August 6, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–662. Confidential. Drafted by McGhee. Also sent to Tyler and Cleveland.

270. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (McGhee) to President Kennedy

Washington, August 9, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Secret. The source text includes no drafting information, but the Department of State copy indicates the memorandum was drafted by Vance, Carlucci, and McGhee. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.70G/8–962)

271. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, August 10, 1962, 6:44 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1062. Secret; Niact; Eyes Only; No Distribution. Drafted by Vance; cleared in draft by Burdett, Fredericks, and Cleveland's Special Assistant Thomas W. Wilson; and approved by Ball.

272. Message From Foreign Secretary Home to Secretary of State Rusk

London, August 10, 1962.

273. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, August 11, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1162. Secret; Niact; Eyes Only. Also sent to Paris.

274. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, August 11, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Series, Congo. Confidential. The source text bears no indication of the drafter, but the Department of State copy indicates that the memorandum was drafted by Fredericks. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1162)

275. Editorial Note

276. Telegram From the Consulate General in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, August 13, 1962, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1362. Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to USUN.

277. Editorial Note

278. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, August 15, 1962, 9:24 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1562. Confidential; Niact. Drafted and approved by Cleveland; cleared by Fredericks, Buffum, and Ball; and initialed by Cleveland for Ball. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and Paris.

279. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, August 17, 1962, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1762. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, Paris, and London.

280. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, August 19, 1962, 4:26 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1862. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Ball, cleared by Williams and Cutler, and approved by Rusk. A copy sent to the President bears the following note in Bundy's handwriting: "Mr. President: Ball begins to take charge." (Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Congo-Security, 1962 (A))

281. Editorial Note

282. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, August 24, 1962, 8:23 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–2462. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Hoffacker, cleared by Williams, and approved by Ball.

283. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, August 25, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–2562. Secret; Niact. A copy was sent to Bundy with a covering memorandum from Brubeck. A handwritten note by an unidentified member of the White House staff states that the telegram was a "toned-down version" of a Ball-Gullion telephone conversation the day before, and that Ball thought it should not be shown to the President until they heard from Hoffacker, who would be talking to Gullion that night or the next day. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo Cables) In the Ball-Gullion telephone conversation, Ball urged Gullion to wait and send a telegram after he had an opportunity to talk to Hoffacker. (Memorandum of telephone conversation, August 25, 1:45 p.m.; Kennedy Library, Ball Papers)

284. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, August 27, 1962, 7:46 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–2762. Secret; Priority. Drafted and approved by Rusk and cleared by Ball and Williams.

285. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, August 28, 1962, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–2862. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

286. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, August 30, 1962, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–3062. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Elisabethville.

287. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, August 31, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–3162. Secret; Priority.

288. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, September 4, 1962, 9:31 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–462. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Carlucci, Buffum, and Pelcovits; cleared by Williams, Wallner, Burdett, and Ball; and approved by McGhee. Also sent to Elisabethville, USUN, Léopoldville, and London and repeated to Paris, Rome, Lagos, New Delhi, and Bonn.

289. Editorial Note

290. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, September 13, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.54/9–1362. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to USUN, London, Paris, Brussels, Elisabethville, and Brazzaville.

291. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, September 14, 1962, 6:56 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.03/9–1462. Confidential. Drafted by Godley; cleared by Williams, Wallner, Andrews, and McGhee; and approved by Ball. Also sent to USUN and repeated to Brussels, London, and Elisabethville.

292. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, September 23, 1962, 7:48 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.12–McG/9–2362. Secret; Priority. Drafted and approved by McGhee and cleared by Williams, Wallner, and Burdett. Repeated to USUN and Brussels.

293. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, September 24, 1962, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2462. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, London, Paris, and Léopoldville.

294. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

New York, September 24, 1962, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2462. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, London, Paris, and Léopoldville.

295. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, September 25, 1962, 1 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2562. Confidential. Received at 3:48 a.m. and repeated to London, Paris, Brussels, and Léopoldville.

296. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, September 25, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.12–McG/9–2562. Confidential; Niact. Received at 3:13 p.m.

297. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, September 25, 1962, midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2562. Confidential. Received on September 26 at 1:10 a.m. and repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, Paris, and London.

298. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, September 28, 1962, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.12–McG/9–2862. Secret; Priority. Also sent to USUN.

299. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, September 28, 1962, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2862. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Brussels, London, USUN, and Elisabethville.

300. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Lépoldville, September 29, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.12–McG/9–2962. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Brussels and USUN.

301. Paper Prepared by Acting Secretary of State Ball

Washington, undated.

Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Congo Security 1962. Confidential. Filed with a September 29 covering memorandum from Ball to the President, which reads as follows: "All evidence indicates that—barring some new major effort—our plans for the Congo are slowly sinking in the African ooze. I have drafted the attached talking paper with the thought that you will wish to make a strong pitch to Lord Home to enlist active British support." The President was to meet with Lord Home on September 30.

302. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, September 30, 1962, 8:21 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.12–McG/9–2962. Secret; Niact. Drafted and approved by Ball and cleared by Cleveland and Williams. Repeated to London, Brussels, and USUN for Rusk.

303. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 2, 1962, 9:43–10:15 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. Confidential. Drafted by Cleveland and approved in the White House on October 11. The source text does not indicate the time of the meeting, but an attached memorandum of October 2 from Cleveland to Rusk states that the conversation took place after the signing of the act authorizing the loan of $100 million to the United Nations. (P.L. 87–731; 76 Stat. 695) According to Kennedy's appointment book, the signing ceremony ended at 9:43 a.m. and his next appointment was at 10:15 a.m. (Kennedy Library)

304. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, October 4, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–462. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Repeated to USUN, Paris, London, Brussels, Elisabethville, and Brazzaville.

305. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, October 4, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–462. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, and USUN.

306. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, October 6, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–662. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, and USUN.

307. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, October 6, 1962, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–662. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, USUN.

308. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, October 7, 1962, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–762. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, and USUN.

309. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, October 8, 1962, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–862. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to USUN and Brussels.

310. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, October 8, 1962, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–862. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Brussels, USUN, and Elisabethville.

311. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 9, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–962. Secret. Drafted by Tyler and approved in S on October 12 and in the White House on October 24. The source text is labeled "Part 2 of 4 Parts"; three other memoranda of conversation record discussion of different topics.

312. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, October 11, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–1162. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Brussels and USUN.

313. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, October 12, 1962, 4:39 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–1162. Confidential; Priority. Drafted and approved by Cleveland and cleared by Williams and Burdett. Pouched to USUN and repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, Paris, and Elisabethville. Telegram 1243 from USUN, October 12, refers to this as a "draft telegram dictated from Cleveland's office." (Ibid., 770G.00/10–1262)

314. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, October 15, 1962, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–1562. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Brussels and USUN.

315. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, October 16, 1962, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10-1662. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to USUN and Brussels.

316. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, October 18, 1962, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–1862. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to USUN and Brussels.

317. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (McGhee) to President Kennedy

Washington, October 22, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Congo Security 1962. Secret. Apparently drafted by McGhee, although the source text does not so indicate. He sent a copy to Rusk with an October 23 memorandum stating that it was going forward to the President that day. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–2362)

318. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, October 25, 1962, 8:34 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–2562. Confidential. Drafted by Whitehouse and McGhee; cleared in draft by Fredericks, Acting Deputy Director of the Office of Western European Affairs Galen L. Stone, and by the Office of United Nations Political Affairs; and approved by McGhee. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, Oslo, Ottawa, Paris, Stockholm, Rome, and Tel Aviv.

319. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate in Elisabethville

Washington, October 27, 1962, 9:23 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.70G/10–2762. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Eisenberg and McGhee and approved by Williams and McGhee.

320. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 31, 1962, 4–4:50 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–3162. Confidential. Drafted by Godley and approved in M on November 2 and in the White House on November 5. The time of the meeting is taken from Kennedy's appointment book. (Kennedy Library) The meeting is also recorded in a memorandum by Kaysen, November 1. (Ibid., National Security Files, Congo)

321. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, October 31, 1962, 11:27 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–3162. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Godley, cleared in substance by Buffum and Burdett, and approved by Williams. Repeated to Paris, London, Brussels, USUN, and Elisabethville.

322. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, November 1, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–162. Secret.

323. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 5, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–562. Confidential. Drafted by Officer in Charge of U.N. Political Affairs Peter Rutter. The meeting was held in the Secretary's office.

324. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy

Washington, November 7, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Series, Congo. Confidential.

325. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, November 8, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Series, Congo. Secret. Drafted by Kaysen.

326. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, November 9, 1962, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–962. Confidential. Repeated to Léopoldville, Elisabethville, Brussels, and London.

327. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (McGhee) to the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen)

Washington, November 10, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Files, Congo. Secret. The source text does not indicate the drafter, but a copy indicates that it was drafted by Rutter and revised by McGhee. (Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/11–962)

328. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State

London, November 14, 1962, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 855.05170G/11–1462. Confidential; Niact; Limit Distribution.

329. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State

London, November 15, 1962, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–1562. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Received at 12:03 p.m. and repeated to Brussels and USUN.

330. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, November 15, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–1562. Confidential; Priority. Received at 1:44 p.m. and repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, USUN, and London.

331. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State

Brussels, November 16, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 870G.25/11–1662. Secret; Niact. Repeated to London.

332. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, November 19, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–1962. Top Secret. Repeated to London and Brussels.

333. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, November 20, 1962, 8:21 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2062. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to London and USUN.

334. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, November 22, 1962, 2:58 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 870G.25/11–2262. Secret; Niact. Drafted by McGhee, cleared by Wallner and Davis, and approved by Williams.

335. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, November 22, 1962, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 870G.25/11-2262. Secret;Niact. Drafted by McGhee, cleared by Wallner and Davis, and approved by Williams.

336. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State

Brussels, November 23, 1962, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2362. Confidential; Niact; Noforn.

337. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, November 26, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2662. Confidential; Niact. Received at 5:30 p.m. and repeated to USUN, Brussels, Elisabethville, London, and New Delhi.

338. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, November 26, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2662. Confidential; Niact. Received at 8:41 p.m. and repeated to London, Brussels, and Léopoldville.

339. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, November 26, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2662. Confidential; Priority. Received at 8:58 p.m. and repeated to London, Brussels, and Léopoldville.

340. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 27, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Belgium. Secret. Drafted by Burdett and Glenn. Briefing material for the meeting, enclosed with a November 25 memorandum from Brubeck to Bundy, is in Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2562.

341. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, November 28, 1962, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2862. Confidential; Priority. Received at 11:39 a.m. and repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, and USUN.

342. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, November 28, 1962, midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2862. Confidential. Received at 6:07 a.m. on November 29 and repeated to Brussels, London, Léopoldville, and Elisabethville.

343. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, November 29, 1962, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2962. Confidential; Priority. Received at 3:25 a.m. on November 30 and repeated to Brussels, London, Léopoldville, and Elisabethville.

344. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, November 30, 1962, 1:23 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–3062. Secret; Priority. Drafted and approved by McGhee and cleared by Burdett, Fredericks, and Wallner. Also sent to Brussels, London, Elisabethville, and USUN.

345. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, November 30, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–3062. Confidential; Niact; Limit Distribution. Received at 3:58 p.m. and repeated to London, Brussels, USUN, and Stanleyville.

346. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, November 30, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–3062. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, USUN, and Brussels. The source text indicates that the telegram was received on November 30 but does not indicate the time of transmission or receipt. A note on the source text indicates the telegram was received by Godley's office "through other channels" by telephone. The text was repeated in telegram 858 from Elisabethville, December 5. (Ibid., 770G.00/12–562)

183. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (McGhee) 183. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (McGhee)1

Washington, January 2, 1962.

In reading cables over the weekend, I was again stuck with the necessity of our staying out of any quarrel with the Union Miniere or other financial interests in Katanga. Elizabethville's #904,2 for example, reports Urquhart's views that General Raja and other Afro-Asians believe Union Miniere and other businesses in Elizabethville are evil.

One of the consequences of our attacking the Union Miniere would be to give our own position a taint of association with that of the Afro-Asians who I suspect reflect strong anti-capitalist tendencies.

I think we would be well advised to lend whatever hand we could to support the efforts of Urquhart and others to get the Katanga economy going as fast as possible.

I would appreciate it if you would talk with Harlan and see what can be done in New York to improve Urquhart's instructions on this question.3 It certainly isn't in our long-range interest to run European business out of the Katanga. We ought to make this emphatically clear both to IO and AF, as well as to P.

As a matter of fact, I think we might do well to get word to the Union Miniere that we were going to do what we could to help them keep their operations going in Elizabethville and the Katanga; that we thought it important that they remain and flourish there; but that of course their continued prosperity would depend upon a peaceful Congo which could only be secured through a reintegration of the Katanga.

Perhaps this has already been said to Kirk,4 but I do think that we ought to try to get an explicit message through to the Union Miniere people somehow before too long. Furthermore, we should let the Belgian Government know what we are doing. I am very much afraid that unless we take some action of this kind, the Rowan statement5 will be interpreted in Brussels and Elizabethville as reflecting an American intention to destroy the Belgian financial and commercial interests there. It is also likely to be interpreted in this manner in London, which would of course only feed the fires of anti-Americanism which are already burning with a gem-like flame.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 870G.00/1–262. No classification marking. Drafted by Ball. Filed with McGhee's memorandum in reply, also dated January 2, which states that much of the information in Ball's memorandum was covered in McGhee's conversation that day with the Belgian Ambassador (see Document 184), but that he was taking the remaining points up with AF and IO.

2 Dated December 30. (Department of State, Central Files, 325.70G/12– 3061)

3 A January 5 memorandum from Cleveland to Ball called his attention to telegram 2305 from USUN, January 4, in which Yost reported that in recent talks with Thant and Bunche, he had emphasized U.S. concern for the prompt reestablishment of normal economic life at Elisabethville and for a cooperative attitude by U.N. forces there toward Union Miniere and other business interests. Both had given him firm and explicit assurances that these were essential elements of U.N. policy. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–562 and 770G.00/1-462, respectively)

4 Former Ambassador Alan Kirk had agreed on December 27 to undertake a mission to Elisabethville to try to persuade Tshombe and the Belgian business community there that adherence to the Kitona agreement would be in Katanga's best interest. He went first to Brussels, but when he met with Robiliart and Societe Generale Vice Governor E. Van der Straeten on December 29, they said they had understood he was going to Katanga on an official mission and they did not think it would be useful for him to go in a private capacity. Kirk did not go to Katanga but remained in Brussels for several days for further discussions with Belgian businessmen and officials, which he described in a memorandum of January 9 to McGhee. (Ibid., 332.70G/1–962) Other material bearing on his mission are ibid., 770G.00 and 870G.00.

5 Reference is to a December 27 speech by Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs Carl T. Rowan. Telegram 1594 to Brussels, December 27, noted that the advance text of the speech contained "certain derogatory references activities Union Miniere in Congo which at Department's request were eliminated in final speech." (Ibid., 855.25/12–2761)

184. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 184. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, January 2, 1962, 9:24 p.m.

1662. Under Secretary McGhee called in Belgian Ambassador Scheyven January 22 to review situation in Congo in light fast moving situation there and questions GOB might have regarding McGhee's television remarks December 31 about Union Miniere.3 McGhee explained his remarks represented US position and that remarks required because of press speculation regarding other recent speeches made by Department officials.4 McGhee said GOB should therefore interpret his remarks as desire be conciliatory and constructive, both with respect GOB and Union Miniere. (Pertinent excerpts McGhee's remarks being sent separately.)5

McGhee then expressed desire speak frankly in light all that was at stake in Congo. He said US considered resumption GOC–GOB relations as very constructive step and that we appreciated GOB's desire cooperate in development and implementation program of economic measures which Ambassador MacArthur had already discussed in Brussels. However, McGhee continued, we sensed certain reluctance in Union Miniere leadership to recognize necessity for GOC to exercise its rights in Katanga under Loi Fondamentale. McGhee indicated we particularly noted difference in attitude between UMHK leadership in Brussels and Elisabethville, in that UMHK in Brussels appeared unable to get its views across to UMHK in Elisabethville. This situation made it difficult to convince Tshombe he had to live up to Kitona Agreement. Although US and GOB against Katangan secession, Tshombe has not been convinced secession no longer possible, fact which must be gotten across forcefully to him.

McGhee stated US was not seeking persuade Tshombe by force but if Tshombe not persuaded there could be further outbreak of hostilities with serious damage to UMHK installations. UN strong enough, McGhee said, resist any Katangan attacks and would be supported by US airlift. McGhee reiterated resumption hostilities last thing US wished see and that US working with UN every day to prevent such eventuality. Thus, McGhee continued, UMHK stands gain everything by offering cooperate immediately with GOC. We have urged Adoula not to be punitive with respect UMHK's past dealings with Tshombe. However, fact is Adoula, especially from moment re-establishment GOC–GOB relations, could demand that UMHK treat solely with GOC. McGhee suggested UMHK should take initiative with Adoula by coming out with statement in support Kitona Agreement and volunteering send representative to discuss UMHK–GOC relations with Adoula. McGhee stressed that, as his remarks December 31 suggested, US wished UMHK to play helpful role in current situation Congo but evidence indicated it disposed cooperate only if forced do so. Thus, most effective way convincing Tshombe that Katanga secession was thing of past, and for preserving UMHK interests for benefit owners and as positive and constructive element in Congo future, would be for UMHK to take initiative in regularizing its relations with GOC.

Scheyven expressed appreciation McGhee's frankness; said UMHK represented only part of Societe Generale which had widespread interests throughout Congo. Societe Generale thus not in favor Katanga secession as realize effect it could have on their interests elsewhere in Congo. Scheyven said he quite convinced UMHK not in favor Katanga secession and, while elements of UMHK in Elisabethville might feel differently, it unlikely UMHK leadership did so.

Regarding McGhee's suggestion for UMHK initiative, Scheyven expressed concern UMHK statement approving Kitona would be seen as admission it had favored secession in past and said Union Miniere did not believe it appropriate take political actions. McGhee questioned this and suggested such statement would be logical sequence of recent UMHK statement against secession. McGhee pointed out press report that Union Minere official Brazzaville had circulated weakened Kitona Agreement.

After Scheyven reviewed UN military action Katanga along familiar lines, McGhee emphasized our opposition to resumption hostilities but reiterated that any attempt by Tshombe to resume secessionist status absolutely intolerable to US, to UN, and to many other governments which were aware of all that was at stake in Congo. Scheyven said GOB had worked hard convince Tshombe there was no alternative to implementation Kitona Agreement. McGhee assured him we accepted this and appreciated it but that we concerned UMHK holding back. In response Scheyven observation that ANC "attacks" against Tshombe's forces in North Katanga placing Tshombe in difficult position. McGhee assured Scheyven US was trying restrain Adoula and that we wished preserve Tshombe as constructive and moderate leader in Katanga. McGhee also suggested that Tshombe's bargaining position was strong because everyone concerned wished see Kitona Agreement implemented.

McGhee closed by expressing hope Scheyven would convey report this discussion to his Government, stressing our desirability edesire] to offer constructive advice to UMHK in their future interest.

You should bring these views Spaak's attention soonest.

Summary being sent Léopoldville for Embassy and Elizabethville.6

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–262. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Miller, cleared by Whitehouse and Wallner, and approved by McGhee. Repeated to USUN, London, and Paris.

2 Miller's memorandum of the conversation is ibid.

3 In a television interview; extracts were sent to Brussels in telegram 1664, January 2. (Ibid., 855.25/1–262)

4 Reference is to the Rowan speech cited in footnote 4, Document 183, and a speech given by Williams in Detroit on December 27; for text of the latter, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 874–881.

5 Not found.

6 Not found.

185. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 185. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, January 2, 1962, 9:25 p.m.

1663. Deptel 1662.2 In addition to points made by McGhee to Belgian Ambassador Jan. 2 following considerations re US policy towards Congo should be reflected in your talks with Belgian officials:

UMHK must realize that it must in its own interest take steps accommodate itself to new situation in Katanga which is inevitable and be prepared collaborate with UN and central government.

Tshombe and Adoula cannot be equated, since former only provincial president.

Recognize deep concern felt over plight Belgians in Elisabethville and that UN action has become profoundly emotional issue to which reports of "atrocities" have contributed. However, these reports should not be accepted at face value. Unfortunate acts have been committed by both sides and many Katangan accounts of atrocities have not stood up under investigation. (In this connection would appreciate knowing extent to which Socialist and other papers have supported Spaak and whether they have taken positions less hostile to US than Libre Belgique.)

US supported only limited UN military objectives in recent Katanga action and did not condone any UN action against non-military installations outside those limited objectives. We repeatedly made this position clear to U Thant and his aides and brought to their attention reports of UN atrocities. Also took this position so far as possible in our public statements. We not always in agreement with UN policies and actions, but must seriously consider implications for UN itself of US publicly criticizing UN in every disagreement. Undoubtedly following latter course of action would undermine US ability influence UN privately.

US affirmative vote for November 24 SC resolution, after Soviet veto US-inspired amendments confronted US with difficult decision. US abstention would have been counter-productive and propaganda bonanza for certain African and Asian nations and for Soviet bloc powers which were seeking much more aggressive action against Katanga. Moreover, US abstention would have made difficult US support UN operation in Congo which as you know is in US national interest.

Re Embtel 1147,3 cannot agree ball only in GOC court re stand-by program. While, to put pressure on Tshombe, recognize certain measures being proposed to GOB depend in their implementation to large extent on GOC's and UN's ability enforce them in Katanga, you should continue do your best persuade GOB agree generally to program and have measures prepared now so they can be rapidly implemented as necessary in concert with measures being proposed to GOC and UN. Detailed comments on this matter follow separately.4

It is important note that we are purposely bringing only some portions of program to attention of GOC in order avoid possible legislative steps by GOC toward unilateral integration of Katanga which might be used by Tshombe as excuse to renege. If Tshombe should renege, such legislative steps will of course be necessary.

GOB should understand that objective of threat of economic pressures to Tshombe is to decrease possibility his reneging yet we reluctant tell him of program without GOB agreement on program in general. GOB reluctance agree now at least in principle to program proposed could weaken impact of program on Tshombe if he learns of GOB hesitation.5

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–262. Confidential. Drafted by Miller, cleared in draft by Vance and Wallner, and approved by McGhee.

2  Document 184.

3 In telegram 1147 from Brussels, MacArthur stated that although the Belgian Government agreed that economic pressures would be preferable to military measures if Tshombe rejected the Kitona agreement, the Belgians had pointed out that their ability to implement the three-stage program depended on actions to be taken by the Congolese Government in Léopoldville and on its ability to make those measures effective in Katanga. Therefore, he stated, "the ball is at present not in Brussels court but in Léopoldville." (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo Cables)

4 Telegram 1208 to Léopoldville, January 4. (Department of State, Central Files, 870G.00/12–2761)

5 MacArthur replied in telegram 1216, January 5, that the Embassy had been working hard to bring home to influential Belgians the "facts of life concerning necessity U.N. presence in Congo and real causes outbreak hostilities of December 5," but that its efforts lost all credibility when U.N. "atrocities" were ignored. He concluded that acceptance by Belgian public opinion of the necessity of U.N. operations in Katanga "depends upon effective control U.N. military there." (Ibid., 770G.00/1–562) He commented in telegram 1221, January 6, that Belgian officials felt they could not agree to the economic program without knowledge of Congolese intentions and concluded: "For these reasons it seems clear ball essentially still in GOC court." (Ibid., 870G.00/1–662)

186. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (McGhee) to Secretary of State Rusk 186. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (McGhee) to Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, January 5, 1962.

SUBJECT

Report on Our Recent Efforts With Union Miniere

As you will recall, we have initiated a series of steps involving economic measures designed to put pressure on Tshombe to convince him that he has no other alternative but to carry out the terms of the Kitona Agreement. These steps are as follows: (1) We have talked to Andre Meyer, who has been in touch with the British interests in the Congo. A report of his efforts is contained in a recent letter to him from Bill Astor, a copy of which is at Tab A.2

(2) Ambassador MacArthur has approached Spaak to urge him to cooperate with us in developing a series of economic measures designed to deny to Tshombe access to tax revenues and duties now being paid to his regime by the Union Miniere and other big companies in Katanga. Spaak has expressed agreement with the desirability of developing such a program, and, while he has raised questions about the practicability of certain aspects, Ambassador MacArthur is continuing discussions with him and his staff. We are making similar approaches to the British and Congolese Governments and the UN to gain their cooperation. A copy of the telegram containing our suggested plan is at Tab B.3

(3) Ambassador MacArthur has approached Spaak to underscore the importance we attach to the Union Miniere's cooperation with Adoula's government and to its no longer giving moral or financial support to Tshombe's secession. A copy of Ambassador MacArthur's report of his talk with Spaak is at Tab C.4

(4) I have made a parallel approach to the Belgian Ambassador here about the necessity for Union Miniere's cooperation. A copy of the report of my conversation is at Tab D.5

(5) At our suggestion, Admiral Kirk has talked with Union Miniere and Societe Generale leaders at Brussels to gain their active support.

This morning the Belgian Ambassador came to see me to convey a report from his Government on the steps that the Union Miniere is prepared to take as a result of our various efforts with them. I am very much encouraged by the Ambassador's report, the substance of which is as follows: (1) The Union Miniere has sent one of its Assistant Directors General to Elizabethville to see Tshombe and to stress to him the necessity of his carrying out the Kitona Agreement. He will indicate to Tshombe that if he respects the Kitona Agreement he has a fair chance to remain Katanga's leader, and further hostilities could probably be avoided. The Societe Generale representative will also talk to all of the Union Miniere leaders in Katanga to impress on them the firm views of Union Miniere leadership in Brussels regarding the necessity for Tshombe to live up to the Kitona Agreement.

(2) The Union Miniere is sending the President of the Belgian Federation of Enterprises in the Congo to Léopoldville on the 8th to make the following official demarche to the Congolese Government on Union Miniere's behalf: A. The Union Miniere assures the Congolese Government of its willingness to cooperate with the latter as soon as arrangements between the Congolese Government and the Katangan authorities have been entered into.

B. The question of Union Miniere's obligation to the Central Government with respect to taxes and duties will be discussed.

C. The Union Miniere is ready to send all its output of copper via Matadi, the Congolese port at the mouth of the Congo River.

D. Assurances will be given regarding the Union Miniere's wish to see an agreement be reached between the Congolese Government and the Katangan authorities, which will allow everyone to work in conditions of peace and order.

E. As soon as the political situation is clarified, the Union Miniere leaders will send a representative to establish direct contact with the Congolese Government.

I had suggested to the Belgian Ambassador that it would be desirable for the Union Miniere to issue a public statement regarding its support for the Kitona Agreement. The Belgian Ambassador reported that the Union Miniere felt it would not be possible to take such a step since they were reluctant to engage in what they considered to be a political act. In view of the encouraging report otherwise that the Belgian Ambassador gave me as summarized above, I did not press this point. I did emphasize to the Ambassador the importance of direct contact between the Union Miniere and the Congolese Government and the hope that this direct contact would be established quickly. I said that this would be an important indication that the Union Miniere was dealing with the established Congolese Government and was dealing with Tshombe only in the capacity as the head of a provincial government.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 870G.00/1– 562. Confidential. Drafted by Miller. Also sent to Under Secretary Ball, who initialed and forwarded it to Rusk.

2 Not printed. The letter from Viscount Astor to New York banker Andre Meyer, dated December 28, set forth his views on the situation in Katanga.

3 Telegram 1098, Document 179. Tab B was a paper headed "Program of Economic Pressures," identical in substance to the program set forth in that telegram.

4 Tab C, not attached to the source text, was a copy of telegram 1206 from Brussels, January 4. (Department of State, Central Files, 870G.00/1–462)

5 Tab D, not attached to the source text, was a copy of telegram 1662, Document 184.

187. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 187. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, January 6, 1962, 11:27 a.m.

1222. For Ambassador from Secretary. View developments in Congo Dept hopes it will soon be possible for Adoula to undertake his long deferred visit to US on basis and for reasons outlined Deptel 797.2

UNGA resumed session commences Jan 15 and in view mounting Congressional interest in Congo it would be helpful if Adoula visit could take place as soon as possible. Visit might be combined with his participation in heads of government meeting in Lagos Jan 25,3 with Adoula visiting Lagos on his way to or from US.

However Adoula should not come until Gizenga censure motion (Embtel 1726)4 has been passed. This is most important to his stature in US and will be helpful to him as well as to Dept in dealing with Congressional and press questions and criticisms of GOC policy. If you deem it appropriate you should make this point to Adoula.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.70G11/1–662. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Whitehouse and Carlucci, who was now in the Office of Central African Affairs; cleared by Williams, Wallner, Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations Frederick G. Dutton, NSC Executive Secretary Bromley K. Smith, and McGhee; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Brussels and USUN.

2 Telegram 797, November 11, conveyed a message from Rusk instructing Gullion to encourage Adoula to visit the United States to address the U.N. General Assembly. If he did so, the President would welcome an informal meeting with him. (Ibid., 033.70G11/11–1161)

3 Information concerning the Conference of African and Malagasy Heads of State and Government, which met in Lagos January 25–30, is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, p. 791.

4 Telegram 1726, January 2, reported that the introduction of a censure motion was expected and that it would almost certainly be approved. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–262)

188. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 188. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, January 13, 1962, 5:47 p.m.

1266. Following based on uncleared memcon:2

Bunche informed Stevenson early afternoon today that SYG had been in direct teletype contact with Linner and McKeown concerning today's developments in Stanleyville.3 UN has now received an appeal for assistance from Lundula, which is being confirmed in letter to be sent from Adoula to Linner.

Bunche said UN has instructed Linner to provide central government with all necessary assistance. UN basing its action on: 1) mandate to preserve law and order in Congo; and 2) mandate to use force if necessary to prevent civil war.

Bunche mentioned possible complicating factor which UN unable evaluate at this time. This is that Adoula has just received letter from President of Orientale Province complaining that rebellious ANC troops preventing Gizenga from returning to Léopoldville take up his duties as Vice Premier.

Stevenson stressed importance of seizing this opportunity to improve public posture of UN in US and elsewhere and asked whether UN intended publicize this decision to assist central government.

Bunche replied following press statement put out by UNNY.

"The SYG has been in direct contact by teletype with the Officer-in-Charge at Léopoldville and the Commander of the Force on today's developments in Stanleyville. He is keeping in touch with the situation constantly and has given instructions that ONUC exert all possible effort to restore and maintain law and order in Stanleyville and to avert civil war. The UN has a substantial detachment of troops in Stanleyville and they will continue to serve these objectives."4

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1362. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Tron, cleared by Williams, and approved by Cleveland. Repeated to USUN and Brussels.

2 Memorandum of a telephone conversation between Stevenson (in Washington) and Bunche (in New York) by Tron. (Ibid., 332.70G/1–1362)

3 Telegram 1803 from Léopoldville, January 13, from Gullion to Rusk, reported that the situation in Stanleyville was near civil war, with both Gizenga and Lundula mobilizing forces. Adoula planned to request U.N. assistance, and Linner was asking U.N. headquarters for authority to use U.N. forces to maintain order. Gullion urged Rusk's personal intervention to ensure that Linner would be given the authority he needed to prevent civil war. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–1362) Yost, who was in Washington, telephoned Bunche in New York at 11 a.m., when Bunche stated that his information was that the Congolese did not wish U.N. assistance. (Memorandum of conversation by Tron; ibid., 332.70G/1–1362)

4 A memorandum from Stevenson to Kennedy, undated but evidently sent on January 13, briefly summarized his conversation with Bunche and quoted the press statement. (Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Congo, General, 7/61–12/61)

189. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 189. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, January 16, 1962, 1:01 p.m.

1270. Embtel 1817.2 Various possibilities regarding future of Gizenga, and political repercussions in Congo and abroad of GOC action and attitudes toward him have been given high level consideration last few days. [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

In separate message instructions are being sent with a view encouraging Tshombe show a little forward motion at this time toward reintegration of Katanga.3

Dept urgently requires your assessment of what are most likely developments in this very fluid situation. [2 lines of source text not declassified] Possibility exists he [Gizenga] may remain in Stanleyville with much reduced influence. This would be hard to explain abroad as impression exists he now in Adoula's grasp. Lundula might frighten him into leaving or take action drag him to Léopoldville.

Dept concerned about possibility that, regardless of conditions under which he returns, anti-Gizenga fire may quickly die down and in glow of reconciliation he be accepted back in the fold. Another possibility is that Gizenga may flee, perhaps to Cairo, thus putting an end to his political influence in the Congo. Please comment.4

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1562. Secret; Niact; [distribution indicator not declassified]. Drafted by Whitehouse and Carlucci, cleared by Williams and by Deputy Director for Coordination in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research Joseph W. Scott and in substance by Wallner, and approved by Rusk.

2 Telegram 1817 from Léopoldville, January 15, reported that Gizenga was under guard by U.N. forces and that Adoula had informed the Embassy that an order for his arrest would be issued that day. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 513 to Elisabethville, January 16, instructed Hoffacker that if Gullion concurred, he should approach Tshombe and point out that he could improve his political position by coming forward with proposals for meaningful steps toward Katanga's economic integration. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–1662) Telegram 1869 from Léopoldville, January 19, recommended delay because Tshombe had disappeared from Elisabethville. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–1962) Telegram 1046 from Elisabethville, January 24, reported that Hoffacker had called on Tshombe that day, discussed his recent trip to Léopoldville, and suggested a conciliatory gesture. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–2462)

4 Gullion commented in telegram 1848, January 18, that he did not believe Gizenga would be "brought back into fold" or that there would be any reconciliation between him and Adoula. He noted that the charge of armed rebellion could now be brought against Gizenga, and he commented that Gizenga's disgrace seemed to have weakened the Lumumbists more than he had anticipated. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–1862) On January 15, Gizenga was censured by Parliament by an overwhelming vote and placed under arrest in Stanleyville.

190. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 190. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, January 16, 1962, 2:46 p.m.

1271. Joint State-Defense message. Re: Use of USAF aircraft within the Congo. Dept and DOD believe emergency which arose in Katanga early December has terminated and ONUC operations in Congo have stabilized. In view of this situation, steps should now be taken to limit USAF intra-Congo lift to bona fide emergency situations. Therefore, we plan undertake phasing down of aircraft available for missions flown in intra-Congo lift without publicity and without formal termination of ONUC Assist 254.2 This phasing down should be preceded by an understanding with UN that now that recent emergency is over, it should rely primarily on its own or contract aircraft for internal Congo airlift. However, US will retain capability to respond rapidly to UN requests for intra-Congo lift for bona fide emergencies. Practically speaking, USAF aircraft available in Léopoldville and vicinity could be put on intra-Congo lift in such emergency. So long as US continues to provide airlift into the Congo, the operation would be based on Léopoldville as the normal terminal.

Resumption of internal lift will be determined in Washington based on following criteria: (1) political considerations; (2) established urgency of lift; (3) military security and flight safety factors (on this point provisions of paragraph 3 JCS 15593 apply); (4) UN demonstrated incapcity to provide its own airlift.

In this connection we believe UN should not only attempt to improve its own airlift capability but also should undertake the development of improved flight safety and traffic control capability.

Special intra-Congo airlifts of humanitarian, political, or emergency nature would be made by USAF for specific purposes where US interests clearly are served. In each such case, airlift would be initiated only after specific requests by UN and approved through established channels. In considering ONUC requests for intra-Congo airlift, Embassy Léopoldville and USUN will make every effort determine in advance whether in fact ONUC can or cannot undertake requested missions with its own or contract aircraft. Each ONUC request when forwarded should explain ONUC incapability to undertake the lift.

For USUN

You should reach understanding with UN on above. Explain to UN that we are not terminating intra-Congo lift but we do desire phase-down and to reduce US participation to emergency and other special category operations. In this connection,you should impress upon UN necessity for more effective utilization of own or contract aircraft to meet requirements and necessity for improvement of security and flight safety factors at primary fields within the Congo.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/1–1662. Confidential. Drafted by Colonel M.J.L. Greene, of the Office of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense; cleared by Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs Haydn Williams, Deputy Politico-Military Adviser in the Bureau of African Affairs Lynford Lardner, and Buffum; and approved by Wallner. Also sent to USUN and USCINCEUR.

2 Reference is to a U.N. request dated September 20, 1961, for assistance with internal airlifts within the Congo; the text was transmitted in despatch 368 from USUN, October 3. (Ibid., 332.70G/10–361) It was a formal confirmation of a request made earlier by Secretary-General Hammarskjöld; see Document 117. US/ONUC/254 was one of a series of U.N. requests for assistance for the Congo operation which were transmitted to the Department of State by despatch and are in Department of State, Central File 332.70G.

3 See footnote 1, Document 117. Paragraph 3 reads as follows:"US retains command of aircraft. To provide reasonable assurance of security of US aircraft and crews, security measures will be coordinated locally between USCINCEUR rep Congo, US Ambassador and the UN Congo with the UN endeavoring to guarantee security. Flights would not be made unless the USCINCEUR rep Congo is satisfied that flights can be made without undue risk."

191. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 191. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, January 17, 1962, 7:36 p.m.

1281. Re US–UK Talks on Congo.2 Major conclusion that can be drawn from US–UK talks on Congo last Friday3 is that serious differences dividing us at end 1961 now largely submerged by more recent developments giving some cause optimism. Nevertheless, effort was made identify areas of potential disagreement in order avoid future serious policy splits.

Both sides agreed on basic objectives in Congo particularly implementation Kitona accord and UN-channeled aid to promote political stability and economic viability of integrated Congo. UK determined give no support whatever to secessionist ambitions. However, UK remains more optimistic than we on Tshombe's willingness and ability implement Kitona agreement, and is therefore much more reluctant than we to exert additional pressures on him. UK also contends there is "limit to extent to which threats, shows of force and forms of pressure will achieve their objectives if applied to Tshombe at present time." UK therefore believes that only form of economic measures which should be taken are those demonstrably preparatory to integration of Katanga into economy of Congo and which capable of being enforced. British particularly anxious eschew any economic measures which likely result in resumption hostilities and on this basis objects to closing tax office in Elisabethville. US stressed that Tshombe must not be permitted to believe pressure has been relaxed since the best protection against the resumption of hostilities is progress in negotiations on a constitution and in actual economic integration. US–UK agreed we should consult on continuing basis to see that optimum—rather than maximum—pressure exerted on Tshombe to follow through on Kitona accord.4

Both sides agreed that there potential differences between us which would come to fore if situation once again deteriorates. Whereas UK likely take position of no more UN military action regardless developments, US believes would be dangerous give Tshombe impression further UN military action foreclosed under any circumstances. We very much hope there will be no resumption hostilities, but we not prepared make definitive judgment before we faced with concrete situation. US stressed UN mandate to protect law and order still stands.

US also expressed belief British tend underestimate threat to peace in Congo posed by Central Government desire reintegrate Katanga quickly and nationalist pressure on Adoula. Any delays in implementation Kitona agreement on Tshombe's part would result in renewed ANC pressure. We regard this as additional reason make certain Tshombe proceeds rapidly.

US expressed concern at what we considered premature UK judgment that "there should be no more UN operations such as that in Congo". US believes we should accentuate positive elements in judging success UN operation. We continue believe that in circumstances it was best risk available, and far preferable to having big power troops fighting in heart of Africa with threat East-West confrontation on battlefield. At conclusion discussion, Ormsby Gore agreed with Stevenson and Cleveland that whether or not operation is clear-cut success, our decision utilize UN was sound and we should continue make this point publicly and privately.

Both sides agreed focus on removal mercenaries by force unfortunate, but US stressed pressures would build up for action against mercenaries if Kitona agreement not implemented. Both expressed hope that economic reintegration Katanga would deprive mercenaries of pay and cause, and lead them drift away. At same time we agreed every effort should be made keep additional mercenaries from going to Katanga.

US and UK agreed highly important task for future is reorganization and retraining ANC. UK wants ONUC move rapidly from"unprofitable garrison tasks" they now performing to streamlined, French-speaking "instructional cadres" to retrain ANC. US agrees retraining program is matter of highest priority; at same time US does not think it feasible dismantle ONUC before ANC brought under control, law and order restored, and concrete progress made in political and administrative reintegration of country. UK also wanted UN move rapidly from military to civil affairs task. US agreed it now essential proceed with nation-building program in Congo.

Both agreed on need for extensive economic and technical assistance by UN. UK in favor five-year economic plan, and is prepared maintain UN Congo budget at present levels at least into 1963. Operation would then taper off and conclude by 1966. US appreciated UK desire maintain contributions, but we completely unable estimate period of time UN assistance will be required.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1762. Confidential. Drafted by Tron, cleared by Fredericks and United Nations Adviser in the Bureau of European Affairs Henry J. Kellerman, and approved by Wallner. Also sent to USUN and repeated to London, Brussels, and Paris Topol.

2 U.S. and U.K. officials held a series of talks in Washington in mid-January on a broad range of subjects related to the United Nations. Participants included Stevenson, Harlan Cleveland, Ormsby Gore, and Sir Patrick Dean. A brief summary of the talks is in circular airgram CA–1005, February 2. (Ibid., 301/2–262)

3 January 12.

4 The U.K. views outlined here were set forth in more detail in a memorandum prepared in the Foreign Office and delivered with a January 10 covering note from Ormsby Gore to Rusk, which stated that when they last discussed the Congo, Rusk had asked if Ormsby Gore could obtain a statement of U.K. policy. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1062)

192. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 192. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, January 17, 1962, 10:20 p.m.

1825. View has been expressed (e.g. Brussels 1292 to Dept)2 that it now unwise follow up on economic program since Tshombe cooperating and because this may result in Tshombe backing away from Kitona accord. In Dept view Tshombe entered Kitona accord because he felt no other acceptable alternative available at that time. Thus he may not carry out accord, whether by own decision or under pressure extremist politicians and advisers, if way appears open to resume secession. In Dept view Tshombe must not be permitted to lose sight of inevitability integration. Best protection against possible resumption hostilities is progress in negotiations on constitution and in actual economic integration.

As should be clear, while three phase economic program may appear to Katanga secessionists to be sanctions against Katanga, nevertheless it is in fact series of measures necessary to achieve economic integration which would necessarily accompany implementation political settlement on basis Kitona accord.

Western unity in willingness continue political urging and prepare for and when necessary carry out economic measures essential. If US, Belgium or UK should in any way give Tshombe or his advisers impression they disunited re importance implementation Kitona accord, Katanga regime would undoubtedly interpret it as implied encouragement delay implementation Kitona accord and eventually resume secessionist policy. As indicated Deptel 1216 to Léopoldville3 Dept urging GOC get Tshombe so deeply involved in programs leading to integration as to make it difficult for him to back out. Important element in this approach will be to make known to Tshombe complete lack Western support for secession and willingness US, UK, Belgium and UN (in cooperation with GOC) to undertake measures economic integration (FYI. Not at maximum but at optimum level to further objective. End FYI) in event there is any sign Tshombe attempting back out Kitona accord. Accordingly, it is essential that preparatory work (Deptel 1208 to Léopoldville)4 be completed soon.

For London: Foregoing discussed informally in recent US–UK talks in Washington, record of which will be sent soon.5

For USUN: Amb Stevenson may wish to draw on foregoing in talks with Spaak.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1362. Confidential. Drafted by Assistant Legal Adviser for African Affairs Alan W. Ford; cleared in draft by Robert M. Beaudry of the Office of Western European Affairs, Williams, Wallner, and McGhee; and approved by Fredericks. Also sent to USUN and repeated to London, Léopoldville, Salisbury, and Paris.

2 Telegram 1292, January 13, reported that Spaak felt Tshombe was "behaving about as well as could be expected" and that under the circumstances he thought it unwise to apply pressure lest it cause Tshombe to back away from the Kitona accord. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 1216, January 5, instructed the Embassy to suggest to Adoula that he propose to Tshombe several steps toward the economic reintegration of Katanga. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–562)

4 See footnote 3, Document 185.

5 See Document 191.

193. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 193. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, January 21, 1962, 1:36 p.m.

1297. Urtel 18712 and 1867.3 Eyes only for Ambassador. Assume no further legal steps can be taken against Gizenga unless his parliamentary immunity is lifted. While Dept currently unclear exact status Gizenga,4 his removal to Léopoldville makes question escape to Cairo considerably more difficult although this possibility still should not be precluded.

It occurs to us Gizenga's oft proclaimed ill health might give Adoula pretext getting him out of country as humanitarian gesture. Another possibility Adoula may wish to explore is possibility of banishment avoiding trial which could easily play into hands Sov bloc and other Gizenga sympathizers.

Whatever decision Adoula takes, it is essential it be his and utmost precaution taken avoid any impression of U.S. participation. Would appreciate your assessment practicability above suggestion and indication degree of control Adoula has over situation.5

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2062. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Ferguson; cleared by Wallner, Williams, and Eisenberg; and approved by McGhee.

2 Telegram 1871, January 20, replied to telegram 1294 to Léopoldville, January 19, which expressed misgivings about reports that Gizenga would be brought to Léopoldville, but noted that the Department was anxious to avoid being identified with efforts to change Adoula's mind. It further stated: "Additional consideration to which greatest importance attached here is Gizenga's safety; his death by violence would have most unfortunate repercussions." It left to Gullion's discretion whether he should seek to influence Adoula and Linner to keep Gizenga in Stanleyville. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–1962) Telegram 1871 reported that Gullion and Godley had concluded that the matter should be left in Adoula's hands. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–2062)

3 Telegram 1867, January 19, reported a conversation with Adoula, who told Gullion that Gizenga was being brought to Léopoldville as a prisoner but that he was in a quandary as to how to dispose of the case. Adoula feared that a heavy jail sentence would give Gizenga a martyr role and a death penalty might "make a Lumumba out of him." Gullion suggested the possibility of Gizenga's "disappearance" to Cairo. He reported that Adoula was very interested in this idea. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–1962)

4 Telegram 1876 from Léopoldville, January 20, reported that Gizenga was arriving in Léopoldville at noon under U.N. custody. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–2062)

5 Telegram 1895 from Léopoldville, January 24, reported that when Gullion had met with Adoula, he had raised the possibilities alluded to in telegram 1297 and thought Adoula was leaning toward some such solution. He concluded: "Although the situation is more equivocal than I would like, I think Prime Minister has matter under control and is waiting to select his move." (Ibid., 770G.00/1–2462)

194. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 194. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, January 23, 1962, 4:36 p.m.

1916. For Stevenson from Ball. Re your January 18 letter,2 I appreciate effort you have made with Spaak, which should be helpful in improving climate in further discussions on Katanga problem.

You may tell him that we fully agree with his view that we should not take risk of aggravating Tshombe at the moment, but are anxious, as Spaak is, to be in a position to exert further pressure on him if there is any backsliding. Aside from question of pressure on Tshombe, however, there are of course some steps which can and should be taken rapidly to enable central government to progress towards exercise its fiscal and economic prerogatives throughout Congo, and we happy Belgian Government shares this view.

Re your proposed memorandum, you probably know that detailed discussions on three-stage program are taking place between our Embassy and Belgian officials in Brussels. In view complexity these negotiations and fact they seem to be going well, our people here feel it would be wiser not to give Spaak a paper on the specifics, which might not mesh exactly with state of negotiations as Spaak will find them on his return. However, it might be useful for you to tell him how pleased we are with progress being made in Brussels talks as well as with Belgian Government actions to date (see for example Brussels tel 413 to USUN, January 20).3 We hope Belgian Government will continue to support program along these lines.

If you think useful to give Spaak a letter along above lines, you may of course do so.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2362. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Stanley M. Cleveland of the Under Secretary's office and George R. Kenney of the Office of Central African Affairs and approved by Ball.

2 In the letter to Ball, Stevenson stated that he had had a "very satisfactory" talk with Spaak, who was in New York. Spaak thought "we should not risk aggravating Tshombe at the moment, but he seems quite ready to exert further pressure on him if there is any backsliding." Spaak had asked Stevenson for a memorandum of actions the United States would like the Belgian Government to take to put financial pressure on Tshombe if necessary, and Stevenson enclosed an outline of points that he proposed to give to Spaak. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–1862)

3 Sent to the Department as telegram 1331. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–2062)

195. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 195. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, January 25, 1962, 6 p.m.

1896. Gizenga: Last night Gizenga was removed from a house in "fashionable" residential section where he had spent one night to confinement in the para-commando camp. Instructions were given to Nendaka by Adoula that "no harm was to come to Gizenga" and that no one was to see him "who might cause trouble."

Meanwhile the circumstances of Gizenga's arrival by UN aircraft, the solicitousness of the UN for him, the relatively relaxed greeting at airport, and the installation of the accused in a comfortable villa had understandably confused foreign observers and press.

I therefore pressed Adoula this morning concerning Gizenga's status. As I entered, Gbenye was leaving and Adoula was saying to him that he should "have the papers signed by three o'clock." I asked Adoula if this was the awaited "order for incarceration" of Gizenga.

Adoula said no, that Gizenga was being placed in protective custody, that he was bringing Gbenye "into the camp," that Gizenga would be held incommunicado except to his lawyers, and that a dossier was being prepared against him.

I again expressed misgivings at delays and asked whether Parliament would be prepared to lift Gizenga's immunity and whether the government had any desire to prevent Gizenga's coming to trial. Adoula said it was rather a question of restraining the Parliament and he was fully confident that any measure decided upon would be followed up. He then referred to "legal complications" claiming that Gizenga could only be tried by the Cours de Cassation for acts committed while he was Minister but this trial court had never been set up. There has been some suggestion of modifying the "Loi Fondamentale" to provide the necessary tribunal but the idea was rejected. Adoula also confirmed that if the indictment were rebellion then Gizenga might be court martialed.

Adoula then indicated that the real problem on lifting Gizenga's immunity was not any tender feeling in Parliament toward him but rather the Pandora's box which would be thus opened. There were adequate grounds to follow the same procedure with respect to dozens of others in Parliament (some of whom I gathered would be Adoula supporters). He said confidentially that he preferred to pick off his enemies one by one.

I told Adoula that I understood the dilemma between a martyr's halo for Gizenga on one hand and the necessity for eliminating his power once and for all and upholding the authority of the central government. The essential thing it seemed to me was that Adoula's signal victory over Gizenga should not be frittered away. Could he assure me that Gizenga was and would continue to be excluded from public life and would be punished; Adoula said there was no question about this.

Comment: Adoula really has not made up his mind how to dispose of Gizenga and indefinite protective custody may be his way of buying time for consideration. He is correct I believe in his assessment of the chaos which would ensue if Parliament degenerated into vendettas in which everyone tried to lift each other's immunities.

It also probable that Adoula is determined to continue to adhere to legal forms as he has done up to now. Yet a long Lumumba-like captivity presents obvious dangers. One reassuring factor is Adoula's continuous confidence that he has both Gizenga and his erstwhile followers under control or effectively neutralized. It is probable that no decision on disposition of Gizenga case will be taken prior to formation of new government.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2562. Secret. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, Paris, and London.

196. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 196. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, January 26, 1962, 8:16 p.m.

1957. USSR pressing for urgent SC meeting on Congo,2 at least by Monday.3 We do not believe substantive Council consideration of Congo matter at this time will be helpful. Moreover, it would give Soviets opportunity to try to reverse present favorable trend in Congo and to exploit potentially divisive elements in Western camp, particularly on question of mercenaries.

We believe that Congolese attitude re possible SC meeting is key to situation. If Adoula can make clear publicly that he sees no reason for SC consideration of Congo question, this will be helpful in pulling rug from Soviet ploy for SC meeting. We hope therefore that Adoula can make public statement immediately in which he refers to his projected visit and indicate he sees no need for Security Council consideration of Congo question at this time since he plans address GA and developments in Congo proceeding satisfactorily.

Since consultations expected take place Saturday a.m. New York request Gullion see Adoula soonest and to report results telephonically to Cleveland or Wallner about 11:00 a.m. Saturday, Washington time.4

For USUN: Our objective is to prevent Security Council consideration of Congo question. We leave tactics to your discretion; whether you decide actually to prevent meeting from taking place, or to agree to convene on Monday and then either prevent adoption of agenda, call for immediate adjournment, or some other tactic which you develop in concert with other friendly SC members. Department prepared to support your efforts in capitals at such time as tactics evolved. Would appreciate your recommendations telephonically on this following your Saturday a.m. consultation.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2662. Confidential. Drafted by Sisco and Buffum; cleared by Harlan Cleveland, Eisenberg, Kellerman, and in substance by Ball; and approved by Wallner. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to London, Paris, Taipei, Caracas, Santiago, Dublin, Cairo, and Accra.

2 The Soviet Union requested an urgent meeting of the Security Council to consider the implementation of the Security Council resolution of November 24, 1961, in a January 25 letter from Zorin to Security Council President Sir Patrick Dean. (U.N. doc. S/5064; also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 825–826)

3 January 29.

4 Gullion was not able to see Adoula before the latter's departure for the heads of state and government meeting in Lagos (see footnote 2, Document 187). Telegram 743 from Lagos, January 28, reported that Ambassador Joseph Palmer had talked to Adoula and that Adoula agreed with the Department's views and would make a public statement that day. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2862)

197. Editorial Note 197. Editorial Note

In a telegram of January 28, 1962, to U.N. Security Council President Sir Patrick Dean and Acting Secretary-General U Thant, Prime Minister Cyrille Adoula stated that he saw no need for a Security Council meeting on the Congo and was opposed to a meeting at that time. For text, see U.N. document S/5066; also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pages 826–827.

The Security Council met on January 30. U.S. Representative Adlai Stevenson moved for adjournment, arguing that the Acting Secretary-General and the U.N. Command were acting vigorously and skillfully to carry out their mandates in the Congo and that the Council should be guided by the Congolese Government's views as to whether or not to discuss the Congo's problems. For text of his statement, see Department of State Bulletin, February 19, 1962, page 304; extracts are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pages 828–829. The motion was passed by a vote of 7 to 2 (Romania and the Soviet Union), with 2 abstentions (Ghana and the United Arab Republic). For the record of the meeting, see U.N. document S/PV.989.

198. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 198. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, January 31, 1962, 4:14 p.m.

1965. Léopoldville 1932.2 Dept welcomes Societe Generale acceptance principle Katanga reintegration and stated desire take steps further this result. Appears from Van der Straeten attitude in discussions Ambassador Gullion that when it comes to practical issues he still seems unconvinced Katanga secession ended. Agree general approach taken Léopoldville and suggest Brussels use following additional arguments in talks with Van der Straeten and other company officials.3

1. Katanga never recognized by any nation as independent state, and signature Kitona ends fiction Katanga secession.

2. We recognize double taxation problem for Katanga companies as long as Tshombe insists on collecting taxes and duties. However, Katanga companies should be careful demonstrate duress under which they pay Tshombe if they want avoid accusation connivance attempted secession.

3. Since GOC recognized as only legal government Congo by all nations, questions relating division tax revenues between provincial (including Katanga) authorities and central government are internal political questions and Societe Generale or any Katanga company should not attempt judge relative merits. We assume central government will treat all provinces equitably re division revenues, but this not our business nor of Societe Generale.

4. All Katanga exports subject in principle to claim by GOC for duties and taxes paid Katanga whatever route chosen by shippers. Resumption some shipments through Matadi would be political gesture and might lead to economic gesture in form interim arrangements under which GOC would collect part of Katanga companies export taxes. In return, GOC could reassure companies as to threat of requesting payment for past periods.

5. Embassy should strongly urge Van der Straeten and other reps Katanga companies ask Tshombe agree their depositing percentage export taxes in escrow for central government to demonstrate Tshombe their concern for GOC tax claim, to improve their present and future relations with GOC in their own interest, and to help pressure Tshombe to work toward formula which would help constitutional talks make progress. Specific percentage to be deposited could be worked out between Tshombe and Adoula.

6. With respect Van der Straeten's fear reprisals, suggestion we making could hardly expose Katanga companies Tshombe ire.

7. Embassy might also inquire whether changes in managerial personnel in Elisabethville are contemplated by companies to insure local policies fully responsive Brussels views.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–2862. Confidential. Drafted by Eisenberg and Kenney; cleared by Fredericks, Burdett, Ford, and Wallner; and approved by McGhee. Repeated to London, USUN, Elisabethville, and Léopoldville.

2 Telegram 1932, January 28, reported a discussion between Gullion and Van der Straeten, who was in the Congo to review Union Miniere's relations with the Congolese Government. Van der Straeten said the Societe Generale was convinced of the desirability of Katangan reintegration and was seeking positive steps to further this end. He planned to recommend that Union Miniere resume shipment of part of its copper from Katanga via Matadi when the road was reopened in about 3 months and to automatically make some export duties available to the central government. He opposed Gullion's suggestion that Union Miniere put in escrow a portion of the export duties on copper leaving Katanga via Rhodesia and Angola until Congolese and Katangan authorities could agree on the division of the funds. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 1378 from Brussels, January 30, commented that the line taken by Van der Straeten with Gullion was familiar. The Embassy would continue to press Van der Straeten and Robiliart but was more hopeful of achieving results by working with younger and more progressive members of Societe Generale, including its newly-elected head Max Nokin. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–3062)

199. Editorial Note 199. Editorial Note

Prime Minister Cyrille Adoula made an informal visit to the United States February 2–8, 1962. He addressed the U.N. General Assembly on February 2. For text of his address, see U.N. document A/PV.1103; extracts are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pages 830–834.

Prime Minister Adoula arrived in Washington on February 5. At a meeting with Under Secretary of State George Ball, they discussed general problems of the Congo, the question of Katangan reintegration, and the retraining of the Congolese Army. Three separate memoranda of the conversation are in Department of State, Central Files, 770G.13/2–562. The Prime Minister had lunch at the White House with President Kennedy; for texts of their toasts at the luncheon, see Department of State Bulletin, February 26, 1962, pages 335–337. Records of the discussion between the President and the Prime Minister which took place after lunch are printed as Documents 200 and 201. Prime Minister Adoula also met with members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and officials of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund. He returned to New York on February 6 for further meetings at the United Nations.

Further documentation on Adoula's visit is in Department of State, Central File 033.70G11, and ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2043, and in Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo, and President's Office Files, Congo, 1962.

200. Memorandum of Conversation 200. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, February 5, 1962, 2:30–4:15 p.m.

SUBJECT

Katanga

PARTICIPANTS

United States The President

The Secretary

The Under Secretary Asst. Secy Williams

Asst. Secy Cleveland

Ambassador Gullion

Mr. Glenn

Congolese Prime Minister Adoula

M. Ambroise Eleo, Minister of Economy

M. Mario Cardoso Chief Delegate to the UN

M. Julien Kasongo

M. Emmanuel Kimbimbi

The President said that he wished to cover some of the main problems facing the Congo even though those problems might have been already touched upon in conversations in the Department of State.2 He was particularly interested in Prime Minister Adoula's ideas on the way in which the United States can best help the Congo.

The first point might well be that of the Katanga. Was much progress accomplished in this respect?

The Prime Minister stated that the Katanga question is the essential question for the Congolese. The Government and the people demand a solution of this question. Utilizing United States assistance in the matter, the Prime Minister agreed to meet Mr. Tshombe at Kitona. The Kitona talks resulted in an agreement which, if it were implemented, would constitute a satisfactory solution. The Prime Minister underlined, however, that he went to Kitona against the wishes of his public opinion and of his parliament, and even without the knowledge of his cabinet. In doing so he took a grave political risk. He took that risk because he did not want to disappoint the President and because he knew that if he did not meet with Tshombe he would create difficulties not only for the United States but also for the United Nations and thus indirectly for the Congo itself.

At the present moment, the Kitona agreements are beginning to be implemented. This is, however, a very small beginning. It seems that Mr. Tshombe has not yet taken a clear-cut decision and that he is playing for time hoping that the circumstances will allow him to reach for some solution which would preserve Katangan separatism.

Force had been used against Mr. Tshombe before. At the present moment, however, everybody seems to want a peaceful solution. In considering that question it is necessary, however, to take into account the time factor and one must not create too much impatience among those who are asking for a rapid resolution of the conflict.

What should be done under the circumstances? Tshombe is hesitating, ready to accept some solution but trying to make it one which would preserve his secession. He cannot be trusted. Even when he seems to agree, concern about his real intentions is in order. The financial and economic help of some groups has given him the hope that he might be able to go on with his secessionist schemes. The Congolese Government has now entered into negotiations with the mining corporations of the Katanga and is pressuring them to cease helping Tshombe. Contacts have also been made with the Belgian Government and this is an area in which the United States might help in order to isolate Tshombe.

Recently, however, the Security Council met on the Congo question following a Soviet initiative. This is something which the Government of the Congo has opposed not because it trusts Tshombe but because it believes the principle of sovereignty is involved and that no meetings about the Congo should take place without Congolese assent.

Another recent event is the resolution taken by the Congolese Parliament giving Mr. Tshombe eight days to implement unconditionally the Kitona agreement. This delay expires tomorrow.

Mr. Tshombe's reaction to this resolution is not known to the Prime Minister. He is afraid, however, that Mr. Tshombe will not be in a position to comply with it. In consequence it might be necessary to resort to other means than those which the Congolese Government wishes to employ in order to obtain compliance.

The Government of the Congo has taken some steps to tear down the economic barriers between the Katanga and the Congo which had been erected by Tshombe. First of all, it hopes to obtain from the mining corporations agreement that they should pay directly to the Central Government the taxes due it. Secondly it hopes to ensure that the exports of those companies be shipped along the "national route" from Elisabethville through Jadotville, Kamina, Luluabourg, and finally to the harbor of Matadi. This would enable the Central Government to obtain the payment of export duties on many commodities and particularly on copper.

In answer to a question by the President, the Prime Minister stated that the products of the Katangan mines are being exported at present through Benguela in Angola. The Prime Minister continued by saying that at present the corporations in question state that they fear to cooperate with the Central Government because they are afraid of reprisals from Tshombe who wields effective power in their area "by the law of war."

Conversations have taken place between the Congolese Government and Mr. Spaak on the one hand and the directors of the Union Miniere on the other. The latter have shown a lot of understanding for the position of the Central Government and it seems that they are ready now to change their policy and to cooperate with the Central Government. There remains, however, a disagreement of principle. As recently as January 30, the Union Miniere paid to Tshombe an important sum of money which was due to the Central Government. In explaining this action the Union Miniere pleads a case of force majeure. This interpretation is, however, difficult to accept because there is evidence that the Union Miniere has actively helped in the secession movement of the Katanga and is rather an accessory to Tshombe's actions than a victim of force majeure. Moreover, Tshombe himself had said to the Prime Minister that in July 1960 he did not have any more than 300 men on whom he could count. This is obviously not enough military strength to force the Union Miniere to act against its will. Had the Union Miniere felt threatened at that time it could have asked for the protection of the Central Government and very soon afterwards for the protection of the United Nations.

Moreover, the Union Miniere people themselves have told the Prime Minister that there existed differences of opinion within the Union Miniere itself, the head office in Brussels being for the Central Government and the local administrators in Elisabethville for Mr. Tshombe. The fact remains, nevertheless, that the company itself must be held responsible for its actions, whether or not those actions were carried out with the agreement of its headquarters. The Prime Minister's personal impression is that the Union Miniere was trying to work both sides of the street so as to safeguard its interests whichever party triumphed in the struggle. At the present moment the Central Government is demanding that the Union Miniere pay to it all of the back taxes due, regardless of what might have been paid to the Katanga provincial authorities.

The President asked if such an attitude on the part of the Central Government would not harden the position of Union Miniere and encourage it to further help Tshombe. It might be better to let bygones be bygones provided a different attitude is observed in the future.

The Prime Minister said that this might be so and that the Government of the Congo might reconsider its position but that it wanted to assert its rights even it if were later on to refrain from exercising them in order to arrive at a compromise in the matter. Its insistence on principle would, however, make it quite clear for the Union Miniere that it should not continue to put money into Tshombe's coffers because it might be forced to pay twice by doing so.

The President asked the Prime Minister what was likely to happen as a result of the demand made by the Congo Parliament placing a deadline on Tshombe's compliance with the Kitona agreements.

The Prime Minister replied that when Parliament sees that its wishes are not obeyed it is likely to place pressure on the Government to adopt sterner measures and probably will make additional demands of Tshombe.

The President asked what Mr. Tshombe's attitude was likely to be.

The Prime Minister replied that Mr. Tshombe depends greatly on his advisers and tends to change his position from one day to the next. The Prime Minister personally doubted that compliance on his part is likely. Under the circumstances the Central Government may be forced to continue and intensify its own police action against the Katanga. At present the northern part of this province has been brought back under the obedience of the Central Government. Even Congolese currency, which Mr. Tshombe had banned, is now in use in that area.

The President asked if additional action on the part of the United States could help bring about a solution.

The Prime Minister said that additional aid is always welcome. However, the United States has already taken steps to help and he does not see any concrete measure which might be called for at this moment.

The President asked whether a continuation of the military action by the United Nations was desirable.

The Prime Minister replied that such action might be desirable but that there were certain danger signs which pointed to the lack of efficiency of such an action. First of all, there have already been two military interventions by the United Nations and in each case fighting was interrupted after a short time. Under the circumstances people might believe that a new action might lead to a few weeks of fighting after which pressure would be interrupted. Under such circumstances there would be no incentive for them to give in to the United Nations. Secondly, a number of countries in the United Nations oppose the use of force by the organization. It might perhaps be better to help the Government of the Congo with its own police action in such a way as to make that action more efficacious.

The President said that the training of the Congolese army seems highly desirable so as to place at the disposal of the Government of the Congo a faithful and efficient force which could take over at the time when the United Nations pull out, at least militarily, from the Congo; the latter is bound to happen sooner or later.

The Prime Minister replied that this touched upon another important point of the conversation. He doesn't believe, however, that the question of the Katanga has been entirely exhausted. He feels that helping the military pressure of the United Nations might not be successful because of the opposition to such an action by the majority of the members of the United Nations. It might be better to consider liberating Katanga by a continuation and intensification of the Government's own police action.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. Drafted by Glenn. The source text is labeled Part I of two parts; Part II is printed as Document 201. Both are filed with a covering memorandum of February 12 from Battle to Bundy. The time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is taken from Kennedy's appointment book. (Kennedy Library)

2 Adoula had met that morning with Under Secretary Ball; see Document 199.

201. Memorandum of Conversation 201. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, February 5, 1962, 2:30–4:15 p.m.

SUBJECT

Reorganization of the Congolese Armed Forces

PARTICIPANTS

[Here follows the same list of participants as Document 200.]

The Prime Minister said that he was ready to pass now to the question of the reorganization of the Congolese armed forces. A year ago, the United Nations proposed to initiate a training program for those forces. At that time, however, it was not possible to accept such a proposal because the Congolese army was divided against itself, and if the United Nations had undertaken training it might have had to train what amounted to two different armies. It is only in November 1961 that this difficulty was solved and that the army became unified. A second problem exists, however. In order to reorganize the army it is necessary to start with a small but healthy nucleus. At the present moment the size of the Congolese army is much too great. Of course, it is possible in theory to decrease the size of the armed forces simply by demobilizing men unsuitable for service because either of lack of discipline or of general ineptness. However, the men so released from the army—and who might amount to one-half of its present strength—would have to be placed in the economy. Otherwise, they will increase the already very great number of unemployed and create areas of discontent and of potential chaos. Thus, help would be necessary and the help in question would have to be of an economic nature aiming at finding work for those who would be released from the army.

In answer to a question from the President, the Prime Minister said that while he did not have a personal plan for retraining of the army, he had discussed this question with the military leaders of the United Nations and that all parties agree that the first step would have to be a decrease in numbers, as a prior condition for the undertaking of a training program. A United Nations project for the retraining of the army is in existence but the financial and economic question continues to be a serious obstacle. In the meantime, the Prime Minister has obtained from the Parliament the authority to recruit 2,000 young men of 18–20 years. This, however, still hinges on the financial problem since it is financially impossible to increase the size of an army which is already too numerous and since the economic conditions make it difficult to release 2,000 men out of the presently existing forces.

The President expressed the wish that a more detailed examination of the problem could be undertaken by representatives of the two Governments.

The Prime Minister replied that Mr. Ndele would remain in the United States and would be happy to participate in a detailed consideration of economic questions including those which were tied with the question of the reorganization of armed forces.

Secretary Ball mentioned to the President that conversations had already taken place in the Department of State and that they would continue with members of the Prime Minister's staff who would remain after his departure from the United States.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. Drafted by Glenn. The source text is labeled Part II of two parts; Part I is printed as Document 200.

202. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Williams) to the Under Secretary of State (Ball) 202. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Williams) to the Under Secretary of State (Ball)1

Washington, February 7, 1962.

SUBJECT

The President's Views on Tshombe's U.S. Visit2

I had an opportunity immediately after the President said goodbye to Prime Minister Adoula the afternoon of February 5 to show the President the telegram reporting Tshombe's desire to make his visit to the United States now for the additional purpose of talking to Adoula.3

The President stated that our letting Tshombe come here to talk to Adoula would be insulting to the latter. He then referred to Tshombe's hope to visit the United States to attend rallies and make other public appearances. He said that we should not let Tshombe come unless he can come on a Congo passport under circumstances that would cause Prime Minister Adoula to be willing to grant him one. Under present circumstances he thought it would not be in our interest for him to come.

I mentioned that we are not required by law to insist that Tshombe travel on a Congo passport, that we can give a visa on a piece of paper. I added that we had, for example, done something like this for people like Holden Roberto4 and that there might well be public criticism and senatorial criticism if in the light of these precedents and our open door policy of freedom of travel we refuse to do so for Tshombe.

The President said that when it was not in our interest to give a visa at a particular time we had declined to do so and he cited the Formosan nationalist as a case in point. He said he took it that we could keep someone out for a desired period of time until circumstances changed sufficiently to make a visit constructive, that this is what we were doing with the Formosan. He added, laughingly, with regard to the public relations and senatorial impact, that he would put me out in front on this one.5

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.70G11/2–762. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Vance.

2 On January 19, Tshombe had requested a visa for the purpose of visiting the United States to participate in a March 7 Katanga Freedom Rally at Madison Square Garden. (Telegram 1024 from Elisabethville, January 19; ibid., 770G.00/1–1962) Telegram 1319 to Léopoldville, January 26, stated that while Tshombe would not be given a visa in a Katangan passport, refusal of a visa could seriously prejudice the Department's ability to retain public support for U.S. policy in the Congo. Hoffacker was instructed to try to dissuade Tshombe from visiting the United States under the auspices of the rally organizers and instructed Gullion to try to persuade Adoula to offer a Congolese passport to Tshombe. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–2662) Further documentation on this subject is ibid., 770G.00.

3 Telegram 1106 from Elisabethville, February 5. (Ibid., 770G.00/2–562)

4 Head of the Uniao das Populacoes de Angola.

5 Telegram 532 to Elisabethville, February 5, stated that if Tshombe continued to show interest in a trip to the United States, the Consulate should advise him that the situation in the Congo was "too disturbed" for a visit by Tshombe to be "fruitful" and should urge him to postpone consideration of a visit until implementation of the Kitona agreement was well underway. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–562) Telegram 1127 from Elisabethville, February 6, reported that Hoffacker had so informed Tshombe and that he had accepted it calmly. (Ibid., 770G.00/2–662)

203. Memorandum Prepared in the Department of State 203. Memorandum Prepared in the Department of State1

Washington, February 8, 1962.

PROPOSED ACTION PROGRAM FOR CONGO

I. Reintegration of Katanga and Other Provinces

A. Task

Reactivate Central Government administration in Katanga, South Kasai and Kivu and make these provinces again part of Congo's economy and eventually bring them fully into the framework of the Republic of the Congo.

B. Proposed Actions2

1. Parliamentary revision of constitution. This process should be speeded up with the help of constitutional advisers supplied by the UN.

2. Administrative reintegration of Katanga and other provinces. This is to be achieved on a step-by-step basis by discussions between technicians from Léopoldville and from the provincial governments involved with appropriate UN help. The objective would be, at first, coordination and eventually integration in such areas as border and customs controls, postal services, radio, inland transportation, civil aviation, tax administration, public expenditures and money and banking, foreign exchange administration, technical education, external aid, public works programs, etc. The GOC with UN support should make a massive attempt to open discussions on as many of these subjects as possible and broaden the scope within their technical ability to handle such discussions. Within this program, for example, use should be made of Brussels' tax and customs offices as administrative agents for all of the Congo.

3. Settlement of basic economic questions through negotiations between Adoula and Tshombe with appropriate UN assistance. One of such questions might be division between the Central Government and the provincial governments of the tax and foreign exchange proceeds realized in Katanga. Pending the new constitution an interim arrangement is necessary either on the basis of pre-1960 data or of a new formula which might be worked out with UN help. This interim arrangement would not prejudice the final decision in the constitutional framework.

4. Creation of overall situation, military, political, diplomatic and economic, which will ensure that Tshombe lives up to the Kitona agreement and to reduce danger of renewed hostilities.This involves adequate UN military presence in Katanga, settlement of mercenaries issue, diplomatic pressure by U.S., UK, Belgium on Tshombe, assistance by UN in GOC policy to assure administrative integration of Katanga and other provinces by way of discussions (paragraphs 2 and 3) or as last resort by legislative action enforced with UN help and with appropriate protection assured for companies operating in these areas against use of force by local authorities.

5. Specific steps. We are attempting to put pressure on Tshombe through the UMHK and the Belgian government which should make clear that payment of export proceeds and taxes solely to Katanga government cannot be continued but that the companies have to satisfy their obligations to the Central Government.

II. Military Reorganization

A. Tasks

1. To define the role and the concept of the Congolese armed forces, of the provincial gendarmerie and the local police, and to outline organization and training programs for each of them and interrelation of missions and functions of the three security elements.

2. Reorganization and retraining of the existing army directed toward development of an effective Congolese military establishment responsive to competent civil authority and adequate to maintain internal security and border control, resist local aggression and, through civic action programs, contribute to the betterment of the economy and society. The nucleus of the new army would be newly drafted men and only fully retrained elements of the existing army would be eventually included.

3. Reduction of the ANC through a selection-out process and retirement of excess personnel with the help of economic incentives to facilitate transformation of these soldiers into workers, factory guards, provincial employees and/or their return to tribal areas.

4. Reorganization and training of provincial and local police forces and gendarmerie.

B. Action3

1. U.S. to send special mission to Congo to study military, social and economic aspects of military reorganization problem or appropriate programs and prepare recommendations to be submitted to GOC.

2. Tripartite talks between GOC, UN and U.S. to facilitate working out of program covering above points.

3. Provision through the UN of funds to facilitate economic integration of former military personnel with the help of contributions of U.S., Belgium and other nations. The fund might be used, for example, for economic development projects with high labor intensity, to assist in setting up small businesses, etc.

4. Establishment of a training mission under UN auspices preferably staffed by officers of one nation. Similar missions should be established for other training tasks.

5. As part of the UN sponsored programs, foreign military advisers should be made available to assist Congolese officers in selected units to speed up process of reforming army.

III. Foreign Aid

A. Task

Coordination of aid programs, increase of funds and technical assistance personnel and securing capital funds for restoration of industrial plants and agricultural plantations.

B. Action4

1. All aid to be channeled through the UN or coordinated by the UN. Prime Minister to create committee for aid coordination in his own office to cooperate with the UN and act as administrative instrument.

2. UN technical assistance to be substantially increased, in particular in the fields of administration and internal security.

3. Belgium to be asked by the GOC to supply technical assistance, import credits and grants, and capital funds for reopening of industrial and agricultural enterprises.

4. UN to work out mutually satisfactory method under which Belgian technicians could operate in the Congo.

5. The U.S. aid program to the Congo will be continued in the current fiscal year in the form and at the magnitude presently outlined ($55 million per annum). The U.S. Government will consider sympathetically Congolese needs for the next year. The educational and training facilities available to Congolese youth financed from U.S. funds will be increased and the U.S. Government will attempt to achieve an increase in the facilities made available by private foundations. Furthermore, technical arrangements will be worked out between U.S. and Congolese authorities to improve the scheduling of American food shipments.

6. U.S. to help UN to obtain additional contributions to finance its technical assistance and import programs.

7. Special fund to be set up for military resettlement outside of the present aid programs.

IV. Financial Stability and Economic Recovery

A. Tasks

To set up a budget at a reasonable level taking into account the needs and the available funds including foreign aid, establish and administer the framework for effective control of public expenditures, improve tax collection, and finally prepare development plan as basis for recovery and renewed growth and create basic conditions for increased production and exports.

B. Actions5

1. UN and IMF assistance should be obtained by the Government of the Congo to work out a budget program and a foreign exchange program and to improve the administrative framework and establish controls responsive to the Prime Minister's direction.

2. The Government of the Congo should give full support to the Congolese and UN officials who will be charged with the administration of these two programs. Creation of a Central Bank should be deferred until the programs are in effect.

3. The IBRD should be requested by the GOC to draft an economic development program for the Congo as a whole indicating in which way to obtain maximum benefit from the existing national wealth and suggest ways of financing development needs.

4. A special program should be worked out by the UN to improve transportation within the country and to create adequate security conditions in centers of productive employment.

5. A public works program should be initiated rapidly by the GOC with UN assistance in Léopoldville and later in other cities in order to alleviate the burden of unemployment and reduce the danger of political upheaval in these centers. Limited distribution of foodstuffs to unemployed should also be initiated for the same purpose.

V. U.S.-GOC Diplomatic Relations

A. Proposed Actions

The Congolese Embassy in Washington should be opened as soon as possible and an Ambassador appointed who would effectively represent the Congo in this post where there is a considerable amount of inter-African diplomatic contact.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. Notes on the cover sheet indicate that the paper represented a consensus in the Department of State of steps that might be taken with regard to the Congo and that it was submitted for discussion to the NSC Standing Group on February 9. The Record of Actions at the Standing Group meeting states that Williams presented the proposed program and it was discussed and "approved in general." (Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Standing Group, February 9, 1962) For information concerning the NSC Standing Group, see Bromley K. Smith, Organizational History of the National Security Council During the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, p. 51.

2 Typewritten notes in the margin next to paragraphs 2 and 3 below read: "GOC ACTION."

3 A typewritten note in the margin next to paragraph 2 below reads: "GOC ACTION."

4 Typewritten notes in the margin next to paragraphs 1, 3, and 5 below read: "GOC ACTION."

5 Typewritten notes in the margin next to paragraphs 1–3 and 5 below read: "GOC ACTION."

204. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 204. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, February 9, 1962, 10 a.m.

1139. In accordance with Deptel 515,2 have called on Munongo, Kimba, and Muhona,3 as well as Tshombe. Found all of them pensive but not violent over Linner demarche to Tshombe (Contel 1124).4 To a man, they asked however that UN "not push us too fast," particularly militarily. Kimba and Munongo as might be expected from such [garble—hard liners?], spoke again in terms of choosing scorched earth policy if UN "drives us to wall." Even moderate Muhona said Katangans would rather perish than yield hastily to unreasonable demands.

None of Ministers interviewed spoke of independent status for Katanga. Nor have they to my knowledge for months. They uniformly spoke of continued willingness work out modus vivendi as confederal as practicable, with Adoula "and without outside influence." Planted with each idea of early Adoula–Tshombe meeting to launch talks between technical delegates on economic, financial and other aspects of integration.

Re point (A) of Deptel 515, Consulate's relationship with key Ministers is, we believe, as good as can be expected. Emotional Ministers like Kimba and Munongo verge on insults when they repeat their false accusations re US Government racial and other policies. They may be irretrievable but perhaps USIS literature which they received today plus steady conditioning otherwise (visit to US at appropriate time would be ideal) may bring them closer to relatively realistic attitude maintained by Tshombe. In meantime they remain hard-headed advisers to Tshombe, who, in our view, is moderate capable being influenced by good advice to follow Kitona outline toward reintegrated Congo. If he fooling us since Kitona, such insincerity should have been apparent by now. Believe solid progress toward Kitona goals inevitably slow, particularly with background of suspicion which constantly in GOK thinking. In any event, Mixed Commission and Adoula-Tshombe meeting seem logical next steps, which must be given adequate chance to show results.

Nyembo another influential Minister who has spent most of last month in Léopoldville on government commission. No information available re his current attitudes, but he normally moderate influence in Cabinet.

Kibwe still powerful figure because of his hold on purse strings. He personally unattractive, as Ambassador will probably attest, and has reputation for having hands steadily in till. He generally regarded incapable [capable?] of being influenced by virtually any regime, including UN, and therefore does not enjoy local respect.

Hoffacker

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–962. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, London, Paris, Salisbury, and USUN.

2 Telegram 515, January 23, requested reports on the attitudes and activities of Tshombe and his entourage, including an appraisal of the Consulate's relationship with them. (Ibid., 770G.00/1-2362)

3 Katangan Minister for Labor and Social Matters Paul Muhona.

4 Telegram 1124, February 7, reported that, according to U.N. representative Jose Rolz-Bennett, Linner had called on Tshombe that morning and indicated that U.N. headquarters wanted faster implementation of the U.N. resolutions and the U.N. Command was considering placing military contingents in Jadotville and Kolwezi for this purpose. Tshombe had agreed to the establishment of a mixed U.N.-Katangan commission to supervise withdrawal of mercenaries. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–762) A February 10 letter from Linner to Tshombe concerning the meeting (U.N. doc. S/5053/Add.7) is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 834–836.

205. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 205. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, February 16, 1962, 8 p.m.

2797. Congo. Gullion, Wallner and Yost called on SYG this afternoon. Bunche, Narasimhan and Linner were present. Fol matters were explored or touched on.

Bunche showed message just in from Rolz-Bennett indicating Tshombe has proposed to Adoula to meet him shortly at Kamina. Linner's impression was that Adoula would accept. However, Bunche had some doubts in view tenor Tshombe's speech yesterday.2

US reps raised question of proposed UN troop movements to Jadotville, Kolwezi and Kipushi and pointed out obvious damaging effects on bond issue and on US opinion generally if "third round" of hostilities should break out. They urged Tshombe be persuaded publicly to agree to movement before it takes place.

SYG replied that UN must eventually comply with SC mandate against secession and against mercenaries by stationing troops in these towns. Brief visits by mixed commissions are good beginning but far from sufficient. Tshombe had definitely in last conversation with Linner agreed to troop movement. If, through influence local UMHK die-hards or otherwise he goes back on agreement, it might become necessary for UN to use force. SYG expects to transmit to SC Monday3 report on latest developments in Elisabethville4 and consult CAC at end of week.

He had told UK he would take no action without letting CAC know in advance and of course he much prefers proceed by agreement if possible. He expressed his intention of consulting with US next week in regard to air transport assistance in connection with this movement. Even if accomplished peaceably and by agreement, movement will require air transport to Elisabethville of large number of additional vehicles, possibly as many as 300. SYG asked specifically what would be US attitude if Tshombe welshes on his agreement to UN troop movement to three above-mentioned towns.

US reps said they could not give definitive answer to this question at this time but that, having in mind very grave disadvantages of military action to which they had earlier referred, they strongly urged UN show greatest patience on this point and allow time for other pressures, financial and political, which are being exerted on Tshombe, to take effect. They pointed out that objective is to reintegrate Katanga into Congo, that whole series of steps are being taken with this end in view and that no single step should be viewed in isolation or considered sine qua non.

Bunche pointed out that as more and more time passes it becomes more difficult for UN to carry out its mandate and that Tshombe is undoubtedly playing on this fact. SYG emphasized relevance of UN financial crisis. He expressed view that for this reason present military strength UNOC cannot be maintained after June. Even if full $200 million obtained through bond issue, which he seriously doubts, present level of expenditure cannot be maintained after end this year. He pointed out new additional financial burden likely to be imposed by pending Ruanda Urundi res.5

Gullion expressed strong hope UN phasing down would not begin so early as June as he felt that it would be clearly premature. Criterion, he felt, should be ability of Congolese to maintain order. SYG emphasized he did not contemplate total UN military evacuation but reduction to about 5,000 by end of year.

Narasimhan expressed view that financial pressure would sooner or later be decisive on this point, whether or not action were premature in terms of situation in Congo.

There was brief discussion of US proposal to send joint civilian-military survey team to investigate program for demobilizing, resettling and providing vocational training for large part of ANC. SYG asked he be given paper describing exactly what was proposed and it was agreed he would be given such paper next week. Bunche expressed fear there might be some criticism in CAC of military component this mission. Gullion explained military component would be very small and in civilian clothes.

Gullion expressed regret at shortness tenure of Gardiner in particular and UN officials in Congo in general. UN reps showed some sensitivity at discussion of UN personnel matters but SYG said assignment Gardiner would be reviewed at end of March. Bunche emphasized importance of ECA position in connection with emerging problems in Africa as a whole.

Wallner reported we intend endeavor disabuse Tshombe of whatever impression he may have Rolz-Bennett is Communist oriented, and urged UN to support our explanations in whatever way seemed most appropriate to them. SYG seemed to attribute stories of this character to Brinton rather than to Tshombe and supported Bunche's position that it would be improper to have UN reps even refer to such accusations unless made directly to them, which had not been the case.

After mtg, [5 lines of source text not declassified].

Plimpton

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–1662. Confidential. Repeated to Léopoldville and Brussels.

2 Telegram 1186 from Elisabethville, February 16, transmitted the official text of Tshombe's speech to the Katangan Assembly the previous day. It charged, inter alia, that the Department of State was "under thumb of voracious financiers who will not rest as long as Congo not colony under their economic domination and as long as Katanga copper not eliminated from world competition." (Ibid.)

3 February 19.

4 U.N. doc. S/5053/Add. 8.

5 On February 23, the General Assembly adopted Resolution 1743 (XVI), which established a U.N. Commission for Ruanda-Urundi.

206. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Secretary of State Rusk 206. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, February 19, 1962.

SUBJECT

UN Troop Movements outside Elisabethville

The cables reporting Gullion and Wallner's conversations in New York with Sir Patrick Dean and with U Thant (Tab A)2 may not in their choice of detail give the full flavor of these interviews. From what Wallner tells me of the talks he is confident that Dean and Thant understand clearly that the U.S. Government would not condone troop movements outside of Elisabethville if there was the slightest chance that they would result in renewed fighting. All three Americans at the meetings stressed that it would not be sufficient for Tshombe to acquiesce in these matters and that before they took place he should publicly declare his support of them and call upon the Katangan authorities and public to cooperate with the UN troops. The point was also made that a renewal of fighting would be interpreted as a collapse of the Kitona agreement, which had been a major effort of the administration, and that the whole issue of a fighting UN, which had so deeply divided U.S. and Western European opinion would again be reopened with dangerous, if not fatal, effects on the bond issue. With Thant, Wallner particularly emphasized that getting rid of mercenaries was only one facet of the U.N. mandate and that hostilities on that facet alone would not be justified in the eyes of the U.S. Government.

In any case, Stevenson is to see Thant today to go over the ground again as requested in our cable of Saturday (Tab B).3 I have telephoned him to relay the concern expressed at your staff meeting this morning.4

Finally, you should know that Thant himself acknowledges he can move no troops out of Elisabethville without an airlift of vehicles to that city which only the USAF can perform. We intend to play this one very cosily indeed.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/2-1962. Confidential. The memorandum bears Rusk's initials, indicating that he saw it.

2 The tabs are not attached to the source text. Regarding the conversation with U Thant, see Document 205. Telegram 2800 from USUN, February 16, reported a conversation with Dean in which he expressed British disquiet at the plan for U.N. troop movements to Kipushi, Kolwezi, and Jadotville. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–1662)

3 Telegram 2133 to USUN, February 17, instructed Stevenson to see Thant and again urge the U.S. view that withdrawal of mercenaries was only one aspect of the problem of Katangan reintegration and that another outbreak of hostilities would endanger U.S. public support for the Congo operation and thus weaken the administration's ability to support it financially. (Ibid.) Telegram 2825 from USUN, February 19, reported that Yost had met with Thant, who indicated optimism that an early meeting between Adoula and Tshombe might obviate the necessity of troop movements in the near future. Thant added that the United Nations would need U.S. assistance for any troop movements from Elisabethville and therefore as a practical matter would need U.S. agreement. (Ibid., 770G.00/2–1962)

4 Battle's record of the staff meeting states that Rusk "again expressed his concern that the additional U.N. troops for Katanga might cause a resumption of hostilities." (Ibid., S/S Files: Lot 66 D 147, Secretary's Staff Meetings)

207. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 207. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, February 20, 1962, 6:37 p.m.

1471. Minister Econ Affairs Ambroise Eleo, Governor-designate Congo National Bank Albert Ndele, Permanent U.N. rep Mario Cardoso accompanied by Kimbimbi, Kimvay, and Kasanda2 called on Under Secretary February 16 prior departure for Congo.

Following based on uncleared memcon.3 Cardoso said delegation would give Prime Minister many positive suggestions from Department concerning re-integration Katanga, reorganization Army, foreign aid, and economic stabilization. GOC will seriously consider U.S. views and Prime Minister believed already beginning carry out some actions along lines U.S. proposals.

Group remains skeptical Tshombe good faith despite good will gesture Katanga assembly on Kitona declaration.4 With U.S. support they hope test his sincerity. Cardoso called attention Tshombe attack on USG. He wished assure us Tshombe will not be allowed act in field foreign affairs which beyond his competence insofar as GOC able control this matter.

Under Secretary noted absence full report Katanga assembly resolution makes it difficult evaluate significance. Only time will reveal extent Tshombe acting good faith. Meanwhile, GOC should know we feel re-integration Katanga has high priority along with other equally important matters Cardoso named. He hoped work here and of GOC with Ambassador Léopoldville will lead to more rapid progress. We anxious assist GOC establish peace, restore economy and make possible growth and prosperity.

During week, Eleo group held talks with IMF and IBRD. Ndele read draft financial stabilization program which he will discuss within GOC (pouching copy).5 Way now seems clear for World Bank proceed with more detailed work "contentieux," probably with special Bank mission Brussels about first April, although talks GOC–GOB need not await further action by Bank this stage.

In course several sessions in Department, basic ideas our proposed action program were explained. Delegation did not feel competent discuss substance, but agreed that elaboration of program and specific actions will be subject talks between Ambassador and Prime Minister. Ndele appeared support our pragmatic gradualist approach Katanga integration whereas Cardoso and Kimbimbi more anxious see rapid progress and stressed principles Congo unity.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–2062. Confidential. Drafted by Kenney, cleared by Stanley Cleveland, and approved by Eisenberg. Repeated to Brussels, London, Paris, Elisabethville, and USUN.

2 Emmanuel Kimbimbi of the Prime Minister's office, Felicien Kimvay of the Chamber of Deputies, and Senator Justin Kasanda of Kasai Province.

3 Drafted by Kenney. (Department of State, Central Files, 033.70G11/2–1662) McGhee met with the Congolese Delegation on February 14; Kenney's memorandum of the conversation is ibid., 770G.13/2–1462.

4 On February 15, the Katangan Assembly adopted a resolution accepting the Kitona Declaration as a "potential basis of discussion." The text is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 836–837.

5 Not found.

208. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 208. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, February 21, 1962, 9:21 p.m.

2180. Following based uncleared Memcon.2

During meeting with Under Secretary February 20, Spaak discussed African problems.

[Here follows discussion of Ruanda-Urundi.]

Congo. Ball remarked that US encouraged over Congo political developments but emphasized necessity make prompt progress forestall UN pressures for greater UN action in Katanga. Ball stressed that US most anxious that fighting be avoided. Ball noted that the UN desires to introduce its forces to Kipushi, Kolwezi and Jadotville. Spaak remarked that Tshombe opposes UN troops in these towns and according Belgian information tribal chiefs have announced their support Tshombe's position. Spaak believes most important avoid incidents which could lead additional fighting, and urges speed achieve definitive agreement since Tshombe very changeable.

Ball suggested that tax payments by Union Miniere to Central Government could be turning point toward reintegration. Spaak replied that UM prepared deposit all Tshombe's tax receipts in escrow pending division to be worked out by Adoula and Tshombe. He implied that deposits would not be made without Tshombe approval.

Spaak reported that during recent meeting with Adoula, he had urged Adoula start talking about Belgian-Congolese financial matters (portfolio and outstanding debt), but Adoula showed no disposition negotiate this matter, apparently intending to wait until Congo political situation more stable. Adoula also asked if Belgium could lend additional money, but Spaak indicated reluctance without having better idea future developments.

Ball expressed opinion that if UM would pay taxes directly to Adoula, latter would be prepared negotiate regarding claim for past taxes. Ball emphasized Adoula's desire obtain tax revenues for Central Government and expressed view that Adoula and Tshombe should meet promptly and settle financial questions.

Concerning Tshombe's attitude, Spaak noted that Tshombe lacks reliable political counselor to keep him moving right direction. Spaak had in November suggested a senior African statesman be found who might perform good office function and follow up decisions to assure implementation. When pressed suggest name, Spaak said he had no one to propose who might be effective under present circumstances. Spaak stated that influence Brazzaville on Tshombe most unfortunate and that Tshombe's French advisers not helpful. In response query by Governor Williams whether there would be available Belgians in whom Tshombe might have confidence, Spaak recalled that he had removed his advisers who were much better than the French people now in Elizabethville. Spaak pointed out that the Frenchmen were acting as individuals, and their efforts did not reflect French Government policy. Spaak said he could not take any action Katanga which might trouble Belgian relations with Adoula Government.

Spaak mentioned that U Thant had urged Belgian cooperation with UN for long-range Congo rehabilitation program. Ball indicated approval such approach and asked if Spaak had any suggestions for US, Belgian, UN cooperation in Congo over long term. Spaak replied would think problem over and communicate with Ambassador MacArthur at early date.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.55/2–2162. Secret. Drafted by Beaudry; cleared by Tasca, Acting Director of the Office of Dependent Area Affairs R. Austin Acly, and Stanley Cleveland; and approved by Tyler. Repeated to USUN, Léopoldville, Usumbura, London, and Paris.

2 Drafted by Beaudry and dated February 20. (Ibid., Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330)

209. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 209. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, February 22, 1962, 8 p.m.

2140. General. Made my first contacts with Gardiner2 since his arrival here. I am confident he will do his utmost to prevent recourse to force in Katanga. Under his administration (Khiary's counsels are prominent) main preliminary effort will swing to proposing further meeting between Adoula and Tshombe probably on basis resolutions of so-called Katanga Assembly in what UNOC hopes will be much modified Stavropolized form.3

1. Round three. I described to Gardiner USG concern with respect to any reopening of hostilities. Gave my personal opinion that final settlement Katanga affair would require arrangements to ensure that border localities not being used for mercenary or troop buildup; to provide for collection of export taxes; and for security of UMHK installations. Had hoped these objectives to be secured as result of peaceful deployment along lines already being negotiated with Tshombe and Belgians during Linner's time. I could not predict action my government, but if UNOC planned implantation of troops by force or if resistance encountered dubious it would support UN action as it had in December. Gardiner replied he would do everything possible to prevent any such action arising from local incidents. He had informed military unmistakably it could not even reply to provocation unless he had direct approval from New York. As to possibility that New York might opt for forceful action he would do everything he could to prevent Secretary General from taking that decision. He said he understood US reactions. He sketched a hypothetical "graph" of US attitudes to Katanga campaigns: on first day one approved; on second day one began to question wisdom; on third day action was blunder; by fourth it was considered crime.

If ever ONUC was compelled to take action and he were responsible it would only be done if he were absolutely certain it could be successful in 48 hours. He was sufficiently Ashanti to respect chief's tradition that one came back with booty or not at all.

Gardiner had little comment to offer on possible effectiveness of proposed Belgian move to place tax proceeds in escrow as means of bringing Tshombe to honor his engagements. It may be he has not had time to familiarize himself with background of this matter but I am more inclined to believe UNOC under Gardiner has radically revised its approach.

2. Adoula-Tshombe meeting. Gardiner and Khiary are attempting to bring about another meeting. He believes Adoula will go along and was able to get Adoula to make speech in affirmative sense (Embassy telegram 2133).4 He expects question of venue will again present difficulties which may take about a month to resolve. Somewhat surprisingly, Gardiner has fixed upon obstreperous and provocative resolutions of so-called Katanga Assembly as basis of meeting. He, Khiary and Stavropoulos have been in correspondence with Elisabethville and Tshombe for this purpose and this initially angered Adoula who upbraided Gardiner for negotiating with Tshombe to exclusion of GOC. Nevertheless Gardiner believes Adoula is coming around. Gardiner is taking Katanga resolutions as basis negotiation although he recognizes they were not seriously intended as such. In fact, he believes Katangan "legislators" seriously expected their action to touch off round three. (He claims numbers of them evacuated city just after assembly meeting and after incident in which Tunisian sentry fired upon civilian who failed heed order to halt.) On basis UNOC's analysis Gardiner believes resolutions when Stavropolized will provide basis for talks. He discerns five essential Katanga points: request for general amnesty in Katanga; provision for integrity of Katanga; organization of administration as between Katanga and Léopoldville; a formula for finances; and formula for army. Of these he thinks principal contentious points are disposition, command placement Katangan forces; Katangan participation in central cabinet; and arrangements with respect to Baluban part of Katanga and Baluba representation. He thinks other points can be more easily adjusted (on this point I think he is too sanguine).

Gardiner has been in close touch with UK Amb Riches. He says UK is supposed to have Linner's confidence and therefore he is asking UK through Consul Dunnett in Elisabethville to suggest to him kind of formula with respect to amalgamation [garble] duties of armed forces which he thinks Tshombe would accept. To my observation that Dunnett likely to present merely a Tshombe plan in toto Gardiner replied we would at least then know where UK stood and would engage its responsibility.

[3.] Kongolo.

Gardiner much concerned by report of alleged Katangan operations to take Kongolo, not so much because of renewal hostilities but because of anticipated request from Adoula for UN collaboration in movement of ANC. He says Adoula should have taken up UN offer when it was made. By this he refers to deal on eve of Kitona whereby UN accepted limited ANC participation under its command. This later scuttled by ANC/Mobutu insistence on concurrent operation in addition to ANC unit under UNOC. (Happily ANC intransigeance helped defer question UN airlift for ANC.) Gardiner hopes to stave off GOC request by use of army retraining plan, i.e., at some long range future date ANC might be used under UN command but only in form of retrained, fully disciplined units.

Comment: Evidently Gardiner placing chief emphasis on new Adoula-Tshombe palaver, this time without UNOC participation, though doubtless latter would have to ensure security. Although Gardiner not dropping possibilities pressure of military on Gbenye and economic persuasion by Societe Generale these approaches have apparently receded to secondary place. As Department aware, Gardiner-Khiary can be useful catalysts in these palavers vide Kitona and Lovanium (and this also face saver for Tshombe). On other hand process is endless, labyrinthine, Byzantine, Bantu. By no means certain lid can be kept on Adoula or that Adoula can keep lid on extremists indefinitely. Gardiner is aware of this and says he gives process until about June to work out whereupon he would be willing to consider more energetic means (unfortunately Gardiner himself may be withdrawn before June). I am inclined to hope all methods will be tried in parallel, i.e., that some UN redeployment concept in form of mixed commissions will continue under peaceful agreement, thus permitting restoration security in remainder of country and resumption economic productivity. Also that Belgian enterprises will continue to give concrete proof their switch to support of central government.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–2262. Confidential. Repeated to USUN, London, Paris, Brussels, Elisabethville, and Brazzaville.

2 Gardiner replaced Linner as Officer-in-Charge of the U.N. Operation in the Congo on February 10.

3 Reference is to U.N. Legal Counsel Constantin Stavropoulos, who had been assigned by U Thant at Tshombe's request to assist the Katangan provincial assembly and the commission it had established to study the Kitona Declaration.

4 Dated February 21. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–2162)

210. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State 210. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State1

Brussels, February 24, 1962, 5 p.m.

1552. Congo. Embtels 14832 and 1504.3 Ambassador saw Robiliart February 24 following latter's return from south of France. Speaking as friend he told Robiliart frankly that there was strong impression in Léopoldville and elsewhere that UMHK was not yet taking effective steps to discharge its obligations and responsibilities to the Congolese central government. If UMHK could not produce absolutely clear record that it was not simply playing Tshombe's game and supporting latter against Adoula, UMHK would probably find itself in deepest trouble with Adoula and GOC and might end by losing its shirt. It had been these considerations which led Ambassador to urge UMHK place very substantial part of export duties, dividends, et cetera in escrow. While Robiliart had informed Ambassador that UMHK representatives Elisabethville had been instructed to propose seventy-five percent escrow for such payments (Embtel 1451)4 there no evidence UMHK representatives in Elisabethville had yet complied effectively with Robiliart instructions. Ambassador concluded by saying this deadly serious matter for UMHK's future and that UMHK could expect little sympathy if it did not take steps to place itself in unassailable legal and moral position.

Robiliart replied that seventy-five percent escrow plan had been put to Tshombe. (In reply to Ambassador's question he said proposal made orally and not in writing.) Tshombe had first indicated he might be willing consider fifteen percent escrow, which Robiliart characterized as ridiculous, but subsequently Tshombe stated he could not agree to any escrow until he had meeting with Adoula which he hoped would occur in very near future since one of the issues he and Adoula would discuss would be division of UMHK payments raised by UMHK in its telegrams to Tshombe and Adoula (Embtel 1441).5 Robiliart concluded by saying that since Tshombe refused to agree to escrow for present, there was no choice for UMHK but to continue full export tax payments to Katanga Government.

Ambassador replied UMHK position was not good enough and was certainly not adequate to protect its shareholders interests. In first place, escrow proposition should have been put to Tshombe in writing and not orally. In second place, and speaking personally Ambassador said record of UMHK representatives willingness to accept and carry out Robiliart's excellent instructions from Brussels was not one that inspired complete confidence. Ambassador therefore urged UMHK propose seventy-five percent escrow plan once again to Tshombe in writing and at same time make it public so that Adoula government would see that UMHK loyally trying live up to its obligations to Adoula government. Furthermore, if proposition made public, it might be more difficult for Tshombe to find valid grounds to turn it down. If Tshombe should again turn it down and threaten reprisals, then UMHK should make payments only under strong written protest. Ambassador concluded by summarizing again grave dangers for UMHK if it did not place itself in unassailable legal and moral position.

Robiliart seemed somewhat shaken by picture of dangers to UMHK Ambassador had drawn and said he agreed seventy-five percent escrow payment proposal should be made public so that there could be clear record. He promised to consult with his associates before his departure for Paris this evening with view to sending further instructions to UMHK Elisabethville. He also tacitly admitted that he had very difficult problem in getting certain UMHK personnel in Elisabethville to carry out his instructions in spirit they were given and said that high UMHK official had been sent yesterday from Brussels to Elisabethville who was thoroughly familiar with Robiliart views and who Robiliart believed would carry them out.

MacArthur

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–2462. Confidential. Repeated to Léopoldville, Elisabethville, London, Paris, and USUN.

2 Telegram 1483, February 14, reported that MacArthur had asked Robiliart that day whether Union Miniere had received a reply from Tshombe to its proposal that 75 percent of its export duties and taxes be deposited in escrow. (Ibid., 770G.00/2–1462)

3 Telegram 1504, February 16, reported a conversation with Van der Straeten of the Societe Generale concerning the Union Miniere proposal. (Ibid., 870G.25/2–1662)

4 Telegram 1451, February 9, reported a conversation with Robiliart. (Ibid., 770G.00/2–962)

5 Telegram 1441, February 7, transmitted the texts of telegrams sent by Union Miniere to Adoula and Tshombe on February 6, urging them to reach an agreement that would end the "impossible situation" in which Union Miniere was "torn between contradictory demands" of the Congolese and Katangan Governments. (Ibid., 770G.00/2–762)

211. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 211. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, March 3, 1962, 5:02 p.m.

2302. For Ambassadors from Secretary. Léopoldville's 2207.2 We are informed Struelens has advised Tshombe to avoid meeting Adoula, referred to developments in US Senate and elsewhere, and stated he believes if Tshombe stalls and plays for time, he can hope to retain his present status. Tshombe's proceeding on basis such miscalculation could have gravest consequences including round three if Katangan ultras should attack UNOC forces or full scale civil war if irresistible pressures build up in Léopoldville.

Prior to foregoing development we had become increasingly concerned, as Gullion (reftel), at lack of forward motion in implementation Kitona and possibilities delays afford for a breach. Struelens' advice favoring inactivity, stalling, and continued de facto independence contains all the ingredients customarily favored by Tshombe.

I believe it is imperative that Tshombe be persuaded that Struelens' advice is based upon a miscalculation. We shall convey such information to him in the strongest possible terms but it would be most helpful if expressions of Belgian and British Government convictions of unavoidability of Katangan reintegration could also be conveyed to Tshombe.

For Brussels: You should inform Spaak of foregoing and state we hope Belgian Government will press Tshombe to go through with his plan meet with Adoula in Léopoldville March 6 and work out details of implementation of Kitona agreement in prompt and reasonable fashion. It would be helpful if that demarche also mentioned Belgian conviction of determination USG to continue support UN and GOC efforts reunify Congo. We are in fact persuaded that it may soon become necessary in order to reduce the pressures that are building up for renewed fighting for action to be taken in economic sphere by GOC in direction economic reintegration Katanga. In our opinion Tshombe can gain reputation as effective statesman if he presses promptly and reasonably for reintegration pursuant Kitona. Failure to do so on other hand could we fear have gravest consequences for him, for Congo and for West in general.

You should also urge Spaak or Prime Minister call in Nokin and Robiliart and inform them gravity with which we view dangerous effects these developments could have on prospects peaceful reintegration. In our view companies probably stand best chance of being able convince Tshombe of unavoidability his moving promptly to reintegrate and of dangerous aspects for Tshombe of Struelens' advice. We believe time is very rapidly running out for companies to make their peace with GOC and that potential threat to their interests posed by possible GOC attitudes considerably outweighs that posed by Tshombe under present circumstances. We fully concur in Gullion's recommendations (reftel)3 as to action UMHK and Katangan companies in like circumstances should now take regarding tax payments. In our view UMHK should send top level representative to Elisabethville from Brussels.

If arrangements are not made at March 6 meeting or promptly thereafter, if meeting not held for companies to make appropriate tax payments to GOC or escrow, we believe GOC would have no alternative to exerting pressure to bring this about. Companies should consider this prospect in light of fact GOC has considerable capability in this regard. It is not tolerable for Tshombe any longer to have veto power over tax payments.

For Léopoldville: We should make similar approach to Tshombe and suggest most effective method would be for you to make quick visit to Elisabethville for this purpose after discussing matter with Adoula.4

For London: Request you urge British Government make similar demarche to Tshombe.5

Believe British and Belgian Government approaches should not await or be dependent upon successful efforts elicit action Belgian companies or vice versa.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–162. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Vance; cleared in draft by Tasca, Fredericks, Williams, Burdett, Wallner, and McGhee; and approved by Ball, who initialed for Rusk. Also sent to London and Léopoldville and repeated to Elisabethville, USUN, and Paris.

2 Telegram 2207 from Léopoldville, March 1, expressed alarm at the widening gap between Tshombe and Adoula and urged continuing efforts to arrange a meeting between them. (Ibid.)

3 It recommended attempting to obtain implementation of the 75 percent escrow proposal; if the Belgian Government and Union Miniere refused to implement the plan over Tshombe's objections, it recommended following the policies outlined in telegram 1552, Document 210.

4 The Department withdrew this suggestion after both Gullion and Hoffacker expressed the view that a visit by Gullion to Elisabethville would be counterproductive. Gullion reported that he understood Tshombe had "worked up first-class psychosis" concerning him. (Telegram 2229 from Léopoldville, March 4, and telegram 1560 to Léopoldville, March 7; both in Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3-462; telegram 1291 from Elisabethville, March 5; ibid., 770G.00/3–562)

5 Bruce replied in telegram 3253 from London, March 5, that the Foreign Office had already instructed the U.K. Consul in Elisabethville to make a demarche to Tshombe. (Ibid., 711.0155/3–362)

212. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State 212. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State1

Brussels, March 4, 1962, 7 p.m.

1606. For Secretary from MacArthur. Deptel 2302.2 Although Spaak intended spend day (Sunday) outside Brussels he changed his plans at my request and met with me late this morning. I went over Congo situation with him in detail including Struelens activity and as suggested in reftel requested him specifically to: (A) send message at once to Tshombe; and (B) call in Nokin and Robiliart and speak to them strongly along lines you suggested. Spaak was most forthcoming and helpful and following is summary of his reply: 1. Struelens. Spaak said before discussing above requests he wanted to make one very frank observation. He is totally unable to understand how we can permit Struelens to remain in the US intervening openly in political matters and doing great damage to declared policy objectives of the US. In the past we have often urged Belgian Government in connection with Congo problem to take steps against Belgian nationals and others whether or not there was any legal basis for action and Spaak has done his best to be responsive.

Struelens is a case where a foreigner in the United States—not an American—is doing great damage and the US Government does not take any effective action against him. Spaak said Tshombe has great confidence in what Struelens cables him about "true situation in United States" and as long we permit him to remain in US we making a major if unwitting contribution to Tshombe's intransigent and separatist attitude. He earnestly hoped we would find ways to expel Struelens as our very refusal to do so bolsters Tshombe's belief that Tshombe has such strong political support in United States we dare not expel Struelens. Spaak said we should realize that Struelens reports exercise far greater influence on Tshombe than does UMHK and we have it in our power to make great contribution to Katanga reintegration by expelling him. If we are unable to curb Struelens' activities all the other efforts Belgium and the United States are making to bring about Katanga reintegration through an Adoula-Tshombe meeting may be nullified.

I said we had difficulty finding legal grounds to deport Struelens. Spaak replied that surely there must be some means to expel an alien who is interfering in our domestic politics and undermining the security of the United States behaving in way that plays into hands of Communists efforts to take over Africa.

2. Message to Tshombe. Spaak agreed situation is drifting dangerously along lines I reported on February 26 in final paragraph Embtel 1554.3 He said Vanderwalle (in charge of Belgian Consulate Elisabethville) is now in Brussels and is leaving for Elisabethville about March 6 and he would give him personal letter for Tshombe. I said while I appreciate this response situation is deteriorating and is one of greatest urgency. I hoped therefore that he would send cable message to Tshombe today which Belgian authorities in Elisabethville could deliver. Spaak said as result of pressure from the UN, from Adoula and from US he had withdrawn his Consular personnel from Elisabethville. In Vanderwalle's absence he has virtually nobody but minor mud larks there and nobody who would have any influence with Tshombe in conveying message. I said I appreciated this but a mud lark could deliver the text of a message from Spaak and I hoped he would send one today. Spaak said he would do so today and directed Rothschild (also present) to prepare draft at once to effect that Spaak had recently returned from US and knew of absolute determination of US Government to support UN and GOC with all means in Katanga reintegration and urging Tshombe to be forthcoming re reintegration and meet with Adoula, etc.

Spaak reiterated he deeply concerned about "drift" in Congo situation and failure to implement Kitona. Latest word he has received indicates Tshombe still agrees to meet Adoula but is thinking of March 8 rather than March 6. Spaak also understands Tshombe has sent message to friends in Léopoldville requesting arrangements for press conference during his visit there. Spaak asked me to say to you that while he will do his utmost to influence Tshombe, he and GOB frankly have virtually no influence with Tshombe and no officials of any stature or rank in Elisabethville who can make real impact.

3. Meeting with Nokin (SG) and Robiliart (UMHK). Spaak agreed to get in touch once again with Nokin and Robiliart about escrow and will urge them to use their influence constructively with Tshombe. He will try to meet with them personally tomorrow, but if this not possible he will have Foreign Office SecGen Van den Bosch see them tomorrow and press them in sense we desire. He emphasized that he fully supports what he described as "very helpful" initiative I had taken last month with Union Miniere and Societe Generale to establish in their own self-interest a clear and unequivocal legal and moral position vis-a-vis Adoula and GOC by proposing and making public escrow. He will continue to urge this and wanted us to know that since our last talk March 1 (Embtel 1586)4 he had again seen Robiliart and pressed him to put escrow proposal to Tshombe in writing and also either to make proposal public or let Adoula know about it. He said he also had on his desk draft letter to UMHK along lines I had proposed to Rothschild (see final paragraph Embtel 1586) and while he had not reached final conclusion he disposed to send this letter.

Spaak said while fully agreeing with us on desirability and indeed necessity of UMHK making a clear record by putting escrow proposal in writing, he wanted you to know that he strongly disagreed with impression he has received that US Government believes that UMHK is key to Katanga integration. This, Spaak said, is just not true and is a very dangerous assumption on which to base any policy or plan of action because while UMHK is significant element in the picture and can of course, exert a helpful influence, the heart of the Katanga reintegration problem is not UMHK but is "political". In this connection as we surely know, there are in Katanga strong secessionist elements surrounding Tshombe and Struelens is an important element in this aspect of the picture. While these secessionists unquestionably are putting great pressure on Tshombe, Spaak is quite dubious about Tshombe himself and considers him an undependable and unreliable quantity but added that Tshombe has at least expressed readiness to meet with Adoula in Léopoldville this week despite pressure from Katangan extremists and some very unhelpful statements by both UN and GOC. Spaak doubts that Tshombe has as yet definitively decided to reintegrate Katanga and believes he may be stalling for time in hope eventually he can establish some form of independent or semi-independent state perhaps within some form of federation with Northern Rhodesia and others. However, unless there is Adoula-Tshombe meeting it will not be possible to smoke him out.

Spaak said he hoped we would avoid any tendency to over-simplify problem of Katanga reintegration by viewing it largely as a matter that would be decided by views and actions of UMHK and the Belgian companies. He trusted we "would not develop such a fixation" about complex problem of Katanga reintegration because it just does not correspond with reality although he knows this is a popular thesis in the United Nations. He repeated that he fully agreed that UMHK is important and that it could make very helpful contribution. However, in addition to our united efforts with UMHK and Tshombe we should now be using our every persuasion with Adoula and with the UN to influence not only their actions but their words so as to bring about an Adoula-Tshombe meeting without which situation will drift with all dangers pointed out in Embtel 1554.

Spaak said that since his talk with me he had had the legal experts look up the record and he believes there is something in the Roundtable Conference5 about division of Katanga revenues between GOC and Katanga on a 50–50 basis which would be useful for UMHK to include as legal justification for escrow in the written submission to Tshombe and he will suggest this to UMHK.

Spaak said if, as he hopes, UMHK will soon put escrow proposal to Tshombe in writing and if latter still reacts violently against it UMHK will, of course, have no choice but pay, as other foreign companies, including American, have had to do in similar circumstances. However, in such event he agreed they should only pay under strong written protest reserving their rights as I had suggested last month to Robiliart. In view of complicated procedures of UMHK and SG executive board procedures and voting, Spaak does not think it realistic to believe that necessary agreement can be obtained from UMHK and SG to put escrow proposal in writing to Tshombe before March 8. Therefore, he urges all our efforts be at once directed to Adoula–Tshombe meeting on assumption that further action by UMHK on escrow will not be forthcoming by March 8. If UMHK does act favorably by then so much the better.

Comment:

We will of course continue to give Congo situation top priority and may have some ideas to suggest. Meanwhile we have several thoughts about points raised in your message and in Ambassador Gullion's 22076 5/ to which you referred. I do not know whether you had opportunity to see my telegram 1554 of February 26 which contains our analysis of the situation as seen from Brussels. We pointed out that to base our course of actions on assumption that we or GOB can force UMHK actually to implement escrow plan if Tshombe strongly objects is just not realistic and therefore we should concentrate our main efforts on bringing about an Adoula-Tshombe meeting soonest. In other words let us use everything we have to get such a meeting this week while Tshombe still agrees to it, regardless of implementation of escrow plan. We think this vitally important because if meeting fails to materialize situation will probably deteriorate further and we may not have another opportunity for a long time to bring Tshombe and Adoula together. As I have reported we here rate earliest possible meeting between Adoula and Tshombe as most important step we can take under present circumstances to arrest drift and deterioration in Congo situation which obvious to all. Since Tshombe has in mind meeting on March 6 or 8 (only two or four days off) we do not share fear in Léopoldville 2207 (referred to in your message) that drift on both sides need continue unchecked. The real danger it seems to us is that if meeting does not materialize soon there will be growing misunderstanding, impatience and distrust on both sides culminating in an explosion. Even if such a meeting fails to produce a breakthrough on Katanga integration, it should (as we pointed out in Embtel 1554) at least clarify matters to point where in terms of our own domestic political situation as well as internationally we will be better able to deal more adequately with the problem and obtain greater support for actions we may wish to take than is the case at present when the situation is getting well fuzzed up as Kitona recedes into the background.

For above reasons and in light of realities of situation (Embtel 1554) we believe Léopoldville is quite unrealistic in its 2207 to set at this point implementation of escrow plan as our first objective. Given the situation we face at this juncture we continue to believe that an Adoula-Tshombe meeting should be our primary goal.

MacArthur

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–462. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Léopoldville, London, Paris, Elisabethville, and USUN.

2 Document 211.

3 Telegram 1554 from Brussels, February 26, commented on the Congo situation. The last paragraph stated that without a meeting between Adoula and Tshombe, a breakthrough could not be achieved through the escrow plan, that an Adoula-Tshombe meeting could be the key to a breakthrough on Katangan integration, and that in the absence of such a meeting, the situation would continue to drift. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/2–2662)

4 Telegram 1586 from Brussels, March 1, reported MacArthur's meeting with Spaak that day. (Ibid., 770G.00/3-162)

5 It is not clear whether the reference is to the Belgian-Congolese Roundtable Conference of January–February 1960 or to the Economic Roundtable Conference of April–May 1960; information concerning both is in Libois and Verhaegen, Congo 1960, pp. 19–69 and 85–103.

6 See footnote 1, Document 211.

213. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 213. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, March 14, 1962, 9:19 p.m.

2354. Ref: Deptel 1549 to Leo, rptd Brussels 2333, New York 2258, London 4709, Paris 4742.2 Although it has not been feasible pursue subject reftel actively in Léopoldville, USUN should proceed to discuss with appropriate Secretariat officials, including SYG, proposed mission to encourage and facilitate program for reorganization ANC, gendarmerie and police. Purpose is to enlist high level UN support and start get plan underway for concerted effort to solve problem which Dept continues regard as among most crucial facing Congo.

Suggest you give UN copy of draft outline of tasks for special mission to Congo pouched on March 7.3 This can be presented as follow-up to Gullion-Wallner-Yost discussion with SYG on Feb 16 when this point briefly raised and we promised give SYG paper describing proposal (NY's 2797).4

Important to stress that only by approaching ANC reorganization program in comprehensive manner can UN hope obtain necessary Congolese cooperation. UN must make it clear to GOC that piecemeal approach, e.g., in purchasing airplanes and training officers, will not lead to solution of complex and difficult military, economic, financial and social problems involved creating effective and dependable military establishment. Special mission to draft recommendations deal with these problems would be first step towards progress in this area.

Although original proposal based on assumption that mission might be US staffed, form and substance US participation can be decided later. We would be ready consider idea UN mission in which US would cooperate and contribute in manner to accommodate itself UN organized and directed operation. At this stage, important have UN accept basic concept and come out in favor of rapid setting up of mission even before request from Adoula obtained.

In informal exchanges with Linner on this subject, he stressed importance of semantics and that even though basic purpose of mission is to address itself to security problem and to reorganize ANC and police, it might be harmful refer to it as military mission but should be presented under suitable economic-social label. This view appears sound to us, and suggest you approach problem under this rubric rather than as "military mission."

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.5/3–1462. Confidential. Drafted by Buffum and Pelcovits, cleared by Eisenberg and Sisco, and approved by Wallner. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and Paris.

2 Telegram 1549 to Léopoldville, March 6, outlined for discussion with Gardiner and Adoula a proposal for a U.S. or U.N. military mission, the purpose of which would be to make recommendations to the Congolese Government and United Nations for the creation of effective Congolese armed forces, gendarmerie, and police, including the reduction, reorganization, and retraining of the army. (Ibid., 770G.5/3–662)

3 Not found.

4 Document 205.

214. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 214. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, March 15, 1962, 7 p.m.

2337. I saw Adoula last night at my request. (He had been hard to reach for last 2 days.) Asked his estimate of talks on eve of Tshombe's arrival. Adoula said he had no indication that Tshombe was coming; noted he had just seen an emissary from Youlou who had asked that Bolikongo (sic)2 give further guarantees for Tshombe safety. Adoula said this was meaningless but had at last shed light on activities of certain persons.

Adoula had received no word directly from Tshombe that he was coming. He had no date from the UN as to arrival time.3

(Adoula's insistence on lack of any direct confirmation to him from Tshombe is pertinent to Adoula's trip early this morning to Coquilhatville. He expects to return in good time for meeting but by trip to Coq he wished to underscore Tshombe failure declare his intentions.)

I asked Adoula whether he had had time consider papers drawn up by Embassy. (These papers pouched today include a long position paper suggesting GOC position on main issues.)4 Key points are disposition of revenues, command of army, series of technical conferences on administrative and financial matters. Included also is proposed agenda. Principal effort of paper is to get discussion onto nuts and bolts measures of integration on theory that Kitona largely constitutional question.

Adoula replied he had studied the paper many times and had it before him just now. He picked up two points: First, with respect to impact on Loi Fondamentale, and second, his own relationship to provincial governments. He asked what arrangements should govern if Loi Fondamentale were considered to be in abeyance pending revision. I said that I hoped he and Tshombe would make modus vivendi which in turn would be considered with representatives of the other provinces. Adoula indicated he did not think the Loi Fondamentale could be suspended by any agreement between him and Tshombe. I tried to indicate it was not a question of suspension but common sense flexibility. Adoula then invited comparison between his flexibility and Tshombe's. Was it not Tshombe who tried to bring suit in Belgian court because Adoula had showed flexibility on the Loi Fondamentale? I acknowledged that this was so but hoped that Adoula would continue to be flexible. (In sum Adoula is still asserting that Loi Fondamentale must remain fully in effect until revised but it is possible to hope that this is merely opening position. He seemed less adamant on subject at this time.)

Adoula said our paper gave him trouble with respect to relations with other Governors. In part it asked him to do more than he could without consulting Governors but elsewhere it seemed to subject his own negotiating authority to Governors as sent. I said that I hoped he would act as if he had full authority and not as Tshombe had acted at Kitona.

Continuing the Kitona theme I emphasized strongly that if Adoula refused to discuss detailed measures of integration Tshombe would again be in a position to win the psychological battle. Just as he might have done had Kitona meeting broken off at midnight, Tshombe could claim he had been ready for wide-ranging talk but GOC refused. Adoula said there was too much concern for psychology in dealing with Tshombe. It was time to find out whether Tshombe would or would not integrate.

I urged that if Adoula had any other course of action in mind it was absolutely imperative that record show that GOC had made a supreme effort to negotiate. I reminded him of reports of Tshombe's heavy preparation for meeting, his intention hold numerous press conferences, and presence of journalists in his retinue.

To get at relation between negotiations and ANC campaign, I asked if it were true that Léopoldville troops had re-entered Kongolo. Adoula brightened at thought but disclaimed that ANC would attack Kongola or Katanga.

I asked what was his plan. Adoula said they wished to occupy areas with fighting and that in these limited areas ANC might call on gendarmerie to lay down arms or to give them to UN. Gendarmerie would be free to return to their homes.

And if they refused, I asked. Then said Adoula, question of legitimate defense might arise.

I confessed I found it hard to distinguish line between defense and offense in such an hypothesis.

I asked if Adoula was working on position papers with UN. He replied that number of his helpers were working with Khiari, Chatti and others.

I took occasion to say I much regretted tension between Adoula and UN and said latter was GOC's main support and its withdrawal would mean chaos. Adoula hoped this UN support would be made clearer. He said he was drafting letter to UN asking it to make its mission more precise. He then complained (much for rhetorical effect) that UN had published correspondence with Tshombe re guarantees5 without consulting him. I said this was probably an innocent error and only intention was to show unreasonableness of Tshombe's demands. Adoula said UN had no right to say it would guarantee Tshombe safety whether or not GOC did and then to publish such a letter without asking him.

Finally Adoula said he was prepared to listen to anything Tshombe had to say. He said his heart "did not exactly flutter" at anticipation of positive results. He would however negotiate hard.

Comment: Although above conversation contained some of more unreasonable remarks Adoula has yet made, I did not find it as discouraging as other recent talks with him re Tshombe meeting. His mood was relaxed and he seemed not particularly disturbed at my identifying some of his points as mere bargaining counters.

Following meeting I learned that Adoula planned Coq trip which he had not told me about. Gardiner tells me he had actually encouraged Adoula to go because of dangerous discontent in provinces and fact provincial officials and Governors at Coq had summoned him. Trip might also reinforce Adoula's position as spokesman of other provinces. It also enables Adoula to be out of town at moment Tshombe arrives. This gesture may be poorly calculated but I do not think it will cause Tshombe to walk out. Adoula wants to underscore that Tshombe did not confirm his arrival to him. Doubtless also he wants to show that Tshombe is no more important than other five provincial presidents.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–1562. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to USUN, Elisabethville, London, Paris, and Brazzaville.

2 As on the source text.

3 Tshombe had told Gardiner in a note verbale of March 5 that he would leave Elisabethville for Léopoldville on March 15. (U.N. doc. S/5053/Add.9/Section XI; also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 840–841)

4 Not found.

5 The correspondence with Tshombe is printed in U.N. doc. S/5053/Add.9; a March 1 letter from Gardiner to Tshombe and a March 6 letter from Rolz-Bennett to Tshombe are also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 840–842.

215. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 215. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, March 24, 1962, noon.

2417. Adoula/Tshombe Talks.2 Both Adoula and Tshombe sides insist that rupture has not occurred. Show-down nevertheless at hand. Adoula plans declare his position on radio or at Parliamentary ceremony today. Tshombe engaged in writing draft which could be valedictory or detailed statement Katanga position as requested by Adoula. Tshombe has not requested aircraft and Gardiner is determined to delay as much as possible in acceding to any such request.

Adoula will inform country and Parliament that Tshombe refuses to agree that he has full powers to negotiate. As I understand it he will also say that he is prepared to submit his government to vote of confidence in Parliament.

In view reliable reports reaching us of impasse in talks I arranged with considerable difficulty to see first Bomboko and then Adoula around 8 p.m. last night. Kamitatu was present at latter conversation, Bomboko joined us about half way through and Kimbimbi and Chatti intermittently present as they worked on draft Adoula speech. Gardiner later saw Tshombe.

I asked both Adoula and Bomboko information on rupture report. I stated that no matter what Adoula objectives were in talks they were bound to be favored by persevering. We were particularly anxious that the GOC case be well documented for public and for record. Tshombe should not be allowed, as he might have done at Kitona, to declare he had been ready to discuss all measures of practical integration but GOC abstained. I said that from what we knew of Tshombe's position on economic matters, Adoula case was certainly not any less convincing or constructive. Whether or not agreement was reached, Adoula could only gain by having issues discussed and inviting public comparison.

Emphasized as strongly as I could that if GOC meditated any new line of conduct or recourse to direct measures it must show that it had been patient in negotiation even beyond reasonable expectations. I pointed out that fact that Tshombe came to Léopoldville and that he had swallowed a number of stiff Adoula requirements with respect to meeting might indicate he was more flexible than in past. At any rate he had acquired leg-up in public opinion stakes.

In earlier meeting with Bomboko, I told him I knew GOC "air force" had broken down through failure of pilots to fly and failure of maintenance. Said that ANC now had 4,000 men left hanging in north Katanga without means of support. GOC would be in bad position if hostilities resumed.

(Bomboko's responses were later reiterated by Adoula not deal separately with them.)

Adoula was courteous and correct but assumed tone of someone addressing public meeting. This partly for effect on Kamitatu but probably was preview of speech he plans to make over radio. He began his remarks with rhetorical claim that US and UN were in final analysis aiding Tshombe.

Adoula rejected with vigor idea that a rupture had occurred. Claimed our source was Mobutu who had no right make such statement. He said after experience of Kitona he was obliged to insist that Tshombe declare whether he could or could not speak with full authority for Katanga. In six days of talks Tshombe had refused to declare himself. He had finally submitted a paper which reaffirmed that Katanga Assembly would have to ratify his acts and moreover made false claims that fundamental law made this requirement. Yesterday Tshombe had gone so far as to declare that Katanga was an independent state and he spoke as head of an independent state negotiating with the head of another state. Nevertheless, Léopoldville delegation had been willing (illogically) to proceed on basis of last Katanga Assembly resolution which recognizes Kitona3 and [garble] forthcoming that Tshombe's statement of mandate. Adoula had moreover invited Tshombe to present in writing or orally his full detailed position even while constitutional point remained unsettled (this is formula we discussed with Gardiner). To date Tshombe had failed to do so. Adoula now feared that any moment he would be sent for by his own Parliament who he implied would censure his conduct.

Adoula then declared US was aiding Tshombe because in effect it and UN prevented ANC from acquiring air force, did nothing to hinder Tshombe, and in fact free world press wrote nothing critical of Tshombe's acquisition of such a force nor of his methods. He complained UN not only did not carry out its duties under mandate but prevented him from carrying out his. Tshombe was being reinforced all time even during negotiations and nothing done to stop or condemn him. This could not continue and Adoula had to do something "even if he had to turn to Satan himself." (I do not believe he has made any overtures to Satan.)

Kamitatu and Bomboko added their own expressions of disappointment at failure UN to support policy central government.

In reply I stated wholly incorrect that nothing being done to stop or arraign Tshombe. Very special effort had been made by US as they well knew to acquaint world public with issues of Katanga secession. As to Katanga aircraft purchases we tried to curb these. Success incomplete because not all Western powers had full understanding of situation nor means of stopping shipment. Publicity on these purchases had also been developed but was hampered by fact much of it gained from intelligence sources.

It was mere "facon de parler" to say we were supporting Tshombe and not aiding GOC. US had after all supported Assembly resolution, supplied sinews of December action, had continued and would continue to aid GOC. We had done all this at cost of some strain on our alliances.

We continued extensive diplomatic campaign to mobilize most effective pressures on Tshombe which were economic. We had hope of cutting deeply into his revenues and his capabilities.

I expressed grave concern at GOC relations with UN. Breach between GOC and UN or withdrawal UN would not only be fatal for Congo but possibly for UN and for those small nations who placed particular reliance in it. Congo example was capital [crucial?] for Africa.

I then developed importance of bond issue now pending4 and its influence for caution in UN decisions at this time. (Although GOC meditating their contribution to bond issue this seemed first time it had occurred to them this was factor affecting UN actions. Point seemed impress them.)

As to US denial of air force we had never (as Adoula contended) said we were against air force. We continued believe Congo should have small effective force developed in cooperation with UN but not under latter's command. It should start with school and training planes and eventually develop transport capability but no mercenary pilots. (This provoked some hair-splitting discussion role UN in relation to air force.) Pointed out press stories on abortive Bohulu mission were GOC leaks. This one more evidence great need for Congo Embassy in Washington which should have handled matter more effectively. Embassy also needed in public opinion matters.

I touched on Adoula's ill-timed visit to Coquilhatville and regretted we had not been informed in time to give press full story. This had given Tshombe psychological advantage (Adoula and Bomboko so that fault in different ways on this one and latter murmured this was fault GOC "Information Service").

Bringing conversation back to course of talks stated my understanding there was no rupture, that door still open. GOC spokesman said there was adjournment and no rupture. It appeared to be in effect up to Tshombe.

In reading foregoing, point for point give and take sounds more heated than it was. Discussion was tense but friendly. Congolese enjoy this kind of debate.

Gardiner earlier saw Tshombe. Told latter he would cut sorry figure if meeting broke down because Tshombe could not speak for Katanga or admitted he unable influence Katanga decisions. Told Tshombe it was up to him to take initiative tomorrow, i.e. 25th, in requesting new session. Tshombe told Gardiner he would do so. Gardiner confirms that Tshombe made no request for transport back to Elisabethville.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–2462. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, Elisabethville, Paris, and Brazzaville.

2 Talks between a Congolese delegation headed by Adoula and a Katangan delegation headed by Tshombe were held March 18–April 16 and May 24–June 26. For a summary, see Gardiner's report of June 27 to Thant (U.N. doc. S/5053/Add.10); also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 863–869.

3 Reference is to a resolution adopted on February 15 by the Katangan provincial assembly, which accepted the Kitona Declaration of December 21 as a "potential basis of discussion" and authorized the Katangan Government to establish contact with the central government "with a view to ensuring a solution in the spirit of the draft declaration." For text, see U.N. doc. S/5053/Add.8/Annex I; also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 836–837.

4 President Kennedy's request for congressional authority to purchase U.N. bonds up to $100 million was pending before Congress. For text of his January 30 message to Congress, requesting authority to purchase the bonds, see ibid., pp. 90–92. For text of U.N. Resolution 1739 (XVI), adopted by the General Assembly on December 20, 1961, which authorized the Secretary-General to issue bonds up to $US 200 million, see ibid., 1961, pp. 111–113.

216. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 216. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, March 24, 1962, 5:01 p.m.

2467. From the Acting Secretary. Tshombe-Adoula talks not going well and prospects successful outcome appear poor.

We foresee dire consequences if these negotiations fail. It clear from developments prior to talks that Adoula considers he must resort to other means than UN, e.g. bilateral military requests to Africans, Belgians, if, after eight months in office, he unable deliver on cardinal point his program, which is reintegration Katanga. We anticipate that if talks fail, in addition to endangering Adoula, we will be confronted by demands from Soviets and radical Afro-Asians for forceful UN action to reintegrate Katanga. This will put UN in middle of contest between supporters radical action and Western members who will be unable agree to use of UN forces for this purpose. The Congo, the US, and the UN can only suffer severe damage in the process.

There is, therefore, critical need assure that these talks do not break down, or if they do, to provide for quick remedial measures which will prevent irreparable damage and make clear to Tshombe that his foot-dragging has been counter-productive.

We have considered numerous alternatives including renewed effort sell comprehensive program re Congo army, greatly stepped up UN economic and technical assistance program and logistic support for ANC in North Katanga. But, although all these measures believed desirable and will be pressed, they would not be adequate. Only alternative we find which likely meet minimum needs of situation is to take decision now on specific steps which would be taken to restore legality in connection foreign exchange and tax proceeds Katangan exports if Léopoldville talks do not produce results at least in these areas. So far, our efforts to prevail upon UMHK to do the necessary in this respect have failed. Remaining possibility (Stage III (2) of economic pressure program, Deptel 1648 to USUN)2 which we see would be for GOC give notice that henceforth all exports from the Congo will be contingent upon prior payment of taxes and foreign exchange proceeds to GOC. In this connection, GOC would station appropriate officials on railway in Elisabethville, which already under UNOC control, to enforce application GOC customs and foreign exchange legislation. Products from Jadotville and Kolwezi could still be exported westward through Angola, but production those cities require sulphuric acid which manufactured from zinc ore mined at Kipushi. Accordingly, GOC officials at Elisabethville could control most UMHK exports. Obviously GOC personnel, who would give all necessary orders, would require protection against Katangans, and UNOC would assume responsibility for assuring their protection.

We recognize that such move could involve renewed violence in Elisabethville since it would hit Tshombe where it hurts—in the pocketbook. We believe UN mandate covers this type assistance to GOC (Deptel 1818 to USUN).3 Onus for any use force would clearly rest on Katangans since UN role would be limited to self-defense and providing protection for GOC officials in exercise their legitimate functions. Doubt Katangans would react against UMHK, which would be acting under compulsion. Real object of exercise, however, would be to let Tshombe and UMHK know such decision has been taken as indication seriousness which UN and US attach to meaningful progress on reintegration in hope this would serve as deterrent to failure negotiations between Tshombe and Adoula.

We recognize that once this made known to Tshombe UN would have be prepared follow through as situation required, for if Tshombe were to find that such threat had been merely bluff, this would be end any hope securing Katangan reintegration short of armed action by GOC with whatever outside support it could muster. In this connection we also recognize that UN would not undertake such commitment without advance assurance it could depend on full US backing including airlift support within Congo in event UN attacked again by Katangans. We recognize there is calculated risk in embarking on such course but considerable degree of risk is acceptable in order avoid much more serious damage which we convinced will ensue if Katanga-GOC impasse and present deterioration situation permitted continue.

You requested approach SYG soonest describing ingredients of problem as we see them and soliciting UN agreement that it would cooperate with GOC in protection its customs officials as envisaged above if situation requires GOC assuming customs functions in Elizabethville. Suggest you draw fully on rationale as developed, indicating our full awareness implications such step and that our request based on decision give full support to UN in such action.

USUN should telephone Brussels as soon as appointment arranged with Thant or Bunche so discussion can be held with Spaak simultaneously with your discussions in New York.

Once UN agrees, Gardiner should be informed soonest and given discretion, in consultation with Gullion, to let this be known to Tshombe during negotiations if it is agreed that revealing such decision to Tshombe required in order assure that negotiations with Adoula do not conclude without agreement on division foreign exchange and tax revenue or if such agreement not promptly implemented. Gullion might also wish use info with Adoula to encourage him be conciliatory.

For Brussels: We recognize effect this proposal could have on US-Belgian relations, once word of it becomes public knowledge. Believe it specially important therefore that we take Spaak into our confidence. Ambassador should therefore see Spaak simultaneously with USUN approach to SYG and inform him in all frankness our rationale for this decision. In doing so, you should stress to Spaak we grateful for his most helpful message to Tshombe just prior to beginning of current Léopoldville talks and other efforts he has made persuade Tshombe re-integrate. However, his efforts and ours combined have not been successful. You may find it useful remind Spaak our continuing efforts prepare UN and GOC acceptance return of more Belgians to Congo.

For London: Dept will inform British Ambassador simultaneously with approach to SYG.

Hope both British and Belgian Govts will renew pressure on Tshombe in light foregoing which hopefully will lead him to reach agreement with Adoula on division revenues and thus avoid necessity UN taking action envisaged.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–2462. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Buffum; cleared by Ford, Wallner, in draft by Tasca, by EUR, and by McGhee, who cleared it with McGeorge Bundy by telephone; and approved and signed by Ball. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, and London.

2 Telegram 1098 to Léopoldville (Document 179) was repeated to USUN as telegram 1648.

3 Dated January 11. (Department of State, Central Files, 870G.00/12–2861)

217. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 217. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, March 26, 1962, 7 p.m.

3168. Congo. Department telegram 2467.2

1. Stevenson called on Thant and Bunche this a.m. and gave them contents reference telegram (in addition we gave Bunche summary in writing at his request of Department's tax collection proposal). Thant and Bunche both were sympathetic to tax collection proposal and its implications; Thant said it was very much in keeping with his views; said he wished send idea to Gardiner for his comments before giving decision. Thant and Bunche were particularly interested to hear assurances that US did not see proposal as bluff and that US would support UN action along lines proposed, even if force required.

2. Thant felt there was time to get Gardiner's views before taking final decision in view of latest information from Gardiner which indicated talks, while difficult, did not appear verge of breakdown. Bunche reported Gardiner had been in communication with Tshombe orally and in writing over week-end. Gardiner received assurance from Tshombe he would not maintain his insistence on Katangan Parliamentary ratification for any agreement with Adoula. Tshombe also sent Gardiner note yesterday saying he would exercise great patience in talks which he expected go on for some time. Tshombe suggested he and Adoula meet alone without advisors. (Bunche subsequently informed us Adoula invited Tshombe for private talk 6 p.m. Monday.)

3. Thant asked Stevenson for estimation of impact on UN bond issue in Congress if UN assisted tax collection in Elisabethville to point where fighting occurred. Bunche noted UN not even responding to Katangan road blocks in Elisabethville for fear of upsetting prospects of bond issue. Stevenson said he thought it important for UN to act effectively; ineffectiveness in long run be more damaging to Congressional opinion than effective action in Elisabethville. Stevenson said he would be in Washington this afternoon but will return New York late tomorrow and would give Thant his impressions of bond situation and likely Congressional reaction to enforced tax collection in Elisabethville.

4. Stevenson noted we intend discuss tax collection contingency plan with Belgian Government in view of implications for UMHK. After some discussion Thant and Stevenson agreed it would be preferable not discuss matter with Belgian Government (although we realize this may already have been done)3 until SYG had Gardiner's reaction.

5. Bunche said GOC tax collection in Katanga would logically lead to GOC collectors in Kolwezi and Jadotville and then UN would have to station forces there to protect GOC personnel. We agreed sooner or later way would have to be found to check on shipments out of Kolwezi and Jadotville but effective action in first instance could be taken at Elisabethville alone through control of sulphuric acid from Kipushi. (Bunche also noted first reaction of Katangans to proposal likely to be suggestion GOC start collecting taxes in territory it already controlled.)

Plimpton

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–2662. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and Paris.

2 Document 216.

3 Telegram 1799 from Brussels, March 27, reported that MacArthur had presented the tax collection proposal to Spaak, who indicated that he did not believe it was possible to agree in advance to a specific course of action and urged patience with respect to the Adoula-Tshombe talks. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–2762)

218. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 218. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, March 30, 1962, 2:58 p.m.

1676. From the Secretary. Deptels 16502 and 1657.3 We note UN has given Gardiner authority (USUN 477 to Leo)4 communicate substance program set forth Deptel 1650 to Tshombe and Adoula if he believes such mention would create useful pressure. Dept wishes stress that actual implementation this program by UN would be a second step and we hope that knowledge UN prepared take such step would act as deterrent and that measures this type will never have to be taken. Per Deptel 1650 you have standby authority use this information if, after consultation with Gardiner, you believe this necessary assure negotiations do not break down. If it necessary convey knowledge possible UN–GOC cooperation re tax collection in Elisabethville to Tshombe; this should be described to him as type of situation which we feel would be forced on UN and US if negotiated settlement on Katangan integration not achieved. In considering whether convey this to Tshombe and Adoula you should be guided by following considerations: 1. Our objective is achieve peaceful reintegration Katanga and sole purpose this standby authority is assure that present efforts achieve negotiated settlement do not break down since failure of talks would probably have fatal effect on chances achieving peaceful reintegration.

2. Since our ability support implementation such measure would be affected by attitudes legislative branch this government and of our allies (with whom consultations have already begun in a general way) we will need as much advance warning as possible if you and Gardiner decide to use this information. Moreover, circumstances surrounding your decision use this information should be conducive to favorable outcome of these consultations. That is, it must be possible make a good case that this information was used only as last resort to assure that negotiations between Adoula and Tshombe did not fail. In this connection, it particularly important Adoula establish a clearly conciliatory posture in negotiations, which it should be emphasized he can do without prejudicing an early liquidation Katangan secession.

For USUN: Suggest you convey sense foregoing to Thant or Bunche soonest expressing hope this consistent with instructions to Gardiner.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–3062. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Ford, Buffum, and Vance; cleared by Williams, Wallner, Tyler, and McGhee; and approved by Rusk. Also sent to USUN and repeated to Brussels and London.

2 Telegram 2467 to USUN (Document 216) was repeated to Léopoldville as telegram 1650.

3 Telegram 1657 to Léopoldville, March 26, also sent to London as telegram 5149, summarized a conversation that day in which McGhee briefed Ormsby-Gore on the tax collection proposal. The telegram concluded with the statement that if the United Nations approved the proposal, and if it was necessary to assure a satisfactory conclusion of the Adoula-Tshombe talks, information concerning it could be conveyed to Tshombe by Gardiner. Because the question of U.S. purchase of the U.N. bond issue was expected to reach the Senate floor that week, however, it was preferable to delay public knowlege of the plan. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/3–2662)

4 Dated March 17; also sent to the Department as telegram 3187. (Ibid., 770G.00/3–1762)

219. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 219. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, April 18, 1962, 11 p.m.

2621. Reference: Deptel 1729; Embtel 2539.2

1. We would not have recommended introduction of tax collection plan in talks until Adoula had introduced a respectable proposal which would win him back the advantage. We hope document he has now submitted3 can at least be modified through negotiation to fit this requirement. Without such document I fear Adoula will not have established a record in these talks which would justify us in recommending this bold plan nor UN in running risks to back GOC in enforcing it. Adoula proposal leaves much to be desired but it does make possible meaningful negotiation.

2. One point I was making in reftel is that Adoula's tough line in talks, his turn to more extremist advice (e.g., Kamitatu, and Casablanca Africans, Indian Charge), the aloof act he put on for US, his quasi-ultimatum to UN, his own state of nervous frustration and irritability, in fact, the whole trend adverse to our policy which set in after Adoula's return to Congo, all proceed from one main source—his wrong-headed notion that US and UN (which he considers as one) have no longer the will, the strategy, nor the means to help him unify Congo.

3. No one has been able tell Adoula how or when unification could be accomplished without force. He himself has no reliable force and UN will not let him employ what he has. Meanwhile he has an exaggerated idea of Tshombe's current build-up under screen of negotiations. Even if he reached agreement with Tshombe past experience indicates to him that Tshombe would abide by it only so long as he obliged to by preference if not use of force.

4. Adoula has heard reports of economic pressure on Tshombe but nothing has materialized. He had hopes of the Ste. Generale and Union Miniere but these have been totally deceived.

5. He knows that strong UN action in December was only made possible by Katangese provocation. He cannot count on recurrence of this same set of circumstances. As time drifts by he sees Tshombe playing for bankruptcy of UN and on recognition out of pure apathy of de facto independence of Katanga.

6. Adoula feels he has failed his mandate from Lovanium Parliament and his relations with West may be responsible. In his frustration he may be required to heed persistent but hitherto ineffective voices which claim that US engineered Kitona and get Tshombe off the hook; that UN hold fire in December was converted to permanent cease-fire by apathy and division in US; that UNOC under Gardiner resists will of UN and that Gardiner is controlled by UK.

7. As his discouragement deepens, the negative thinking which Adoula would easily reject if he were in a healthier frame of mind gains more hold on him. He might be led into rash acts. He might at the least yield to Soviet suggestion for Security Council meeting to explore alleged failure of UN executive action.

8. When Adoula is himself, he knows well and recognizes false premises of all this thinking, is grateful for US support and recognizes his dependence on UN. Moreover, without rehearsing it here, Adoula's basic case remains much better than Tshombe's, if only he would make it and stop blotting his copy book by string of errors like those recently committed in his name by Kamitatu.4 Adoula represents a centripetal force in Congo, working for result which is in US interest, whereas centrifugal forces which would be set in motion by Katanga separatism would only profit those who are hoping this fly-wheel will break up.

9. It was to give Adoula some ideas that US and he still had some cards to play that I wanted to tell him now about tax plan. I have given him strong hints about it. He at least knows US would back some kind of economic pressure to be exercised by GOC but unless he knows more about it he will regard it as one more illusory hope.

10. In my opinion evidence of US support at this time is more important in a wider connection than the outcome of present round of talks with Tshombe. As for talks themselves, I do not now believe that knowledge of new factor will cause Adoula to kick his ante any higher than it already is. At least we would be in better position to advise him and keep him from going off deep end.

11. Department asks where Adoula and Tshombe positions might meet. I told Adoula if federal govt controlled army, customs, money, foreign affairs, he had the essentials. He agreed but I would not pin hopes to this formula. I suggest that we begin to envisage consequence of failure to agree, which side we want to win, how to make that side win and how to come out on that side.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–1862. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to London, Paris, Brussels, and USUN.

2 Telegram 2539 from Léopoldville, April 8, reported that efforts to promote meaningful discussion between Adoula and Tshombe were so far unavailing. Gullion thought Adoula did not believe Tshombe would negotiate seriously and had no confidence in U.S. or U.N. support for unification of the Congo. He suggested telling Adoula of the tax collection proposal as a means of encouraging him to be constructive. (Ibid., 770G.00/4–862) Telegram 1729 to Léopoldville, April 10, expressed concern that this might have the opposite effect. It suggested informing Adoula of the substance of the plan but indicating that it could not be implemented unless he made serious efforts to probe Tshombe's willingness to negotiate. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 2605 from Léopoldville, April 17, reported a conversation the previous evening between Gullion and Adoula during which Adoula gave Gullion a copy of a draft agreement that he had given to Tshombe. (Ibid., 770G.00/4–1762) Telegram 2606 of the same date transmitted the text of the draft agreement. (Ibid.)

4 Kamitatu had reportedly recommended in a letter to Adoula that Tshombe shouldbe kept in protective custody in Léopoldville until the Katanga Assembly ended its forthcoming session (Telegrams 2513 from Léopoldville and 1466 from Elisabethville, both April 5; ibid.,770G00/4-562)

220. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 220. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, April 20, 1962, 9:50 p.m.

1801. Dept has been considering courses of action we should now adopt in order regain forward motion with regard reintegration Congo following airport incident2 and recess Adoula-Tshombe talks. Hard realities that moderate control of government must be continued and re-fragmentation of Congo avoided have not changed nor has need for prompt reintegration Katanga without which we are likely to see loss of first two goals. An opening has reappeared which the Bloc might exploit to tear Congo apart once again. It is most regrettable that while UNOC and US were attempting effect reintegration of Katanga through negotiation and improve GOC public posture, GOC by injudicious action has placed itself in bad light and imperiled future negotiations. At same time Tshombe has emerged from incident and negotiations with enhanced bargaining power.

Urgent need therefore exists to get GOC back on rails, improve its public posture. Main trouble in dealing with GOC is that it no longer believes UN policy backed by US of peaceful integration can bring about reintegration; hence its propensity to act intemperately and toy with idea of asking for UN withdrawal, substituting bilateral aid.

Dept is concerned that in their present mood Congolese leaders may take further rash steps which could exacerbate already difficult situation. We have report of unestablished reliability Adoula planning Moscow visit in May and we anticipate Soviets will react promptly to current stalemate with strong statements in support GOC, castigation UN and US as neo-colonialist supporters of Tshombe and possible moves for UN withdrawal which could involve Security Council.

Cleveland and Fredericks plan to discuss with Bunche and Gardiner in New York April 23 or 24 courses of action UN and US should now pursue. Among other courses being considered is informing Adoula of tax and foreign exchange collection threat coupled with explanation that posture in which GOC has now put itself would make this kind of support next to impossible for us to extend unless GOC posture basically reoriented. Would also appreciate your assessment of possibility for UN, or US with UK and Belgium if possible playing more prominent mediatory role such as development of fairly precise formula (possibly Gardiner paper) for reintegration of Katanga into workable central govt for presentation perhaps by African state or UN to both parties. This approach is based on belief that Bantu palaver between two parties is unlikely to result in agreement and that situation is likely to continue to deteriorate. Feasibility of an approach by US–UK and Belgium would depend, of course, on agreement on contents of formula and willingness all three countries to give formula their full support.

Urtel 26213 will be very helpful in these discussions and Dept would appreciate receiving urgently any additional views and suggestions you wish have considered in upcoming meeting.4

Fully appreciate risks in your lecturing Adoula in absence specifics which would restore credibility of US and UN expressions of support. However, any immediate action you can take which would be calculated prevent GOC taking further steps militating against early resumption negotations would be highly desirable.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–2061. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Vance; cleared by Fredericks, in draft by Burdett, and in substance by Wallner; and approved by McGhee. Repeated to USUN, Paris, London, and Brussels.

2 On April 18, while Adoula was away on a short trip to Coquilhatville, Tshombe arranged with U.N. officials to visit Elisabethville. Congolese forces at the airport prevented the departure of the U.N. plane with Tshombe aboard. Numerous discussions ensued, with Ambassador Gullion reinforcing the efforts of U.N. representatives to persuade Congolese officials to adhere to previous Congolese assurances to the United Nations that there would be no interference with Tshombe's freedom of movement if he came to Léopoldville for talks. Late in the evening of April 18, opposition to the plane's departure was withdrawn, and Tshombe flew to Elisabethville. (Telegrams 2616, 2620, 2622, and 2624–2626 from Léopoldville and telegram 2728 to USUN, all April 18; ibid., 770G.00/4–1862)

3 Document 219.

4 Telegram 2670 from Léopoldville, April 22, supported the suggestion in the second sentence in the preceding paragraph but warned that the Congolese would reject any joint U.S.-U.K.-Belgian proposal and that such a jointly-sponsored proposal would destroy U.S. influence with the Adoula government. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–2262)

221. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 221. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, April 24, 1962, 8 p.m.

3515. Congo. Cleveland, Yost, Fredericks, and Vance met with Bunche and Gardiner for review of Congo situation and consideration of next steps. Gardiner, in response to question from Cleveland, said he expected Adoula–Tshombe talks to recommence soon. He said Tshombe had conveyed his intention to return to Leo Apr 30 and he (Gardiner) had sent letter to Tshombe welcoming decision. Gardiner, in accordance with Tshombe's request, reaffirmed UN's guarantees for Tshombe's security. Gardiner said his reply had been sent to Adoula before it went to Tshombe and Adoula had approved it; Gardiner considered this favorable sign. However, he noted Adoula making speech Tuesday which would no doubt cover airport incident.

Yost asked what basis would be for talks when they began again. Gardiner presumed they would be on basis of paper Adoula gave Tshombe just before they parted.2 Tshombe has said he would offer: (A) comments, (B) amendments, (C) and counter proposals. Gardiner expressed opinion Adoula paper gave provinces a little less autonomy than Loi Fondamentale, but made clear his view paper was useful opening bid and had apparently been taken as such by Tshombe.

Cleveland asked if paper containing proposals from third party might be useful at this point as basis for negotiation. Gardiner said he did not think Congolese on either side would accept it. He noted extremely negative reaction to proposal agenda Gullion had offered earlier,3 attributing to that incident the temporary cooling of Adoula-US relations. Bunche also emphasized difficulty of pushing Congolese and said pressure only produced explosive reaction.

Cleveland then asked if this meant present situation was to go on indefinitely. Gardiner replied it could not be allowed to. Bunche stressed that Gardiner would not let talks collapse without intervening; but he would have to be judge of his tactics and timing so that his intervention would have effect of keeping talks going and not producing blowup.

Yost asked Gardiner's estimation of domestic pressures on Adoula growing out of lengthening inconclusive negotiations. Gardiner noted that negotiations almost paralyze GOC administration. He named large number of GOC leaders who are kept away from administrative duties by participating in talks. (He said GOC thinking of dividing team in two parts which would alternate; but Adoula himself would have to continue be present for all talks.) Gardiner turned to difficulties Kamitatu is causing for Adoula and to some extent for UN. He noted Kamitatu's practice of taking decisions about which Adoula was not informed and mentioned as examples arrests of trade union leaders and journalists, closing of daily papers, airport incident, etc.

He said Kamitatu is trying build party which theoretically is to be loyal to Adoula but Gardiner speculated it might turn out to be loyal to Kamitatu. He said Kamitatu has developed trouble with the "Leo group" who support Adoula.

Gardiner said there are two theories on political situation in Congo; one is that negotiations are going about as might be expected and will be successful ultimately; the other is that Tshombe simply stalling and preparing himself militarily. Gardiner did not commit himself as to which theory he held but he tended toward view Tshombe stalling.

Cleveland raised possibility of using tax collection scheme to get out of impasse. Gardiner replied this might be "waking the lion" and "if we wake him up I would hope the gun will be ready." Bunche said during Gardiner's talks here UN planning for various courses (A) if the talks succeed and (B) what UN would face in Leo and Eville if attempt at reconciliation collapses. Bunche said Gardiner had wanted to come to New York to get advice on contingency plans.

Gardiner and Bunche both expressed view tax collection scheme ran danger of starting train of events requiring extensive military action. While UN could hold its position in Eville under attack, it might also be attacked in other points in north Katanga. What would UN do? What, for example, would be limits on its action to stop troop movements from other parts of Katanga toward Eville?

In response to questions by Fredericks, Bunche noted reports of continuing buildup of mercenaries and military equipment by Katanga. As example, he referred to discovery of route for transporting mercenaries from Usumbura by barge and air to Abercorn in Rhodesia and then to Ndola and Katanga. He concluded if only small part of reports are true, Katanga is stronger now than in December.

Vance asked for Gardiner's estimation of Adoula's feeling toward political trends. Gardiner said Adoula feels he is on rock with Tshombe and tide is rising; Tshombe has a boat and he doesn't. When Cleveland said it did not appear Adoula trying for deal with Tshombe, Gardiner noted great difficulties of negotiating with Tshombe and great skill required to make any progress. Gardiner commented if Adoula knew of tax collection proposal this might harden his negotiating positions. Vance asked Gardiner what he would expect Adoula's position to be if Adoula were told of tax collection scheme with force behind it, but at same time were told scheme not available unless Adoula took certain positions in negotiations with Tshombe, thereby forcing Tshombe either to accept or reject reasonable offer. Gardiner replied Adoula would first have to get cabinet acceptance of proposal he would put to Tshombe; second, Adoula should not be given such proposal unless it were genuine and not bluff.

Cleveland commented we would need to know whether tactic was good one before we could go through procedure of taking decision to back it. Gardiner replied he believed if proposal were really true, if it was not bluff and therefore would lead to integration of Katanga, Adoula would do anything to carry it out; but if bluff, and Adoula made compromise offer to Tshombe which was rejected and nothing happened, results would be disastrous. Gardiner expressed view Adoula would make all reasonable concessions to prove that Tshombe is not really willing to integrate; but Adoula would only do this if he were assured it was not waste of time and at end there was backing for firm measures. Gardiner also referred to natural time limit to negotiations; when rainy season ended, movement of gendarmerie which had vehicles, could lead to clashes.

As conversation ended, Cleveland noted he and Gardiner would be traveling to Leo on same plane and could continue discussion.

Plimpton

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–2462. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and Paris.

2 See footnote 2, Document 219.

3 Reference is apparently to a proposed agenda that Gullion had sent to Adoula via Gardiner. Gullion transmitted it in telegram 2539; see footnote 1, Document 219.

222. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 222. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, April 26, 1962.

3542. Congo. Cleveland, Yost, Fredericks, Sisco and Bartlett met with Thant, Bunche, Narasimhan and Stavropoulos yesterday (Tuesday) afternoon. Cleveland said we wished follow up on conversations of previous day (Monday) with Bunche and Gardiner (ourtel 3515).2

Re problems raised by Gardiner concerning use of customs collection scheme, Cleveland said we had considered this matter further and had reached fol tentative conclusions: it was very important to get Adoula-Tshombe talks off dead center since time working on Tshombe's side in indefinite continuation of negots. Therefore someone, presumably UN, must play more vigorous mediating role. Moment may come before long when Gardiner could usefully enter with formula consisting of points about where negots should come out. These would cover both financial and political-constitutional essentials.

Cleveland recalled Bunche and Gardiner had asked us what U.S. position would be after sensible mediation proposal put forward which Adoula accepted but Tshombe rejected and continued to stall. Cleveland said U.S. mood as fol: we think if sensible middle position was formulated and put on table (and perhaps eventually publicized) and Adoula indicated willingness accept it while Tshombe refused, U.S. would be prepared to back UN customs collection scheme with all its implications. Obviously, he added, U.S. have to reserve final decision but at this point felt very strongly in that direction. Cleveland added time limit would need be put on negots, say June 15. He said we would be ready talk now with UK and Belgians and others to try to organize consensus behind such procedure. However, before we did that we would need UN's views on timing as well as content of proposed UN initiative. Cleveland observed there no use developing consensus unless UN willing play mediating role. Before Thant and others could comment fully, mtg had to terminate to enable Cleveland and Sisco (and Gardiner) to catch plane for Leo. However, Thant did indicate Cleveland's ideas compatible with his views, though he did not specifically say UN would assume more vigorous mediatory role Cleveland suggested. We suspect, in light yesterday's conversation with Bunche and Gardiner (USUN 3515), UN will await Gardiner's recommendations after resumption Adoula-Tshombe negots before determining if and when to take responsibility putting forward compromise formula.

Bunche reported on two developments since previous talks: (A) Adoula had made speech which Bunche considered quite conciliatory and moderate. He mentioned some of main points including Adoula's account of where talks now stand. (B) Tshombe's office has sent cable asking UN to take Mumba (phonetic) to Leo tomorrow to discuss arrangements for return of Tshombe. From these two developments Bunche considered outlook relatively hopeful for recommencing of negots, probably beginning next week.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4-2662. Confidential; Priority; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and Paris. The source text does not indicate the time of transmission; it was received at 4:10 p.m.

2 Document 221.

223. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 223. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, April 28, 1962, 12:35 p.m.

2982. Re Deptel 2800 USUN, rptd 2940 Brussels, 5709 London, 1815 Léopoldville.2 McGhee called in Belgian Ambassador Scheyven and British Minister Hood to outline US policy on Congo as set forth reftel.

McGhee opened by saying since we all three deeply involved in Congo we would like discuss future course events and receive Belgian and British ideas as to how we should proceed from here. McGhee stated we were discouraged as to progress of Adoula-Tshombe talks. Tshombe had said he would return to Léopoldville on May 3 but we have no indication that progress will be made when talks resume. In addition we are worried about courses of action Adoula Government might take to reintegrate Katanga. Adoula had already approached certain Afro-Asian states for possible assistance to reintegrate Katanga and to have UN mandate changed. This line of action could lead to unfavorable situation which could be exploited by Bloc. We had, moreover indications that Adoula may ask UN to leave the Congo and unconfirmed secret reports that he may visit Moscow in mid-May. Therefore, in view dangers facing us in Congo we should try map out new approach, injecting into Adoula-Tshombe discussions new element of more vigorous mediation by Gardiner between two sides if they do not soon reach agreement. U Thant and Gardiner expressed general agreement idea, in recent talks with Cleveland and Fredericks. Our concept is to try find middle ground which both Adoula and Tshombe might accept. This should include financial concessions by Tshombe on tax question balanced by certain constitutional guarantees to satisfy Tshombe as well as Adoula. Views Gardiner who following talks and has confidence both parties should have great weight. The U.S. would like to see what new ideas Gardiner might come up with when talks reconvene next week and discuss them with Belgians and British. However, we would not envisage joint demarches which would be counter productive. McGhee concluded statement by saying fact of meeting with Belgians and British should not become known and should be held very tightly. He then asked for British and Belgian views.

Scheyven indicated that on basis their information they not as pessimistic as U.S. Spaak felt that although it was clear talks had gone on a long time without agreement time not yet ripe to intervene on either side. Spaak also very much opposed to contingency tax collection plan believing that this would be spark which would set off hostilities. During recent talks with Bomboko in Brussels, Scheyven continued, Spaak had suggested to Bomboko that GOC pass a law specifying division of taxes between Central Government and provinces. Spaak felt that such a law might give UMHK better legal basis pay taxes Central Government and that the proposal itself might help in getting both Adoula and Tshombe down to specifics.

McGhee replied that we also thought that time was not yet quite ripe for injection of mediation role and that we plan to await further views of Gardiner. We do however have greater sense of urgency and feel that unless some progress made by mid June, Adoula might begin take some dangerous steps. We do not wish use tax collection scheme, except as last resort. We want exhaust every other approach before resorting to it, e.g., mediation and Spaak proposal. McGhee indicated Spaak proposal might be very useful in helping Adoula and Tshombe reach an agreement.

In response to McGhee's query as to British views, Hood replied he did not have London's assessment concerning deterioration described by McGhee but would request it. He was sure British policy unchanged. He would report to London on our suggestion for more active mediation in talks and personally thought Gardiner would be best candidate for role.

In response to questions concerning timing of consultation, McGhee replied: a) we wished begin consultation as soon as possible in Department on working level, perhaps by May 1, if Belgians and British could get preliminary views their Fon Offs by then including estimate present situation in Congo; b) in meantime British and Belgians could study Gardiner's paper3 [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified] c) once we have additional suggestions or new reports from Gardiner after resumption of talks, we would wish begin more detailed consultation; d) when proposals finally worked out for Gardiner to inject into talks, there might be consultation in Léopoldville between Gardiner and (separately) our three ambassadors, if necessary.

For Brussels and London:

Ambassador MacArthur and Embassy London should inform Spaak and British Fon Off of McGhee's talk with Scheyven and Hood, emphasizing our concern that continued lack of progress in talks increases domestic political pressures on Adoula, pushing him towards unilateral action. By bringing Belgians and British in on discussions at beginning and by asking for their thinking on possible outlines of an acceptable settlement between Adoula and Tshombe, we hope obtain if possible their concurrence US policy set forth reftel as well as their support of provisions of paper to be introduced by Gardiner when finally worked out, with corollary result their willingness to use their best efforts to make Tshombe agree to such provisions.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–2862. Confidential. Drafted by Andrews; cleared by Tasca, Burdett, and Wallner; and approved by McGhee. Also sent to London and repeated to Léopoldville, Paris, New Delhi, Elisabethville, and USUN.

2 Telegram 2800 to USUN, April 25, contained Cleveland's instructions for his meeting with U Thant reported in telegram 3515, Document 222. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–2562)

3 Reference is to a draft agreement transmitted in telegram 2553 from Léopoldville, April 10. (Ibid., 770G.00/4–1062)

224. Memorandum of Conversation 224. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, April 28, 1962, 3:30–5:15 p.m.

Prime Minister Macmillan's Visit to Washington, April 27–292

SUBJECT

Congo

PARTICIPANTS

U.S. The President

Under Secretary Ball

Ambassador Bruce

Mr. McGeorge Bundy, White House

Mr. Pierre Salinger, White House

Mr. William R. Tyler, Acting Assistant Secretary of State

Mrs. William C. Burdett, Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of State

Mr. Joseph Sweeney, BNA

British Prime Minister Macmillan

Sir Norman Brook, Secretary of the Cabinet

Ambassador Ormsby Gore

Sir Evelyn Shuckburgh, Deputy Under Secretary of State, Foreign Office

Mr. Harold Evans, Public Relations Adviser

Mr. M. A. M. Robb, Information Minister, British Embassy

Mr. John Thompson, First Secretary, British Embassy

Mr. Philip de Zulueta, Private Secretary to Prime Minister

Mr. Ball said that the Congo continued to cause us anxiety. We would like to approach the problem with the British and the Belgians. We hope that the discussions between Tshombe and Adoula would be resumed and that there might be some resolution. Otherwise the situation would deteriorate. There were strong pressures for military action on the part of the Afro-Asians and a weakening of the Adoula Government. We were less hopeful than we had been a month or so ago.

The President inquired what could be done outside the Congo. Tshombe was receiving reports from Katanga agents such as Streulens which encouraged him to wait. These reports said that the U.S. would not support another military operation. We should not look like we were prepared to use force when we were not, but if Tshombe believes that we would not then the pressures would be off. We should consider measures short of force.

Mr. Ball commented that he had the impression that the Union Miniere hopes for a white enclave in Katanga had been revived. We should make it clear that this was not possible. It would only invite chaos.

The President said that we should give high consideration next week to the Congo. He did not want matters to come to a military action. He wanted to avoid this. If necessary we would face up to it but it would be tough. We should get the Belgians in.

Ambassador Ormsby Gore remarked that the exertion of pressure depended largely on Belgium. The Prime Minister said it was quite a dilemma. The U.K. could not tolerate another military action but if Tshombe believes we would not use force, he would be under no pressure and would just stall. Relations between Belgium and Adoula were improving. Spaak was being quite helpful. We should try to work out an American-British-Belgian policy.3

The President asked whether it would be desirable to send someone to Brussels from here and London. He noted that the Prime Minister had said Britain could not support a military action. A substantial body of opinion here would not do so either, but if there is no military action why would Tshombe do the right thing? We needed some other form of pressure.

The Prime Minister remarked that he had talked to U Thant on the problem. The Acting Secretary General was very anxious to reduce the U.N. presence in the Congo.

The President asked what contribution Rhodesia could make, What are the pressure points on Tshombe? The Prime Minister thought that Adoula and Tshombe just did not like to agree. He did not see what the Union Miniere could do. We should exert pressure on both Adoula and Tshombe. The Belgians, Americans and British should find a reasonable settlement. It would be necessary to change the Loi Fondamentale to provide for a confederal not a unitary state. Britain had faced the same problem in Nigeria. If it had insisted on a unitary state there would have been trouble. [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified] The only hope is a confederal one but it is hard to see how this can be brought about now. One side is bound to the Loi Fondamentale, the other side has all the money.

Ambassador Ormsby Gore inquired whether Brussels was the right place rather than Washington to try to work out a plan.

The President asked whether we could have it understood that the Prime Minister and he felt that the Congo should receive great priority. The Prime Minister assented. Ambassador Ormsby Gore suggested that Secretary Rusk, Lord Home and Spaak agree at Athens4 on how to organize to attack the Congo problem. This was agreed to.

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2084. Secret. Drafted by Burdett and approved in the White House on May 4. The meeting was held at the White House.

2 Additional documentation on Macmillan's visit is ibid.

3 Stevenson had reported in telegram 3571 from USUN, April 27, that at dinner with Macmillan in New York on April 25 he had proposed "that U.S., UK and Belgium working together in full agreement and in pursuit of agreed plan of action could be far more effective in Congo and with Union Miniere. Prime Minister expressed lively interest in joint effort with Belgium to bring about early settlement of Katanga secession and indicated would discuss it with President in Washington." (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–2762)

4 A NATO Ministerial Meeting was to be held in Athens May 4–6.

225. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 225. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, April 29, 1962, noon.

2726. Cleveland accompanied by Ambassador had hour and half talk with Adoula April 28.2 Presented letter from President Kennedy (Deptel 1829)3 and affirmed US continued support of Adoula and opposition to Katanga secession. Adoula received President's letter with obvious gratification and read it most attentively.

Noting President's hope that progress could be accomplished by peaceful means and in conference, Adoula stated he had just received telegram from Tshombe confirming his return to Léopoldville on May 3. Adoula would reply proposing resumption of talks 1000 May 4.

Prime Minister launched into long, willfully imprecise, but nevertheless positive description of prospects in resumed negotiations. He was going to insist Tshombe present without delay a counter-proposal to GOC's draft conclusions. Adoula agreed GOC draft did not constitute his last words but was first offer which Tshombe should accept or modify paragraph by paragraph. Tshombe knew this but pretended not to.

Adoula tried feebly to tag Tshombe with responsibility for precipitating airport incident saying Tshombe had let him think he prepared resume talks April 21. Instead he had purposely tried to make demonstration of his return to Elisabethville. If he had only informed Adoula he could have left with no trouble.

Adoula thought talks could have positive result but insisted principle must be observed that Loi Fondamentale, whether good or bad, must be accepted as law until modified, as must be case with any law. Process of modification was really well in hand. He showed us very lengthy document which he said was draft constitution which Commission including Conakats had completed just before Tshombe arrival here. Tshombe had copy and knew very well it represented extensive modification Loi Fondamentale. Adoula did not, however, think it would be useful to discuss constitution in bilateral session with Tshombe. This was prerogative of Parliament; if he and Tshombe agreed on new constitution and Parliament failed to adopt it,where would Katanga problem be then? Moreover, when he dealt with Tshombe, Adoula claimed to feel presence of 5 other provincial presidents whose interests would be affected.

To suggestion that he seemed fairly optimistic, Adoula replied he was never optimistic but only skeptical in negotiation with Tshombe, he said Tshombe often seemed "not to exist" at conference table, letting others carry ball.

Adoula observed Kitona Accord had been useless since Tshombe seemed unwilling to take it as basis of discussion despite his own signature and Katangese ratification of Accord.

Adoula was skeptical re appropriateness for Congo of "reserve powers clause". He claimed there was large area of "shared powers" which could not accurately be defined and thus made it hard to envisage such article.

Asked re his parliamentary backing, Adoula did not reply directly. He intimated he had enough support but took occasion to stress necessity checking any agreements with other provincial presidents. He could not treat Katanga as special case.

Adoula was asked whether his reference in recent speech to assistance by other countries contemplated help outside UN framework. Adoula evaded definite answer. Observed that other countries from whom he had asked help were members of UN and had duty to make resolutions effective including channelling aid through UN. His appeal to them was to make resolutions work. He claimed he was waiting for precise account of attitude of Congo Advisory Committee.

Cleveland and Ambassador stressed importance of cooperation with UN, also fact that UN concept was important to US in support of Congo.

Adoula challenged US reps to suggest date by which results in negotiations might be expected. He warned these talks could not continue much longer without general disintegration of his position and what he called "positive actions and disagreeable surprises."

He did however stress his allegiance to UN, saying he would continue work through UN channel even though some of his associates did not agree with him on this. He had spoken to SYG and suggested African countries should be asked what increased technical assistance they could give. (Adoula intimated that military aid was to be included in technical assistance.) He argued that aid from other Africans helped morale of Congolese by showing what Africans could do in technical field.

On ANC retraining Adoula referred back to same March 1961 letter from Kasavubu to SYG that Bomboko had read out loud in full to Cleveland and Sisco in prior interviews. This and other comments implied Adoula prepared to do business with UN rather than Belgians on recruitment retraining officers. But like Bomboko (though more calmly) Adoula emphasized difficulty retraining until Katanga issue resolved. Answering question he said eventual size ANC should be 15,000 (or, as afterthought, up 20,000).

At close of meeting Adoula became less rhetorical and more sincere. Asked Cleveland to tell President he was striving to continue line of conduct which he had traced during US visit. Cleveland replied President also firm in support Adoula govt. Adoula said that when question raised of Communist influence in Congo or Communist orientation he could only say he not that much a fool. Only too clear some African countries which had traveled that road had now made about face and were working their way back. If Congo took that course it would merely encounter African brothers homeward bound; Congo would also be compelled to about face if it tried Communism, but only after much suffering. Adoula was going to keep trying to save country but warned he might be powerless prevent disaster if efforts reintegrate Katanga not successful.

In general Adoula seemed in good shape physically and mentally, more poised and in more sanguine frame of mind than during Ambassador's last several interviews. In presence Washington visitor seemed on good behavior and his implied blackmail was not showing. Perhaps he has had time to meditate on moral of Tshombe airport incident. Moreover, Gardiner's first interviews with him since return from New York and in pursuance agreed "stronger UN mediatory role" may be having some effect.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–2962. Secret. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, Paris, Elisabethville, and Brazzaville.

2 Assistant Secretary Cleveland visited the Congo April 25–May 1. He met with U.N. civilian and military leaders, as well as with Adoula and other Congolese officials, and observed U.N. operations in Léopoldville and at the provincial level in Kivu. A May 14 memorandum from Cleveland to Rusk headed "Next Steps on the Congo" is ibid., 770G.00/5–1462. A copy is in the Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Congo-Security 1962(A).

3 Telegram 1829 to Léopoldville, April 26, transmitted the text of a letter of the same date from Kennedy to Adoula, which recalled Adoula's visit to Washington and assured him of U.S. friendship and support. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/4–2662) A copy of the letter, with attached notes indicating that it was drafted in the Department of State at the President's suggestion, is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo.

226. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Athens 226. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Athens1

Washington, May 2, 1962, 5:23 p.m.

Tosec 43. From Acting Secretary. Usumbura for Williams. The President and Macmillan discussed the Congo on Sunday2 and agreed that renewed efforts should be made by the US-UK-Belgium as soon as possible to concert pressures for a favorable outcome of Adoula-Tshombe talks. They agreed that Tshombe is unlikely to make a reasonable settlement except under pressure supported by British and Belgian economic interests. For such pressure to be exerted, there must be a clearer tripartite understanding and agreement on basic policy and objectives.

We believe the elements of such a policy exist in agreement on reintegration of Katanga in a Congo more loosely federated than current fundamental law provides, together with economic arrangements sharing tax revenues between central and provincial governments. The President and the Prime Minister believed that such an agreement could best be reached if the locus of internal 3-Power discussions could be in London, to facilitate participation by Spaak and acceptance by Tanganyika Concessions and Union Miniere.3

At the same time, since mediation between Tshombe and Adoula continues to be Gardiner's responsibility, and because relations with UN are best maintained from Washington and New York, we must obviously retain overall U.S. control here, as well as 3-Power liaison on progress of mediation.

The President and Prime Minister agreed that you and Home and Spaak should discuss these problems at Athens. President's hope is that you will support the notion of talks in London which might lead to effective joint pressures on all concerned.

Both London talks and our diplomatic relation to mediation should be based on agreed appraisal of prospects if Tshombe and Adoula do not soon reach agreement. We hope you may be able to press our appraisal with Home and Spaak in Athens. Possibility of agreement on degree of risk to run in exerting pressures if needed to bring reintegration about would be dim if we are not in agreement on the nature of the risks which would be incurred if reintegration is not promptly attained.

Tshombe has said he will return Léopoldville May 3 to resume talks and Adoula has said he welcomes this prospect. We hope two leaders, with Gardiner's help, can negotiate settlement reasonable to both. We believe Adoula still can persuade his govt accept settlement that recognizes legitimate Katangan interests. However, we fear his capabilities this regard will soon diminish sharply, as will ours to influence events.

Our assessment follows of developments we foresee and which already shaping up if reintegration not achieved shortly. In essence, we believe time has almost run out for moderate control of Léopoldville Govt in absence material progress on reintegration. Adoula has been in power for nine months under a strong mandate from parliament to end the Katanga secession at all costs. In the light of Tshombe's refusal recognize Kitona (where personal prestige of President involved) as a basis for negotiation, his continued demand for virtual internal sovereignty while "studying" means to end secession, and reports mercenary forces again on rise in Katanga, Adoula has concluded Tshombe stalling for time in hope that Adoula will fall and/or UN operation will fail. Adoula beginning believe unfriendly counsels that we insisted on Kitona before Tshombe militarily hurt in order to save him and Govts like Indian, Sudanese, Tunisian, Nigerian beginning suspect this also.

Adoula has expressed his disillusionment with UN and policy of peaceful integration which has produced no concrete results. Two days ago he challenged Cleveland and Gullion to suggest date by which results in negotiations might be expected. He warned talks could not continue much longer without general disintegration of his position and what he called "positive actions and disagreeable surprises." Stated he would continue trying save country but feared he might be powerless prevent disaster if efforts reintegrate Katanga not successful.

Reacting to heavy pressures, Adoula already shows signs accommodating his position in order remain in office. He has publicly stated GOC has told Afro-Asian states and "other friendly countries" it may have to ask for increased assistance to put final stop to secession. We believe such unilateral intervention would be disastrous, but Adoula has already indicated he may ask for UN withdrawal. We also have unconfirmed reports Adoula will visit Moscow in mid-May.

Another danger is SC meeting on Congo which Soviets would turn into instrument to divide West and GOC by demanding UN use force to end Katanga secession immediately. In past Adoula has blocked Soviet efforts in this direction but under circumstances assumed here GOC would be pressing for stronger UN mandate. Bloc would welcome opportunity place any Western powers in position of appearing to favor Tshombe who has come to be regarded as a stooge in Africa and Asia.

If present trend continues GOC will be forced to ask for Afro-Asian help with or without UN umbrella. If Adoula refuses to swing with this tide he will be swept away along with other moderates and opening would reappear for Bloc to exploit to tear Congo apart once again with resulting grave dangers for US and UN and influence and posture entire West in Afro-Asian world. Should extremists gain power in Léopoldville they virtually certain turn against UN as did Lumumba and accept help from radical Afro-Asians and probably Soviet Bloc. Violence in Katanga would be inevitable and could involve big powers. Western business interests throughout Congo would risk expropriation by extremist leaders.

UN prepared play active mediatory role (see Deptel 2800 to New York repeated London 5709)4 but they unlikely be effective with Tshombe if he remains persuaded he can continue stalling with total impunity.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–262. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Vance and Carlucci, who at this time was Officer in Charge of Congo (Léopoldville) Affairs; cleared in draft by Fredericks, Wallner, and Burdett and cleared by McGeorge Bundy (see footnote 2 below); and approved by Ball. Repeated to Léopoldville, London, Brussels, USUN, Paris, New Delhi, Lagos, Tunis, Khartoum, and Usumbura.

2 April 28; see Document 224.

3 A May 2 memorandum from Bundy to Ball states that he had talked to Kennedy and found him "very clear in his conviction that the center of talks with the British and Belgians should be in London." Bundy had accordingly redrafted the first two pages of the draft telegram (to this point). (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–262) A memorandum by Colonel Julian J. Ewell of the White House Staff of the May 2 staff meeting states that McGhee and the Bureau of African Affairs wanted discussions in Washington, where pressure from African representatives at the United Nations could be brought to bear, but that "Bundy seemed to feel this was the wrong approach, that we were primarily trying to get the Europeans and their financiers to move towards the middle, and that pressure from the left would probably not do this." (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Box 24, Daily Staff Meeting)

4 See footnote 1, Document 223.

227. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 227. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India1

Washington, May 4, 1962, 1:31 p.m.

3693. Following based on uncleared memcon:2

Ambassador Nehru and Indian Ambassador designate to Congo Chatterjee (now DCM Washington) met with McGhee at Department's request May 3 for review Congo situation. McGhee indicated GOI and USG deeply involved together in the Congo. USG therefore wished discuss with GOI our concern re lack progress current negotiations due Tshombe failure make concessions. USG not certain he will negotiate meaningfully until forced to do so.

By same token Adoula has not done as much as he could. Paper he presented to Tshombe not sufficiently forthcoming. Adoula himself becoming desperate and has hinted at bilateral aid, use of force and possibly even UN withdrawal. Adoula whose base depends upon successful Katanga reintegration losing ground politically because, from GOC standpoint, UN has not made any progress in uniting country.

Nehru inquired about Union Miniere promises withhold revenues. McGhee replied they never agreed despite all possible USG pressure. UMHK concerned Tshombe would take retaliatory action against company properties located in Katanga. Nehru inquired if agreement between Adoula and Tshombe was indeed possible without effective economic or military pressure on Tshombe.

McGhee stated this precisely why we desire introduce third element into negotiations if substantial progress not made in next two weeks. Specifically we envisage Gardiner taking more active role, including outlining financial concessions by Tshombe and suggested modifications of fundamental law. In effect Gardiner must find middle ground involving concessions both sides. If governments concerned such as US, UK, Belgian and Indian, find this proposal acceptable all possible means pressure would be asserted on Tshombe. If Tshombe could be convinced his income would be cut off, use of force would not be required.

Ambassador indicated some surprise that we expected Adoula make concessions also. When this confirmed by McGhee, Amb read from MEA cables contents of which made Indian case against Tshombe. Cables reported "dozens" of mercenaries entering Katanga, an airstrip being readied across border Angola, Katanga reinforcements arriving Kongolo and Tshombe making deals with Welensky. Cables also said situation fast deteriorating due US failure support Adoula; if UN forces to be used must be within next few weeks before Katanga forces achieve big buildup. Amb said USG "making it known" it will not support UN military action against Katanga which suits UK and Belgium who do not want reintegration. Said Indian view is, given Belgian reluctance, economic pressure would not succeed without threat arms pressure on Tshombe. Although US money involved, Indian boys would be killed in event fighting, posing same problems for GOI as would for USG if American boys being killed. Added US failure support further action against Katanga gendarmerie destroys realistic basis for negotiation.

Amb Nehru continued that "some of our chaps don't think much of Gardiner" but in any event mediation no good unless backed up with econ and military force. How much time is there? How much would Adoula be forced give up? The Indians would not go along with autonomy for Katanga.

McGhee recapped US position: We propose allow two weeks for Adoula-Tshombe talks; if no progress made then Gardiner should mediate. We would get proposals which acceptable to India, UK, Belgium that would ultimately include withholding revenues from Tshombe. McGhee agreed with Amb that hints should be dropped that military force would be used if there was no other way. Amb concerned that delays allowing Katanga military buildup would result more UN casualties.

McGhee stated Belgians and British do not feel sense of urgency we do; nevertheless he believed necessary pressures could be applied when acceptable mediation proposals put forward. Although Belgians do not agree on income withholding their attitude could change if they convinced military force was a possibility. We do not take position military force must not be used but use of force a difficult decision which must be carefully considered.

Chatterjee said if Tshombe convinced USG were taking firm stand talks could succeed. McGhee agreed, stating we haven't yet convinced Tshombe but intended to do so. We think results are necessary by mid-June. In meantime Dept will continue consult with Indians on progress being made and will discuss the mediation proposal with them, McGhee concluded.

Emb may draw on foregoing as desired in talks with GOI.

For Khartoum: Department does not intend call in Sudanese Charge but you may draw on foregoing as appropriate in talks with GOS.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–462. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Robert J. Barnard of the Office of South Asian Affairs and Carlucci; cleared by Director of the Office of South Asian Affairs Turner Cameron, Vance, Officer in Charge of Sudan Affairs Cleo A. Noel, Jr., and McGhee's Staff Assistant Alan L. Campbell, Jr.; and approved with revisions by Tasca. Also sent to Khartoum and repeated to Léopoldville, USUN, Elisabethville, Brussels, London, Paris, Salisbury, and Athens for Secretary Rusk.

2 Not found.

228. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 228. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, May 5, 1962, 5 p.m.

2755. From Williams.2 During Léopoldville visit I had extensive conversations with Kasavubu, Adoula, Bomboko, Koumorico, Kimpiobe, Gbenye, and others.3

While variously pointing with pride to progress on some fronts, (cabinet changes, Gizenga, parliamentary victories, plans for budget and austerity measures) every single one of these men claimed unsolved Katanga issue was continuous threat to GOC policies and stability. Consequences delay in integrating Katanga not only felt directly in such sectors as government finance and defense but was used by opponents of government to block constructive measures not directly related to Katanga. For example, some parliamentarians who oppose austerity budget for most selfish reasons are encouraged in opposition by general waning of confidence in government. Incidentally made own Gallup Poll among professional men, students and others throughout Congo: What most important problem? Katanga secession inevitable answer, some adding it was "key to all other problems".

Some of top GOC leaders alluded openly to disaffection in army and important sectors of population.

These negative influences have constrained government to take stubborn line in Tshombe talks, thus contributing to still further delay in negotiations and detracting from GOC public posture.

In conversations with GOC leaders I have sought to impress imperative need for better position before world opinion. Have urged them to persevere in negotiations but simultaneously work with US and UN to keep time from working against reconciliation and interests GOC.

Among leaders Adoula, at least, recognized bad publicity GOC has been getting especially in Tshombe airport incident and plans do better.

We should, of course, continue to do all we can to help Adoula improve his public posture. His publicity operation is picking up effectiveness. Our expansion of USIS efforts and means in Congo and its aid to GOC information services should also help. Much impressed by weekly wall picture newspaper USIS puts out for and over name of GOC. Part of effort should go to exposing truth about Tshombe, i.e., how he stands to gain from delay, details on his arms deals, difference between genuine federation and what Tshombe is after. On substantive side, we should try to check GOC tendency blame everything on Katanga problem. For example, we should work against idea that army reform cannot be tackled until Katanga settled. We have made some progress in lessening tension between Congolese over whether Belgians or UN would train army.

Cleveland's visit useful in this matter as well as in another area where US can help clear up liabilities; i.e., more effective administration by UN and GOC of US funds and goods. Embassy has impression of "scatteration" overall aid effort and priorities. Sharp look at this should be taken in near future with increased priorities and possibly funds as well for education, roads, transport, and private capital investment. I hope investment guaranty agreement will be expedited. Also there should be more US personnel in UN.

Liaison between provinces and GOC very inadequate with consequent provincial resentment of Léopoldville.

Through appropriate means we should push ahead with effort to help Adoula build political party, compose his differences with labor movement, streamline his cabinet and increase his grip on parliament. We should also encourage reasonably free press.

Embassy tells me leverage on Adoula for accomplishment these and other important objectives has been much lessened in recent weeks by his feeling nobody including US can give him clue to Katanga riddle and by own nervous exhaustion.

In my visits to Adoula with Ambassador, he did not pull punches on danger of endless negotiations but he was less ominous in his forecasts of new policies and divorce from UN than Ambassador tells me he had been. Moreover Adoula's brief vacation seems to have given him somewhat better grip on himself.

Ambassador and I agree airport incident brought him face to face with what it means to break with UN and to antagonize world opinion. Additionally, reaction of Congo Advisory Commission to idea of GOC bilateral approach to Africans has discouraged him at least for present from dubious adventures. He has also proved responsive to Gardiner's stepped-up mediatory effort. Latter is working with him to produce fall-back position from draft conclusions he has introduced in talks. I believe US should produce for Gardiner its own formula.

Gardiner is working toward presentation in talks of comparative tabulation of positions. He also expects UN to be actually present in resumed sessions and says Adoula agrees.

In summary, I found visit with Adoula and GOC leaders relatively encouraging although prolonged crisis created by Katanga secession continutes deeply disturbing. Will comment further after visit to provinces.

Embassy comments: Embassy would warn that good effects on Adoula may be only temporary while basic causes of his frustration still exist and while Congolese state of mind is what it is (i.e., overwhelming majority would have wanted government to hold Tshombe).

For reasons which Embassy has extensively described Ambassador still would like to inform Adoula of tax collection plan. This cannot be done however until Gardiner is ready to go along and he will not consider it either to keep Adoula in line or force Tshombe to negotiate unless he has at least been promised certain reinforcements as prudent reserve in case plan miscarried.

Williams summary: Our program should be to continue to urge Adoula to do more than reasonable to work out reconciliation with Tshombe. This he seems prepared to do. Moreover, he should make his position clear to world in specific reasonable proposals that Tshombe failure to accept, or reasonably counterpropose, would leave Adoula before world as going all out for peaceful reconciliation. At same time, we must recognize Tshombe tends to delay negotiations, convinced that Adoula deals from weakness and has internal political and economic problems. To increase likelihood of successful negotiation Adoula must have strengthened posture not only in fact but of complete credibility to Tshombe.

Believe Adoula meeting provincial Presidents conscious or unconscious recognition of necessity to build support more than counter-maneuver against Tshombe. Must be other collateral ways to build Adoula strength in order to increase likelihood reconciliation. Strongly believe his pushing and our support of transport solution, more spare parts, more trucks, more roads would help provincial prosperity, politics and Adoula's position.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–562. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, USUN, London, Paris, Elisabethville, and Brazzaville.

2 Williams visited the Congo April 28–May 4 during a tour of a number of countries in West and Central Africa. He visited Stanleyville and Luluabourg as well as Léopoldville. Additional information concerning his trip is scheduled for publication in volume XXI.

3 His conversations with Adoula and Kasavubu were reported in telegrams 2753 and 2754, both May 5. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–562)

229. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 229. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State1

Athens, May 6, 1962, 3 a.m.

Secto 54. In brief meeting with Home and Spaak,2 Secretary reported that President and Macmillan in their talks last Sunday on Congo had discussed desirability of US, UK and Belgian representatives meeting in London to concert views on Congo and to devise plans and measures to carry out such plans. Secretary gave his assessment of present situation in Congo along lines set forth in Tosec 433 noting that Adoula's position was deteriorating rapidly as was our influence with him. Secretary proposed that three countries determine what should and could be done and stressed importance of avoiding third round. He thought that with three countries in agreement and with support of UN/SYG and private companies in Congo, something could be accomplished. He said two key elements of plan should be creation of Congolese constitution along federal lines with somewhat less power for central government than provided by present fundamental law and arrangements for equitable division of tax revenues between central and provincial governments.

Home expressed general agreement with proposal for meeting and with Secretary's assessment. He stated however, that difficulty was not in deciding what should be done but how to impose whatever plan might be devised. He would "not be happy about the use of force." UN seemed to be running into sand, and there is important question of what to do if UN pulls out of Congo.

Spaak also agreed with proposal and Secretary's assessment and stressed very serious deterioration on Congolese economic and financial situation.4 He acknowledged that Bantu palaver was not progressing though he felt Gardiner's good offices offered some promise. He stated his government was thinking in terms of a broad economic, financial, political, and technical assistance plan for Congo. (To Secretary's question regarding military components, Spaak replied "not yet" in view of sensitivity on this subject.) As to financial help, he believed that it should be doled out in installments to Adoula rather than giving latter large lump sums which would be quickly dissipated. He mentioned difficulties currently experienced by Union Miniere which an agreement between central and provincial governments on tax revenues would help resolve. He expressed cautious optimism concerning possible success of broad plan such as he had mentioned.

Secretary asked if anyone had confirmation of report that Adoula planned to visit Moscow later this month, but only knowledge others had was of invitation extended at time of Adoula's New York visit.

Home again raised question of how plan could be carried out stressing his view that it could not be imposed. Secretary said US felt it had influence with U Thant and that with latter's agreement and three-power support something could be done. Home had earlier mentioned possibility of Soviet veto in UN, but both Secretary and Spaak believed UN/SYG free to act under existing resolutions.

There was firm agreement that London talks be secret. Home mentioned idea of appointing Lord Dundee5 as British Representative. Kohler suggested that in interest of secrecy US would be inclined towards appointment of someone at Deputy Assistant Secretary level. Owing to commencement of NATO session, meeting broke up without discussion of date for London meeting.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–662. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London, Brussels, Paris, New Delhi, Tunis, Khartoum, USUN, Lagos, Léopoldville, and Usumbura.

2 On May 5.

3 Document 226.

4 Spaak stressed this aspect of the situation in a brief discussion of the Congo with Rusk on May 6, reported in Secto 84, May 7. (Department of State, Central Files, 375.800/5–762)

5 Minister of State for Foreign Affairs.

230. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 230. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom1

Washington, May 11, 1962, 8:58 p.m.

6037. Subject: Talks on Congo with UK and Belgium. Purpose of consultations with British and Belgians is to develop a joint plan based on UN mediation for overcoming the present impasse in the Adoula-Tshombe negotiations and for bringing about prompt reintegration of Katanga. We would assume that US would take the lead in concerting with UN and in backing Gardiner's overture to Adoula, while UK and Belgium would take on task of persuading Tshombe.

Our three governments are worried about the possible recurrence of fighting and the effect it might have on UMHK and other foreign properties. However, grave damage would be done the West if the present drift continues. USG is concerned that Tshombe (basing himself upon erroneous information conveyed by Struelens and others), the companies, and other interested parties are operating upon a serious miscalculation regarding USG determination to see Congo reunited promptly so as to assure continued control of GOC by moderates. USG will fully support UN action even at risk of incurring hostilities and none of the parties concerned should operate under any different assumption. It is our hope that, by concerting frankly with the British and Belgian Governments at this time and making clear to them USG's appraisal of the situation and determination to see it resolved promptly they will join with us in supporting UN mediation effort and the pressures which will be required to make it effective

Pouching detailed briefing and background papers on questions expected to arise in Congo talks. Following are basic ideas reflected in our papers and approach to be taken in talks: 1) Congo situation can any moment seriously deteriorate to such extent that immediate action might become necessary to forestall highly undesirable military and political developments. Desirable therefore that delegations first agree to explore in initial go-round in provisional way points listed in agenda so as to obtain indications in what direction positive achievements might be found and to define areas of agreement and lack of agreement. Discussions then could be concentrated on most promising areas of action so that we can work out rapidly constructive approach in at least several areas.

2) Useful to begin with review of present situation and assessment of probable developments if reintegration Katanga not achieved shortly in order create common understanding of urgency of situation and pave way for coordinated policies. (Deptel 5846)2

3) Discussion of possible principles for Congo constitution, and arrangements which might be agreed upon pending adoption of new constitution, should pool ideas on realistic Adoula-Tshombe accommodation which could be submitted to UN to aid it in its mediation effort and lead to creation of very broadly constructed yardstick to facilitate evaluation of possible proposals for which Gardiner might request US and other international support and to define nature of settlement we would press on Tshombe. With key mediatory role necessarily played by UN we must avoid laying down our views on constitutional questions in any but the broadest and most flexible fashion to avoid hampering Gardiner's efforts. Nevertheless it clearly understood that we cannot give Gardiner carte blanche but will review any proposal submitted to us before deciding whether to support it.

4) Under heading Tactics we would explore all possible ways which might be used by three governments directly or indirectly to support UN mediation effort and create atmosphere conducive to agreement. We have explored in past all possibilities we could think of and applied everything available except UN support of GOC exchange and tax authority in Katanga. In particular we tried diplomatic and political pressures on both sides, made attempts to ensure cooperation of UMHK in escrow plan, etc. Nevertheless view shortness of time now remaining for settlement of Katanga issue by negotiation we may now be able find new avenues not explored or hereto considered impracticable and we have open mind on any suggestions from other parties.

5) Offer of substantial aid to Congo suggested by Spaak, while desirable, does not appear effective means for our immediate purposes since on one hand it is unlikely Tshombe will find it persuasive enough to induce him to give up any of the powers he now exercises and secondly because such offer could be made only after substantial measure of agreement reached between three governments and UN on major aspects of program, in particular readiness to commit very substantial amounts of funds beyond those of any three Governments now giving to Congo. We would welcome Belgian and UK proposals for longer range efforts in this area and will make additional arrangements to discuss them in detail.

6) While our common objective is to find an alternative to measures which might lead to the re-opening of hostilities, we believe that Tshombe is unwilling to take irrevocable integration steps as long as he feels that UN is blocked from recourse to forceful measures. It is his conviction that the UN is so blocked that causes him to persist in his present delaying tactics. There may well come a point in the negotiations when Adoula has accepted a mediation scheme which we all consider reasonable but which Tshombe declines. In order to make Tshombe go the last mile we envisage Gardiner at this point informing Tshombe that unless he reconsiders within a reasonably short time the UN would be prepared to back the central government in asserting its foreign exchange and tax collection authority in Katanga. While the actual implementation of this scheme entails a risk of a renewal of hostilities, we hope knowledge its existence would have deterrent effect on Tshombe and that the initiative for any such hostilities would have to come from Tshombe. We believe Tshombe is a realistic politician and lacking in suicidal tendencies and would avoid recourse to violence to attempt forestall this measure. Rather we would expect him at that point to accept a reasonable formula for reintegration.

In any case we believe that this risk is a lesser one than the alternative which as we see it would have highly undesirable consequences for the West; in particular, a GOC request for strengthened UN mandate which could split the West, civil war in Congo, loss of moderate control of GOC, expropriation of foreign enterprise, etc.

7) We recognize that the Belgian and even the British Government might not be able openly to approve exchange and tax collection program, although we hope to achieve such support in our talks with them. The talks should at least achieve their understanding of the possible need for such a program and, if events should develop unfavorably, their acquiescence in it as the lesser of evils. We recall Spaak reaction when December fighting broke out when he expressed hope that UN would pull it off fast enough so that it would not create political difficulty for his Government.

8) While mediation proposal must not deprive Tshombe of ability retain reasonable autonomy for Katanga, we must avoid giving our support to interim solution which failed contain irrevocable steps of integration. We must not risk setting up an arrangement under which in exchange for few political gestures and payment of more or less substantial sums of money Tshombe would be permitted to retain effective military, political, and economic control of Katanga. In such case the only assurance for eventual compliance with the constitution negotiated through appropriate processes would be the continued presence of UN military in substantial numbers in Katanga. To hinge the future peace of the Congo on such presence would be politically unwise and unrealistic taking into account the difficulties of finding the necessary funds and the desire of India and other nations to withdraw their troops soon. Accordingly, we must insist that the interim solution contains enough irreversible elements of integration so that the process could not be reversed even in case negotiations on the constitution should run into difficulties.

Bruce should report currently to USUN so Stevenson can be in continuous communication with UN New York, and to Léopoldville so that Guillon can be in constant contact with Gardiner.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–1162. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Buffum and Eisenberg; cleared in draft by Fredericks, Wallner, Burdett, and Ford and in substance by Edmond C. Hutchinson, Assistant Administrator for Africa and Europe at the Agency for International Development; and approved by McGhee. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, New Delhi, Paris, and USUN.

2 Tosec 43 (Document 226) was repeated to London as telegram 5846.

231. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 231. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, May 11, 1962, 7 pm.

3716. Congo. SYG informed Yost this afternoon that he had just learned from telex with Gardiner that Tshombe, who had expected to leave for Leoville May 13, is still ill and will not be able to depart until 16th or 17th. Moreover Thant said that Tshombe's reply to Adoula's constitutional proposals had been substantially unyielding and that Adoula, when shown reply by Gardiner, had exploded. SYG therefore sees little likelihood of early progress in negots even if Tshombe comes to Leoville and, in view possibility stormy breakdown, has instructed Gardiner seek new assurances from Adoula there, will be no interference with Tshombe's departure from Leoville. Thant remarked, however, that assurances from Adoula may not be binding on some of his colleagues.

Thant himself is at present concentrating on his scheme for replacing Belgian with UN guards at Jadotville, Kolwezi and Kipushi in order be able to ensure that Union Miniere and Tanganyika Concessions can, without fear of reprisal, comply with arrangements made at time of independence for distribution of tax revenues between central and provincial govts. SYG is seeking British and Belgian Govt support for stationing UN guards at these places and Linner is presently in London for this purpose. Thant indicated awareness that US, UK and Belgium will shortly be conferring in London on these matters and gave impression that Linner's presence there was not unconnected with this arrangement.

In response to Yost's query SYG said that, if UK and Belgian agreement could be obtained, he felt that UN movement to Jadotville, Kolwezi and Kipushi could be accomplished, not without any hostilities whatsoever but at least with relatively minor hostilities.

In response to further query SYG indicated intention to bring Congo problem before SC at end this month. While he feels present mandate broadly interpreted authorizes UN forces move to three Congo towns and assumption guard duties there, he nevertheless believes that his inability bring about solution Katanga problem in line earlier SC res obligates him report to SC and seek further guidance. He realizes, however, that SC may be unable to agree on any further res or guidance.

Comment: SYG's conviction that he must shortly bring Congo problem back to SC obviously reenforces urgency of rapid and effective decisions at forthcoming tripartite London mtg.

Yost

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–1162. Confidential; Priority. Received at 10 p.m. and repeated to London, Brussels, and Léopoldville.

232. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 232. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom1

Washington, May 14, 1962, 1:56 p.m.

6054. Eyes only for Ambassadors. The following is the text of a letter from the President to Ambassador Bruce regarding the Tripartite Talks beginning Tuesday, May 15.

"Dear David:

I attach great importance to the talks you will be having this week on the Congo with the British and Belgians.

Time is fast running out on integrating Katanga promptly into the rest of the Congo. We want this integration to be achieved peacefully. However, if Tshombe proves obdurate we must be prepared to pursue actions which could involve the use of force by the UN. We must anticipate of course that Tshombe, encouraged by some of his advisers, will discount our readiness to see the UN again resort to force; we must seek to convince him of his error.

The financial interests behind Tshombe are important elements in any successful resolution of the Congo problem. It is essential, therefore, that you drive home to the British and Belgian Governments our determination to achieve an integrated Congo. They, in turn, must impart this determination to the financial interests of both countries involved in the Congo. You and your British and Belgian colleagues might point out that failure to achieve a viable solution will most certainly result in catastrophe for the commercial enterprises in the Congo.

There should emerge from your talks agreement on what the British, the Belgians, and ourselves would consider a reasonable settlement between Adoula and Tshombe, and on the means to bring it about. This will require that the British and Belgian Governments, and their nationals with financial interests in the Congo, give full support to a program to achieve this objective.

The Prime Minister and I have discussed this matter carefully and we both believe that US, UK, and Belgian interests will be served best by tripartite consultations and the development of a concerted course of action. The task is not easy, but with your experience I am sure we can convince our friends of the seriousness of the situation.

Sincerely, John F. Kennedy"

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–1462. Secret; Niact. Drafted and approved in the Executive Secretariat and cleared by Ball and by Bromley Smith at the White House. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, and USUN. The letter transmitted here was drafted in the Department of State, sent to the White House with a May 13 covering memorandum from Battle to Bundy, and approved with revisions by Dungan and the President. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

233. Special National Intelligence Estimate 233. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, May 16, 1962.

SNIE 65–62

THE KATANGA INTEGRATION PROBLEM

The Problem

To estimate the prospects for early agreement on reintegration of Katanga into the Congo and the likely consequences of the failure of current efforts to secure such agreement.

Conclusions

1. Katanga separatism is regarded by the Central Government, other Africans, and the neutrals as a successful effort by Western commercial interests to retain a "neocolonial" position in Katanga and thus to prevent the full independence of the Congo. Adoula is under considerable pressure to show progress toward the integration of Katanga under the Central Government. Adoula wants a wide measure of authority over Katanga. However, his minimum needs would probably be satisfied by recognition of the formal civil and military authority of the Central Government and assured access to Katanga revenues.2 (Paras. 5, 9, 20)

2. Although Tshombe recognizes the many outside forces opposed to his maintaining Katanga as a near-independent state, he is under no significant pressure from within Katanga to reach any accommodation with Adoula. On the contrary, the tribal elements of southern Katanga, and Belgian and British commercial interests and residents in Katanga, as well as the Europeans in neighboring countries (Northern Rhodesia in particular), support his present position. In any agreement with Adoula, Tshombe's minimum requirements would include a considerable degree of provincial autonomy plus a guaranteed share of Katanga revenues. (Paras. 15, 20)

3. Negotiations between Adoula and Tshombe are unlikely to achieve any early accommodation unless both sides are subjected to stepped up pressures and inducements by outside forces, particularly by the Belgian and UK Governments and economic interests, the UN, and the US. We do not believe that their minimum needs are so inconsistent as to make agreement impossible. If some movement on the issue is not evident in a relatively short time, Adoula or a successor may take more radical and intransigent initiatives, including acceptance of military aid from Afro-Asian or Bloc states. It cannot be excluded that the Central Government will attempt to subdue Katanga by force. (Paras. 20–21, 25)

4. We do not believe that any attempt to subdue Katanga militarily, by either UN or Congolese Army forces, would be promising. Such action would be likely to bring about conditions of such disorder that the prospects for unity and an orderly political and economic development of the Congo would be further reduced. (Para. 23)

[Here follows the Discussion section of the estimate, comprising paragraphs 5–25.]

3 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency Files. Secret. According to a note on the title page, it was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by the U.S. Intelligence Board on May 16. A note on the reverse of the title page listed the organizations that participated in the preparation of the estimate (CIA and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense, the three military services, and the Joint Staff), all the directors of which concurred. The AEC and FBI representatives to the USIB abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

2 SNIE 65–2–61, "Possible Developments in Katanga," dated 7 December 1961, remains essentially valid. [Footnote in the source text. See Document 152.]

3 The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, would prefer that this sentence read as follows:

In order to preserve his own political position in Léopoldville, he must have, as an absolute minimum, recognition by Tshombe of the formal civil and military authority of the Central Government and assured access to Katanga revenues. [Footnote in the source text.]

234. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State 234. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State1

London, May 16, 1962, 7 p.m.

4223. From Bruce. Department will quite justifiably be disappointed with results conversations here on Congo between representatives of US, UK, and Belgium.2

1. On two principal points upon which President and Department particularly wished agreement: (A) Support of use of force, if necessary, by UN to bring about Katanga reintegration; (B) support by Union Miniere and Tanganyika Concessions of policies designed to achieve such reintegration; I must report almost complete failure.

2. I spoke repeatedly about the great importance USG attaches to these points, and also discussed them frankly in private with Lord Dundee and with Rothschild.

3. As to (A), Lord Dundee stated that he was instructed by his Government to oppose any measure suggested that might be expected in their judgment to involve a resumption of hostilities. If a resolution were presented in the UN, or action undertaken by it under its existing mandate, of a nature considered by HMG dangerous in sense of threatening renewal of fighting in Congo, HMG would vote against such resolution, and in either case would probably withdraw its backing for UN operations in Congo including its financial contributions.

4. Rothschild was not as explicit in stating what might be, in such regards, decision of his own Government, beyond saying he was sure Spaak would view with alarm and disapproval any actions that might lead to hostilities.

5. On (B), viz., position of private companies, neither British nor Belgians offered either expectation or desire to try further to influence them, and spoke of their lack of ability to do so even if they wished. Rothschild did, however, present some personal views that will be reported in summary of discussions,3 that might be helpful in connection with securing portion of Katanga mining revenues for central government.

6. I was impressed by mobility and helpfulness, within limits, of Belgian position as compared with that of British. Pragmatism of latter was evident as usual, resolution to let sleeping dogs lie, not to engage in hypothetical or advance planning, to procrastinate. Equally, British assessment of dangers inherent in present situation is markedly tepid and different from that of Belgians which much resemble our own.

7. I would suspect that after Prime Minister has been informed of our views re being prepared to pursue courses which could involve use of force by the UN the President will have a personal message from him.

8. I do not believe there is, or will be, any difference of opinion between the three Governments on the advisability and necessity of achieving Katangan reintegration. When it comes to methods we are far apart from British who are pinning their hopes on Gardiner's efforts at conciliation.

Bruce

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–1662. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Brussels, Paris, USUN, and Léopoldville.

2 The talks were held May 15 and 16.

3 See Document 235. The discussions on May 15 were reported in telegrams 4204 and 4205, May 15. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–1562)

235. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State 235. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State1

London, May 16, 1962, 8 p.m.

4225. Congo Tripartite Talks. Immediate preceding telegram Embassy's telegram 42182 gives changes in text aide-memoire suggested by Rothschild3 as agreed final meeting May 16.

At conclusion deliberations Ambassador Bruce said paper would be submitted to Department but meeting should not gloss over fact that two important elements of US position not covered. These are: (1) Need to place pressures on private companies (Tanganyika Concessions and Union Miniere) in such manner they will cooperate and accept theses that their own positions would be gravely threatened in absence re-integration Congo; and

(2) Agreement by UK and Belgium to join with the US in supporting the UN mediation effort even at risk of incurring hostilities.

Ambassador said most improbable that Department would agree accept paper in absence these two points.

Dundee had made UK position clear previously and repeated that, in view of Britain, renewal of fighting worse than any possible alternative. Britain would veto any UN resolution which might lead to renewal hostilities and, if fighting started, would have to withdraw its support of UN operation including financial contribution. Dundee said in Britain's view UN military in Congo had made great blunders and Britain did not wish see more. Dundee believed these questions should be referred to higher level and paper should be accepted and used as indication of common level of agreement. He did not believe meeting should pursue discussion objectives on which representatives could not agree.

Paragraph C, 2, d, suggesting "methods of coercion" in Belgian draft4 was natural casualty of tripartite considerations, given attitude Britain. Rothschild explained he had advanced proposal in hope of finding formula resolve differences between US and UK although he was advancing suggestion on his own and might have difficulty persuading Spaak. Rothschild said blockage of exports by stationing small UN units Dilolo and Sakania (near Ndola) meets need cited by US and is less dangerous than US tax collection scheme. Chances of actual fighting less than placing collectors in Elisabethville. Closing these two points would be effective pressure on Tshombe and Katanga gendarmerie would have difficulty in attacking in view distance from bases.

Rothschild stated he didn't particularly like suggestion and third round highly repugnant to Spaak. Any further resort to force most disagreeable to Belgians. Delegations agreed suggestion would be reported various governments, studied and perhaps brought forward at later time.

Stevens again referred Linner suggestion for stationing UN forces Jadotville and Kolwezi with Tshombe's agreement.

Rothschild expressed view Linner's suggestion weak since, if Tshombe prepared settle financial division with Adoula, protection these points not necessary. If no financial agreement made, introduction UN troops would be required protect water supplies, power lines, and other widely disbursed installations.

Stevens made clear HMG would be opposed UN going in without Tshombe agreement and should make every effort try get division revenues through negotiations.

Reference was made failure Kitona agreement at one point discussion. Fredericks mentioned fact Adoula, not Tshombe, had been under pressure to sign. Dundee said, on contrary, UK information was that Gullion had "bullied" Tshombe into signing and Tshombe "has been vigorously protesting ever since." Fredericks emphatically made clear Tshombe was neither bullied or pressured by Gullion.

Dundee also at first opposed suggestion for restrictions on Katanga gendarmerie saying such restrictions in agreement might indicate lack trust in Tshombe. Ambassador Bruce made point in reply that US doubted past actions taken by UN had been convincing to Tshombe. US has difficulty believing Tshombe has been convinced in past that steps of serious nature would be taken against him if he did not agree to return to Congo.

Comment: Delegation believes Department may wish consider giving Gardiner portions paper dealing constitutional principles and interim arrangements, but not section on pressures since this inadequate from our point of view.

Bruce

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–1662. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Brussels, Paris, USUN, and Léopoldville.

2 Dated May 16. (Ibid.)

3 The draft aide-memoire was submitted by Rothschild at the May 16 meeting; an informal translation was transmitted in telegram 4208, May 16. (Ibid.) For text as revised, see Document 236.

4 It reads as follows: "As a last resort methods of coercion would be envisioned principally in Katanga (blockage of exports, closing Dilolo and Ndola)."

236. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State 236. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State1

London, May 18, 1962, 6 p.m.

4263. Congo Tripartite Talks. Verbatim text. Embtel 4218.2 Following is English text "aide-memoire on Congolese reconciliation" as prepared by Foreign Office. French text (which takes precedence) being pouched:

A Provisional Solution

It is impossible for Adoula to modify the Loi Fondamentale on his own initiative and without following due constitutional procedures. Mr. Tshombe no longer accepts the application of the Loi Fondamentale in its present form. The putting into effect of a new constitution will take too long. The situation is full of danger.

It is therefore necessary to consider a provisional solution calculated to ensure in an irrevocable manner the re-entry of Katanga into the Republic of the Congo while waiting for the promulgation of a new constitution providing for a more decentralized regime.

This provisional solution would provide for the putting into effect immediately of a certain number of practical measures and the setting out of principles which the constitution ought to contain and upon which undertakings will be entered into forthwith.

The practical measures will favour the aspirations of the Central Government whilst the setting out of principles and the undertakings to include them in the constitution will provide for Katanga the guarantees which it seeks.

I. Immediate practical measures

A) Sharing of the revenues of Katanga (50 percent) between the Katanga and the Central Government, including those in foreign currencies. To make this sharing easier the Central Government might be advised to increase taxes on the export of mineral products.

B) A tripartite committee should exercise joint control over the command of the gendarmerie, see to it, so far as the gendarmerie is concerned, that the provisional agreements are carried out, and prepare a plan for the integration of the gendarmerie into a reorganized ANC.

C) Reopening of the national route, including the reconstruction of the bridge over the Lubilash River.

D) Resumption of communications and of internal exchanges.

E) Assignment to Katanga of some ministerial portfolios in the Central Government.

II. Constitutional principles

Division of powers in such a way as to establish, under a central government, real local autonomy.

(The two lists which follow are not comprehensive).

Powers of central government: Foreign Affairs

National Defence

Customs

Foreign trade

Internal trade of national interest and communications

Nationality and immigration

Currency, exchange control and national finance, including national taxation

University education.

Local powers: Provincial police

Administrative organization of the provinces

Teaching, etc.

III. Long term solution

The constitution will be drawn up around the constitutional principles envisaged for the provisional solution.

IV. Methods which should help in carrying out this policy

1. Inducements A) Belgium might offer to the Republic of the Congo a convention on bilateral technical assistance the scale of which would be fixed at a higher level than at present.

B) A plan of multilateral financial aid might be drawn up with a view to improving, through the United Nations, the financial situation and to lead to an improvement of the general economic position. This plan would also have as its object the re-establishment of a single Congolese currency. There would also be an opportunity to consider there the enlargement of the control exercised at present by the monetary council and the extension of its work to Katanga.

C) The United Nations would begin to put into effect a plan for the reorganization and re-equipment of the ANC in which Belgium as well as other countries would be ready to participate.

D) The possibility of increasing taxes on the export of mineral products (see 1 (A) above).

2. Methods of exercising pressure A) Belgium would be led by the force of circumstances to limit its technical assistance.

B) The establishment of a multilateral plan for financial aid would become impossible.

C) All other international aid would become more difficult to provide.

Bruce

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–1862. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Received at 9:08 p.m. and repeated to Brussels, Paris, USUN, and Léopoldville.

2 See footnote 1, Document 235.

237. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 237. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, May 18, 1962, 7 p.m.

3780. Congo. Stevenson gave Thant brief report on London tripartite talks stressing areas of agreement and referring lightly to continuing disagreement with UK on means to be employed in achieving largely agreed objectives. Stevenson completed report by emphasizing desirability of making Gardiner mediation effort succeed if at all possible and, in event it should fail, of finding ways to proceed without necessity of SC debate.

Thant questioned Stevenson closely to see if any agreement reached on measures to be taken and in particular on his idea of stationing UN troops at Kipushi, Jadotville, and Kolwezi. Stevenson replied no agreement reached on such measure and in fact UK would oppose it unless Tshombe had accepted move so that it took place without fighting.

SYG said his thought was to convene SC, should Gardiner mediation effort not succeed, and present proposal that UN move troops into Kolwezi, Jadotville, and Kipushi. On basis of his talks with Spaak and initial reaction when this idea discussed with Dean (UK), he was hopeful UK abstain on such proposal after disassociating itself from it and possibly offering formal opposition. Thant asked question whether on basis of London talks we thought UK offer stiff resistance to proposal; for example would UK veto res or, as he had hoped, merely abstain. Yost said on basis of UK position London (which we did not reveal in detail) we feared such proposal in SC might indeed draw stiff UK resistance.

We raised tax collection scheme as advantageous alternative since tax collection scheme did not involve UN offensive movement; if fighting broke out it would be initiated by Katangans which would be important fact for public opinion. Also, in our judgment scheme could be put into effect without SC mtg.

Thant discussed justification for SC before any new strong measures taken and drift of his argument at first seemed to be SC decision required. However his comments were inconclusive on this point and in view of our estimation that UK active opposition likely be left open possibility of acting on basis of CAC consultation alone.

At beginning of conversations Stevenson had mentioned our greater sense of urgency about settling Katanga question compared with British. Thant later picked this up and said he had been following Indian press closely recently and had noticed beginning of "clamor" concerning need for Indian troops now in Congo to be recalled in view of tensions with Pak and Red China. From this as well as what he called "private info" he speculated Indian troops would not remain in Congo beyond Dec and they would begin talking about gradual disengagement within "couple of months." He observed UN military presence in Congo had no meaning without Indian troops.

Thant noted what he called "paradox" in that those who supply money for Congo operation threatened withdrawal of funds if UN took offensive action. Those with troops in UN operation threaten withdrawal if UN did not take offensive soon. He said he had made point frankly to African and Asian reps that UN limited to what contributing countries would pay for and so far they had been "very understanding." He noted in this connection there had been no reaction about Gizenga issue but he is concerned that time is running out. Meanwhile his "paradox" so far limits what he feels he can do if Gardiner mediation does not succeed.

Yost asked SYG what Gardiner considered prospects to be. Thant said Gardiner remains somewhat optimistic. He will offer his suggestions on how to proceed to Tshombe as soon as latter arrives in Leo, which should be today.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–1862. Secret; Limit Distribution. Received at 2:08 a.m. on May 19 and repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, Paris, and London.

238. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 238. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, May 19, 1962, 5:16 p.m.

1953. Re: London's 42182 and 4228.3

For London: As Ambassador Bruce forecast to British and Belgians, final working paper4 unacceptable to Department because Interim Measures in section [IV] 1 and section 2 (Methods of Pressure) inadequate. At same time, we believe efforts devoted to developing "yardstick" for interim and long-term arrangements served useful purpose and section [IV] 1 of paper should be used to best advantage.

In this connection, US had considered presentation to Gardiner of a suggested outline of agreed principles for a settlement would really be meaningful only in context of describing type of arrangement we would be prepared support by bringing our influence to bear on both parties in effort to get agreement. Since no tripartite agreement possible on tactics to be employed in latter regard, we believe only logical way to proceed is for each of us who cares to do so to describe to Gardiner suggestions for settlement based on London papers with any supplemental suggestions desired now or later required by changes in negotiating situation (see section below for Leo), supplemented by indication of what we each prepared to do support his efforts. You should inform FonOff we intend follow foregoing course in effort do what is possible proceeding from discussions in London. We will keep UK currently informed as appropriate on our future efforts.

FYI: In fact British are adamant against any positive steps to persuade Tshombe to negotiate seriously despite Ambassador's vigorous efforts to secure reversal their position. Dept considers it would be futile to pursue efforts with UK further at this time in attempt establish common approach. End FYI.

For Brussels: You should inform FonOff our foregoing thoughts on use to be made of London working paper with following modifications:

Dept greatly appreciated efforts Rothschild and Hupperts at London to attempt bridge gap between US and UK, and we believe further consultations between US and Belgian governments would be productive. In particular, we welcomed Rothschild suggestion regarding threat withdraw Belgian technical assistance to Katanga at an appropriate time and his tentative suggestion re foreign exchange and customs collection on rail line to Angola and Rhodesia as last resort. Ambassador requested see Spaak and say we most interested latter suggestion. As GOB aware, we had thought foreign exchange and tax collection in Elisabethville would offer fewer risks of hostilities and greater degree protection UN troops involved in view their concentration that area. However, in deference to Belgian concern about possible fighting in major civilian center such as Elisabethville, we giving urgent and sympathetic consideration as to how Rothschild proposal might be implemented. You may inform Spaak we examining for example, what logistics and security problems would be involved in order permit early discussion with him of further details. You may also tell Spaak that in our conversations with UN or others on next steps we make clear Belgians displaying forthcoming and constructive attitude in cooperating in search for solution Congo problem.

For Leopoldville: Suggest you tell Gardiner that on basis London talks we shall shortly suggest to UN any ideas we might have on provisional solution and long-term solution as useful guideline for Gardiner in his mediation efforts. Our ideas appear, however, to coincide with those of Gardiner. (FYI: as pointed out by Spaak (Brussels 2205)5 and Gullion (Léopoldville 2876)6 End FYI.) So we may have little to add. FYI: as already indicated initial study London paper which has no official status indicates interim measures not adequate. Dept urgently studying paper and will shortly telegraph its comments so that they and paper may be communicated to UN. End FYI.

We recognize current Gardiner efforts designed to result in communique announcing agreement and providing for establishment joint commissions to work out specific problems on reintegration appear at variance with idea obtaining immediate agreement on provisional solution we had envisaged. We consider necessary that certain irreversible steps (particularly sharing Katanga foreign exchange and tax revenues and joint control of gendarmerie) should be agreed at outset. We continue believe such irreversible steps are crucial if we are to avoid mere repetition of Kitona exercise where there was no follow through by Tshombe. We think that this objective can be accomplished within the framework in which Gardiner currently operating provided the joint commissions which he envisages are required complete their activities on at least these two critical subjects within specified period of time. Would appreciate your recommendation, after consultation with Gardiner, as to what reasonable deadline might be. Tentatively appears to us that given good will on both sides, agreement on fiscal and exchange issues and control of gendarmerie could be worked out within two to three weeks.

In talking with Gardiner you may reiterate US is prepared to give full support to UN mediatory effort, even at risk incurring hostilities if necessary, achieve adoption by parties of reasonable proposal. In context your discussion with him about possibilities establishing strong points on railroad lines to Angola and Rhodesia (see separate tel)7 you may indicate purpose of inquiry is to permit us on contingency basis, reassess what type of forceful UN action would be most effective and feasible to implement GOC authority over Katanga foreign exchange and tax revenues.

You authorized inform Adoula of outcome of London talks in general terms, stressing US exploring further what means of persuasion might be used with Tshombe and are hopeful we can quickly achieve positive results. He should be told we believe UN will be able to play a constructive role in integration of Katanga, and we will give it necessary support. On other hand, it will be necessary for Adoula to make some concessions and recognize need for working out termination of Katanga secession on a practical basis. Our aim would be to have Tshombe take major irreversible steps soonest. We will keep closely in touch with Adoula.

For USUN: Suggest you fill in U Thant along same lines as Embassy Leo instructed to inform Gardiner.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–1662. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Eisenberg and Buffum; cleared by Williams, Burdett, Cleveland, and McGhee; and approved and signed by Rusk. Also sent to London, Brussels, and USUN and repeated to Paris and New Delhi.

2 See footnote 1, Document 235.

3 Telegram 4228 did not concern the Congo. The reference is apparently to telegram 4225, Document 235.

4 See Document 236.

5 Telegram 2205 from Brussels, May 18, reported a conversation that day between Spaak and MacArthur in which Spaak stated that he felt the main elements of the tripartite paper were included in Gardiner's proposals and it would be better tactically to support the latter than to introduce separate proposals. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–1862)

6 In telegram 2876 from Léopoldville, May 18, Gullion commented on Rothschild's May 16 draft aide-memoire; see footnote 2, Document 235.

7 Telegram 1948 to Léopoldville, May 18. (Department of State, Central Files, 870G.11/5–1862)

239. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 239. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, May 21, 1962.

SUBJECT

Our Congo Policy After the London Talks

In the London discussions some measure of agreement was reached among the three parties as to the constitutional arrangements which would be considered reasonable, somewhat less agreement as to the transitional arrangements which would be desirable, and disagreement as to the assessment of dangers which the present situation involves unless the integration of Katanga is achieved and as to the measures to be taken to bring it about.

The British were completely negative on the point of the measures to be taken to promote the integration and it also became fully clear that neither Belgium nor the UK would attempt to persuade the big companies to take any active role in such a policy. The Belgians agreed with us fully that there are serious dangers in the Congo and in the UN if Katanga is not integrated soon, and suggested tentatively it might be necessary to take effective action within one or two weeks. However, the Belgians took a half-way position as to what measures could be envisaged. In particular they consider there would be serious risks if the UN supports the GOC in collecting taxes in Elisabethville, but on the other hand they developed some suggestions on applying pressure on Tshombe, at least in a limited way, and there is reason to believe they would acquiesce in the GOC (with UN protection) cutting of the railway lines in Katanga provided it is done in sparsely inhabited areas west of Kolwezi and southeast of Elisabethville.

Our conclusion is that we have to press energetically for integration of Katanga. We prefer that this be achieved with no military action but we recognize it may be necessary and we are willing to indicate to Tshombe and Adoula that certain forceful steps might be required (exchange and customs collection under UN supervision) if no agreement is reached promptly. We believe that we can develop considerable measure of agreement in bilateral negotiations with the Belgians. We will, however, have to give up for the time being any attempts to bring the British around to supporting our policy although we will keep them informed. We think they might in the end acquiesce notwithstanding their threat of a veto in the Security Council, etc.

The negotiations with the Belgians should concentrate on the pressure elements and on improving the constitutional paper tentatively drafted in London so as to bring adequate elements of irreversible integration into the transitional arrangements.

The UN Secretary General has already been informed on very broad lines about the outcome of the London talks and we intend to make available to him the paper drafted there stressing, however 1) that this is only a working paper and has no status; 2) that in the transitional period envisaged there a greater degree of integration would have to be achieved; 3) that it is the objective of this Government to assure reintegration promptly and that we are prepared to back the UN fully in its mediation efforts even if this involves a risk of renewed fighting; and 4) that the Belgian idea of cutting the Katanga railroads at or near the borders should be carefully explored.

Mr. Gardiner is at present engaged in an attempt to obtain agreement by Adoula and Tshombe on a formal declaration which would announce that the Katanga has rejoined the rest of the Congo and would refer the specific issues of reintegration to committees chaired by UN representatives. In our view, this approach is feasible only if 1) the individual committees develop a reasonable formula for integration, 2) that a very short time element is built into the agreement which would make it impossible for either party to use dilatory tactics, and 3) that the UN's hand in this negotiation is strengthened by U.S., and hopefully Belgian, assurances of full support.

Prime Minister Adoula is being informed by Ambassador Gullion of the outcome of the talks in general terms stressing that we are exploring further what means of persuasion could be applied on Tshombe and are hopeful that we can come out rapidly with positive results. He will be told we believe the UN will be able to play an active role in the integration of Katanga and we will give it appropriate support. On the other hand it will be necessary for Adoula to make some concessions and recognize the need for achieving the liquidation of Katanga secession on a practical basis. Our aim would be to see that major irreversible steps are taken immediately. We will promise to keep closely in touch with him on our further efforts.

WB

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Files, Congo, May–July 1962. Secret. The source text does not indicate the drafter, but according to the Department of State copy, the memorandum was drafted by Eisenberg. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–2162)

240. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State 240. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State1

Brussels, May 23, 1962, 4 p.m.

2237. Congo. Deptel 3257.2 I discussed Congo last evening with Spaak and Rothschild putting to them our views as contained in reftel which dealt essentially with 1) procedures to be followed with respect to informing Gardiner about London papers; 2) withdrawal of technical assistance; 3) possibility of establishing foreign exchange and customs collection posts or rail line to Angola and Rhodesia. Following are Spaak's comments: 1. Procedures for Informing Gardiner. Spaak was in principle not opposed to our proposal that each of three who care to do so describe to Gardiner suggestions for settlement based on London papers supplemented by indication of what each is prepared to do to support Gardiner's effort. Spaak said since US found working paper unacceptable he understood our view that each of three had in effect regained its freedom of action.

However, Rothschild said Belgian Embassy London reports British propose three powers not approach Gardiner concerning London discussions. Reason is disadvantage in revealing to Gardiner divergencies among Three. British proposed since Gardiner is aware of discussions, he be given explanation no paper or agreement prepared to show him because he is doing so well already with his mediation proposals that there had been no particular need for development suggestions for him. By this means British said Three could avoid revealing differences among them. This procedure is acceptable to Spaak provided we also agree. Spaak would like our views soonest.

2. Re Threat to Withdraw Belgian Technical Assistance. Both Spaak and Rothschild said Department's telegram seemed to reflect only partially the results of London meeting. At London meeting there was agreement on principles and certain practical measures looking to Katanga reintegration. However, it had also been envisaged that on basis of agreed principles certain inducements would be used to persuade both Adoula and Tshombe to be forthcoming in reaching agreement. If inducements failed with either or both of parties it had been envisaged but not agreed that certain methods of exercising pressure might be used.

As matters now stand, Gardiner has made proposals to both Adoula and Tshombe which designed to serve as basis of an agreement. Rather than concentrating on pressures at this juncture, the Three powers should concentrate their efforts on inducing Adoula and Tshombe to agree to Gardiner proposals. If, in light of persuasion we exercise, either Adoula or Tshombe refuse to accept Gardiner proposals as a basis for discussion, we should then decide what pressures should be applied on the recalcitrant party. In this connection Spaak said he and Rothschild had both understood that if Tshombe agreed to go along with Gardiner's proposals and Adoula refused, we would of course apply pressures on Adoula. As a practical matter it seemed probable that inducements and pressures might well have to be applied to both. However, first things must come first and we should be using our persuasion to get Tshombe and Adoula to go along with Gardiner proposals before moving to threats.

Recent news he received from Léopoldville was not too encouraging and there was one unconfirmed report that Adoula is not disposed to use Gardiner proposals as a basis for talks with Tshombe and is creating other difficulties with Katanga del which might lead to breakdown of talks. Spaak assumed that if Tshombe is willing to enter discussions on basis of Gardiner plan and Adoula is not, we will use our influence with Adoula on behalf of Gardiner's efforts to get talks started on basis of his proposals.

3. Customs Collection Posts on Rail Line to Angola and Rhodesia.

Since Rothschild's return from London, Belgians are looking into this matter most carefully. Rothschild reminded Spaak and me that he had made unequivocably clear in London re collection posts that, as set forth in London's 4225 to Department,3 "he was advancing suggestion on his own." While Belgians are still looking into this possibility, he said that Dilolo near Angola frontier (which is most important exit route) is in Lunda territory (Tshombe's tribe) and that if post installed there, it might well lead to hostilities with major tribal uprising against UN collection post which would spread to rest of Congo. This is an important and serious consideration.

Spaak indicated he had reservations about whether collection post proposal was feasible and whether it would not result in resumption of hostilities which could spread from collection posts throughout Katanga. In any event, he would wish to study the matter most carefully before reaching any conclusions with respect to it.

In conclusion, Spaak said that he fully agreed with our view (reference telegram) that there should be a continuation of the close consultations between our two governments as our close exchanges over past few months on the Congo had been most useful. He wanted us to know he welcomed our views on this vitally important problem.

Comment: In light failure reach agreement at London, we doubt US can obtain from Belgians advance agreement on program of threats and pressures to which they would be irrevocably committed unless we have first given strong support to Gardiner proposals and used all possible inducements and persuasions with Adoula and Tshombe. US has taken position that London paper is unacceptable and therefore dead. We must remember that we have in London and elsewhere taken position that threats and pressure would only be resorted to as last resort after we had first made major effort to induce Adoula and Tshombe to go along with solution along lines of Gardiner proposals and London paper. If either Adoula or Tshombe refuses to play ball, we will be in much better and stronger tactical position to press Belgians to agree to pressure program if we have first made major effort with inducements and persuasion. We fully realize that in a perfect world it would be preferable to have agreement in advance of threats and acts of pressure, but we doubt such agreement can be obtained in absence of first playing out persuasion and inducement string.

We believe there is possibility Belgians will be reasonable re pressures if Adoula is forthcoming and Tshombe refuses to play. On other hand, if Adoula is obstructive, we obviously will get nowhere with Belgians re putting pressure on Tshombe unless we are also willing put pressure on Adoula.

MacArthur

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–2362. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, London, Paris, New Delhi, and USUN.

2 Telegram 1953 to Léopoldville (Document 238) was repeated to Brussels as telegram 3257.

3 Document 235.

241. Message From Prime Minister Macmillan to President Kennedy 241. Message From Prime Minister Macmillan to President Kennedy1

London, May 25, 1962.

Dear Friend, The Congo situation seems to be threatening us again. I had hoped that the talks between your people and ours, on which we agreed in Washington and which took place recently in London, would bring our two points of view closer together, but if anything they seem to have had the reverse effect. If the Congo talks fail it looks as if the United States and Britain will find it difficult not to be in open disagreement. I do not see how we in the United Kingdom could support a further United Nations operation in present circumstances. If there were to be a United Nations operation about which we were in disagreement, I fear bad effects not only in the United Nations and in Africa but in Anglo-American relations. Whatever resolutions may be passed in the United Nations, people here feel that the Organisation itself is dependent on United States financial support and that the operation in the Congo would be impossible without United States logistic support particularly in aircraft. I therefore venture to send you this message to see if we cannot prevent this awkward situation from developing.

Our position about the Congo is quite simple. We agree that it ought to be a united country, but feel that it should have a federal constitution, leaving the provinces in general, and Tshombe in particular, a considerable degree of local autonomy. We think this is right, because the country is so large and the tribes so different, and because Tshombe is the best hope of keeping Katanga prosperous and therefore supplying some money for the rest of the country. So what we want is an agreement between Adoula and Tshombe, in which Tshombe will accept the authority of the Central Government and supply some money, and in return Adoula will agree to amend the loi fondamentale.

At the moment I must say that Adoula seems to be more unreasonable than Tshombe as he seems to be rejecting the proposed Commission of National Reconciliation and is trying to hold Tshombe incommunicado. We are prepared to use our influence with Tshombe but we could not accept another United Nations military operation against him. In the first place we do not think that such an operation would be successful because of the likelihood of guerilla warfare developing, or if it did succeed the price in terms of casualties and chaos in Katanga would be unacceptable. And we fear that a new United Nations operation might well result in the destruction of Tshombe which, for the reasons which I have explained above, we do not wish to see. And if Tshombe were to disappear, the United Nations would find itself committed to running Katanga as a sort of colony. So we feel that at the moment Gardiner should be encouraged to put pressure on Adoula to accept the idea of amending the loi fondamentale as well as pressing Tshombe to make concessions to the Central Government notably on revenue and gendarmerie, and that the two sides of the bargain should hang together in time as they do in logic.

I hope very much that you will feel able to give instructions to your people to work in this sense. Gardiner has brought about a remarkable improvement in the political atmosphere and I would hope that we can both give him the maximum support with Adoula and Tshombe.

[Here follow brief comments on Chinese refugees and British Guiana.]

With warm regard,

Harold Macmillan2

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo General, Tripartite Congo Talks, May 1962. Secret. Filed with a covering note from Ambassador Ormsby Gore to the President.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

242. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 242. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, May 30, 1962, midnight.

2951. 1. This is to confirm (as indicated summarily in Embtel 2901)2 that I did on May 22 inform Adoula after consulting Gardiner, that US prepared to give full support to UN mediatory effort, even at risk of hostilities if necessary to achieve agreement on reasonable proposal. To make this assurance more meaningful to Adoula in his own environment, I explained in terms of Embtel 28953 that if GOC took reasonable line and Tshombe refused to negotiate, or if reasonable and responsible agreement reached which Tshombe refused to honor, we considered UN would back GOC and US would back UN; on other hand if GOC demanded simple capitulation or could not show it had made every reasonable effort to reach agreement, US could not help.

2. Effect of these assurances on Adoula so far has been what we desire: He has become more accessible to suggestions, more friendly to us and to Gardiner, more reasonable in negotiations, has moderated restrictions on Katanga delegates, and has tried to meet us half way on subjects of concern to us not directly related to Tshombe talks, e.g., Congolese purchase of aircraft at exorbitant prices, retraining ANC, et cetera.

3. In presenting position to Adoula, it turned out not to be necessary to diagram for him just how GOC might assert authority and how UN might back it up in event negotiations failed. I had thought since my previous hints to him had been necessarily vague I would have to be more specific and had therefore requested authority in paragraph eight of Embtel 28954 to tell Adoula about tax collection plan. Did not intend to suggest it be introduced into talks until these headed for failure as seemed case last week.

4. Paragraph eight of Embtel 2895 is in effect formula for eventual implementation of design presented in paragraph one above, moving from negotiating impasse to action. I contemplate Adoula would put Tshombe on notice (A) that GOC intends to take tax collection action, but (B) plan will take into account legitimate interests Katanga and technical experts would work out practical steps to put arrangement into effect.

5. Such advance notice might give Tshombe few days to get set to resist. On other hand it would give him final chance to avoid show down by force. If after this notice, tax collection plan resulted in hostilities, Katanga apologists could not claim this result of precipitate, provocative action (as they did last September). At last moment even UMHK might prefer to bring decisive pressures on Tshombe rather than risk unilateral assertion of GOC rights.

6. Adoula has himself obviously thought about how he would assert GOC authority if agreement failed. I am confident tax collection plan with UN backing has not occurred to him. He tends rather to think in terms of unleashing ANC operations in North Katanga. Possibly, therefore, he could interpret our assurance as backing for North Katanga scheme.

7. I should still like therefore after checking with Gardiner and when we know where collection points would be installed to inform Adoula about tax plan. I repeat that I would not propose anyone introduce plan into talks unless and until these were clearly headed for failure.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/5–3062. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, Paris, London, New Delhi, and Lagos.

2 Telegram 2901, May 22, reported a conversation in which Gullion outlined for Adoula the results of the London talks, telling him there was agreement on objectives but not on methods. He urged Adoula to give serious consideration to Gardiner's proposals and told him the United States was prepared to back the United Nations but Adoula must be flexible and prepared to make concessions. (Ibid., 770G.00/5–2262)

3 Telegram 2895, May 21, reported that Gardiner was deeply discouraged at the prospects for talks. Tshombe had returned to Léopoldville on May 18 and had professed willingness to take Gardiner's proposals as a basis of discussion, but Adoula had declared that he was awaiting a Katangan reply to his April 16 proposals. Gullion proposed telling Adoula that if he took a reasonable approach and Tshombe rejected it, the United Nations would support the Congolese Government with U.S. backing, but that if he insisted on Katangan capitulation, the United States could not help him. (Ibid., 770G.00/5–2162) Telegram 1961 to Léopoldville, May 22, authorized him to talk to Adoula along these lines. (Ibid., 770G.00/5–2262)

4 It reads as follows:

"Provided Department does not perceive objection to specifics I should like further to suggest GOC advise Tshombe that at some firm date GOC will assume its responsibilities for customs collection and that tripartite commission GOC–GOK–UN will work out practical steps implement this agreement in accordance fundamental law. Adoula should also specify GOC undertaking supply appropriate portions Katangese budget excepting such things as gendarmerie, foreign representation, et cetera."

Telegram 1961 to Léopoldville (see footnote 2 above) requested clarification as to how this would fit in to Gardiner's negotiating program.

243. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 243. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, June 1, 1962, 9:28 p.m.

3406. Re Léopoldville's 29572 —Congo Financial Crisis. Paraphrase of Mladek report was delivered Department by IMF. Understand copy also handed U Thant who intended pass GOB and other Europeans. Situation appears grave and we concur with IMF appraisal that either radical cut back of imports or major devaluation and resulting inflation would be political disaster. We also concur additional comment made by Mladek to IMF that unless foreign exchange requirements met soonest prospects current Katanga negotiations will be impaired. Dept therefore seeking sources additional funds on priority basis.

For Brussels:

Spaak has repeatedly expressed his desire to attack Congo economic problems without waiting for a political settlement. Present situation sufficiently grave jeopardize possibility Tshombe-Adoula agreement and we would expect Belgian cooperation.

Ambassador requested seek meeting with Spaak soonest, describe situation as reported reftel, and strongly urge Belgian credit or grant to GOC equivalent 10 million dollars for essential imports and services. Spaak fully aware US balance of payments difficulties but, despite this, we are making serious effort provide additional funds. Under present circumstances very difficult offer grants for third-country purchases, especially as it is well known that Europe and especially Belgium would benefit almost exclusively from this trade. Congo situation critical and US will do its part, but we believe Belgium must share burden by providing additional funds for Belgian franc expenditures; also, it would facilitate US efforts if we could point to fact that interested Europeans doing their share in face of emergency situation.

Belgian assistance this effort would also provide expression Belgian determination support Adoula government. This could have salutory effect on Tshombe during current negotiations. Department considers present emergency aid measures as separate from economic development program but essential to create basis for latter. Ambassador may inform Spaak that we are preparing positive response to his suggestion for long-range economic program organized on basis effective planning and coordination under UN umbrella, including aid from all sources.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 870G.10/5–3162. Confidential. Drafted by William C. Harrop of the Office of Central African Affairs and Beaudry; cleared by Fredericks and Harlan Cleveland, in draft by Tyler, and in substance by Hutchinson; and approved by McGhee. Repeated to Léopoldville, London, Paris, and USUN.

2 Telegraph 2957, May 31, stated that Acting Director of the African Department at the International Monetary Fund J.V. Mladek, who was heading an IMF delegation visiting the Congo, was sending a message to IMF headquarters reporting a grave financial crisis in the Congo far more serious than had been previously reported. Usable foreign exchange reserves had fallen to about $2.5 million, while the foreign exchange deficit was currently about $15 million per month. Mladek proposed that the United States provide $55 million in aid during the next 4 months, with waivers permitting the use of $20 million for non-dollar procurement. (Ibid.)

244. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 244. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom1

Washington, June 2, 1962, 3:51 p.m.

6425. Eyes only for Ambassadors. Verbatim text. Please pass following message from President to Prime Minister:2

"June 1, 1962

Dear Prime Minister:

Thank you for your letter of May 25.3 As you know, we attach great importance to a peaceful solution in the Congo and I have been giving this subject my close personal attention.

I am confident that we both have the same ultimate objectives. We both want a free and undivided Congo, prosperous and at peace. Where we differ is with respect to how the objectives might be achieved, the amount of autonomy which can be safely allowed to component parts of the country, and the role of the UN.

We, too, favor a federal constitution under which Tshombe accepts the authority of the Central Government and under which the provinces are given a considerable degree of autonomy. We do not believe, however, that this autonomy should be so great that it could lead to a resurgence of secession and outbreak of civil war with several factions backed by great powers.

We are convinced that the longer Katangan separation is maintained the stronger centrifugal forces in the country will become while moderate nationalist elements grow weaker.

We, too, pin our hopes on a reasonable agreement between Mr. Adoula and Mr. Tshombe, but we fear perhaps more than you the consequences of indefinitely protracted negotiations and the possibility of an illusory agreement.

The former condition can, and probably does, mask aggressive preparations by both sides in which Katanga, unimpeded by allegiance to the UN and supported by taxes paid exclusively to it by foreign companies, has an advantage. It could also mean either the downfall of the Adoula Government or perversion of its policy. Despite a few real successes and some superficial improvements, the erosion of Adoula's political and financial strength is already well advanced. The Soviet Bloc confidently awaits the outcome of this development.

An agreement which turned out to be illusory would have the same bad effects and worse. It would only make inevitable the conflict we seek to avoid in circumstances much more disadvantageous.

Unhappily, after Kitona and similar previous experiences, the possibility that an agreement could be sabotaged must be taken with utmost seriousness. For these reasons, we believe an agreement must come soon and it must contain elements of genuine federal authority.

In our own national history, our experience with non-federalism and federalism demonstrates that if a compact of government is to endure it must provide the central authority with at least the power to tax and the exclusive power to raise armies. We could not argue with the Congolese to the contrary.

In the Congo, we believe that the Katanga gendarmerie must be reliably integrated with the army of the Republic. The tax collection system should be one in which the federal government participates. It is not enough that an autonomous Katanga pay tribute to Léopoldville. In our judgment, the Central Government could not be bought off with these monies. So long as an unfederated Katangese Army is intact, these payments could be cut off at any time and any other obligations entered into by Katanga could be nullified.

Mr. Tshombe can indeed play a useful part in the future life of the Congo. But, if he reaches an agreement and holds to it, he must be finally convinced that the UN will have full support in its effort to bring about integration, and secession in any guise is no longer possible.

For our part, we are doing our best to persuade Mr. Adoula to be reasonable. He and Mr. Tshombe appear to have agreed to drop the Commission on National Reconciliation to which you refer in your letter. Also, the question of security safeguards for the Katangese delegation seems to have been resolved, partly as a result of the efforts of our two embassies at Léopoldville.

We have lost no opportunity to impress on Mr. Adoula the dangers of civil war during the present negotiations and throughout his tour in office. We have told him that he ought to be patient, even beyond the expectations of most reasonable men. We have argued with him strenuously, urging him to accept the Kitona accord and we are pressing him to reach an agreement in the present negotiations.

Should current negotiations fail, however, the time could be near at hand when Mr. Adoula will no longer heed or be free to follow counsels of restraint. When he has exhausted every reasonable possibility of negotiation, or if Mr. Tshombe having made an agreement fails to live up to it, the Chief of the Congolese Government will be obliged to assert his authority.

We have told Mr. Adoula, after consulting with Mr. Gardiner, that the United States is prepared to give full support to the UN mediatory effort even at the risk of hostilities, if this is necessary to achieve agreement on a reasonable basis. In concrete terms, our support would extend this far: if the Government of the Congo follows a reasonable line and if Mr. Tshombe refuses to negotiate, or if a sound agreement is reached which Mr. Tshombe refuses to honor and if Katanga then contested the establishment of the authority of the Government of the Congo (for example, its right to collect taxes) and if the UN backed the Government of the Congo, the US would back the UN.

The effect of our assurances thus far on Mr. Adoula has been positive and he has become more, not less reasonable.

Indeed, just at the moment the sky has lightened and these gloomier prospects have at least temporarily receded. This is primarily owing to the remarkable achievements of Mr. Gardiner and his UN team.

The United States, as you are aware, has supported the efforts of the UN as the best insurance against the conflict of great powers in the Congo. We also supported the Security Council Resolution of November 24, 1961, and are presently backing the UN consistent with that policy.

When it comes to accepting 'another UN military operation against Tshombe', we have, of course, never contemplated offensive military initiative by the UN.

We should regret it very much if the 'awkward situation' you describe should arise in the Security Council revealing our differences of opinion in this isolated issue. Yet, our powers to prevent this development are limited. Unless the Katanga issue is soon resolved, it seems evident that some other country is bound to raise the question about non-application of the Council's November mandate.

It occurs to me that there is an additional step which might lessen awkwardness in the Security Council and also contribute to a peaceful settlement.

Mr. Tshombe's government (and effectively his resistance) is almost wholly financed by revenues paid to him by the Union Miniere du Haut Katanga which elects to make no payments to the Central Government. I hope you and the Government of Belgium can use your influence with this company and its affiliates to cause them to reconsider this policy. If, as it has been reported, they fear reprisals from Mr. Tshombe, I believe they should apply to the United Nations for protection.

I am aware that there is some risk involved in any course of action available to us in the Congo. I do hope, however, you will agree with me that the risks presented by the kind of support we believe should be given to the United Nations are less than the risks of inaction.

I am encouraged by reports reaching me of some progress in the negotiations at Léopoldville. It seems to me that, with the situation developing as it is, now is the time for all of us to exert the maximum pressure to insure that these negotiations are successfully concluded. Let us hope these efforts will spare us the difficulties that we will have to face if the Congo crisis is not abated.

Sincerely, John F. Kennedy"

White House does not intend to publish. Letter should be classified Secret.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–262. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Cleveland, Vance, and Carlucci; cleared in draft by Williams and Wallner and in substance by Tyler; redrafted in the White House and approved by the President on June 1; and approved by McGhee. Repeated to USUN, Léopoldville, and Brussels.

2 A draft message was sent to Bruce, Gullion, Stevenson, and MacArthur for comment in telegram 6346 to London, May 29. (Ibid., 770G.00/5–2962) Their comments are ibid., 770G.00.

3 Document 241.

245. Memorandum of Conversation 245. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, June 9, 1962, 1 p.m.

SUBJECT

The Congo

PARTICIPANTS

Belgian Foreign Minister P.H. Spaak

Mr. Robert Rothschild, Chef de Cabinet to Mr. Spaak

Belgian Ambassador Louis Scheyven

Mr. Jean de Bassompierre, Counselor, Belgian Embassy

The President

The Vice President

The Secretary

Mr. George Ball, Under Secretary

Mr. George McGhee, Under Secretary for Political Affairs

Governor G. Mennen Williams, Assistant Secretary for African Affairs

Mr. Foy Kohler, Assistant Secretary for European Affairs

Mr. McGeorge Bundy, White House

Ambassador Douglas MacArthur II

The President said that there were many difficulties in exerting pressure so as to bring about unity. The most critical aspects of the Congo situation are, the President continued, how to persuade Tshombe to come to an agreement with Adoula; what to do about the private economic interests; and what the governments of Belgium and the US can do to prevent the collapse of the Adoula government.

Mr. Spaak indicated that neither Adoula nor Bomboko seem to realize how serious the financial and economic situation is in the Congo. However, not only is it a question of the Congo's needing assistance, but there has to be some form of controls over imports and the uses of foreign aid. Mr. Mladek of the IMF is also most concerned with the deteriorating economic situation in the Congo, Mr. Spaak said, and has stated that $10 million in foreign exchange will be needed in the immediate future to pay for necessary imports, as well as $15 million a month thereafter for some months. However, Mr. Spaak reiterated, it is essential that adequate controls be established so that this money will not be wasted. As an illustration of Congolese irresponsibility, Mr. Spaak remarked that the Congo Government had been pressing Belgium strongly to pay for a sumptuous "Palace of Culture" in Léopoldville. Another example of this unrealistic attitude was the fact that the Congo reacted to a recent Belgian offer of technical assistance by asking Mr. Spaak to appoint three judges to try Gizenga.

The President agreed that controls were an urgent necessity in order to prevent the drain on currency reserves and that the Congolese Government often did not act in a mature manner. The President emphasized, however, that it was of paramount importance to the West for Adoula and Tshombe to reach agreement, and pressure would have to be used, if necessary, to achieve this result.

Mr. Spaak concurred that it was extremely important for Adoula and Tshombe to reach agreement, but indicated that it was difficult to guess how Tshombe would react to pressure.

The President continued that, generally speaking, it would be disastrous to have a renewal of hostilities in the Congo. However, he went on, the US was prepared to support the use of strong pressures, if necessary, even though they might lead to the risk of hostilities which would in turn create problems for everybody, including himself. The difficulty is that Tshombe's economic position is still quite strong, and therefore there is no great incentive for Tshombe to change his attitude. In view of the possibility that the Adoula Government may collapse if no progress is made in the negotiations, however, it is vital to act promptly, the President stated.

Ambassador MacArthur observed that it is most important to determine what concessions should reasonably be made by both Adoula and Tshombe. There must be a balanced solution and if Tshombe is to give up control of his army and half of his present revenues, there must be something in it for him. He must obtain satisfaction on constitutional issues and, in particular, he must gain a considerable degree of autonomy.

Governor Williams remarked that Adoula seems to be a reasonable man.

Mr. Ball stated that there are diverging opinions as to what Tshombe's aspirations are, namely, whether he leans toward some form of an autonomy for Katanga or whether he wants to be a national figure in a united Congo. Recently, there had been some indications that he might favor a united Congo in the belief that he would play an important role in it. At the same time, he is disturbed over the fact that the opposition to him in the Katanga is receiving strong backing from Adoula.

Mr. McGhee said that one of the difficulties is the fact that Tshombe is being asked to give up something specific, but it is not clear what he will get in return, such as a new Constitution, which would give the Katanga some autonomy within a federal framework.

The President stressed that there was a difficult problem with the UN, because if the UNOC were to pull out of the Congo, it would be more difficult to exert pressure on Tshombe. Some elements in Katanga are under the mistaken impression that the US would not support another UN action in the Congo, the President observed.

Mr. Spaak replied that the US, the UN and Belgium should all speak in identical terms to Adoula and Tshombe, making it clear to them that unless they reach agreement, the Congo would not receive any help. Adoula does not realize how badly he needs money from the US.

The President wondered what could be done to persuade Tshombe to reach agreement. We would have to find effective means of persuasion or pressure and we should consider what both Belgium and the US could do along these lines.

Governor Williams said that as long as Tshombe had money and was receiving taxes from the private companies in Katanga, he could afford to hold out in the negotiations. It was important, therefore, to try to find means of turning off this flow of money to Tshombe. Any agreement reached between Adoula and Tshombe, the Governor stressed, should give the central government the power to levy taxes and to control the army, while allowing the provinces a large measure of autonomy.

Mr. McGhee said we should strive for a balanced proposal, whereby each party would be asked to give in on some things. Then, if Adoula accepted this compromise, but Tshombe refused to, we would have to exert pressure on Tshombe.

Mr. Spaak agreed there should be a balanced proposal, with concessions on both sides, but said that a final decision could not be made in advance as to what action should be taken in the event no agreement were reached between Adoula and Tshombe. This would depend on circumstances and on whether Adoula or Tshombe were responsible for preventing an agreement.

Mr. McGhee concluded the discussion on the Congo by saying that a balanced proposal could be an effective instrument to be used by the commissions which would be created as a result of Gardiner's current mediatory efforts in the Adoula-Tshombe talks and that there would be further discussions with Mr. Spaak that evening at dinner as to details.2

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Belgium. Secret. Drafted by Glenn and MacArthur. The meeting was held at the White House during a lunch for Spaak, who visited Washington on June 9. He was in New York heading the Belgian Delegation for the U.N. General Assembly discussion of Ruanda-Urundi.

2 No record of the dinner conversation has been found. A memorandum of conversation dated June 9 records discussion of the Congo by Rusk and Spaak that morning and after lunch. At the afternoon meeting, Spaak and Rusk agreed that a working group would prepare papers on the problem of financial controls on aid and the tactics to be followed in obtaining a balanced political settlement. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–962) At a meeting that afternoon, McGhee and Rothschild agreed that a draft telegram to Léopoldville should be prepared and shown to Rusk and Spaak that evening. Their discussion of the problem of obtaining a political settlement and of the Congo's financial situation is recorded in separate memoranda of conversation. (Ibid., 770G.00/6–962 and 870G.10/6–962)

246. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 246. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, June 10, 1962, 2:08 p.m.

2073. For Ambassador. Verbatim text.

We believe Gardiner's current approach of commissions must be supplemented in order to result in early liquidation of secession and agreement on constitutional principles. Our purpose is to facilitate Gardiner's task by supplying adequate support so as to assure the achievement of our objectives. An early solution is needed because of erosion of GOC both politically and financially. Immediate measures are required for currency stabilization. We are envisaging a plan to propose to United Nations and GOC whereby major new aid will be given the GOC provided it agrees to adequate controls over the utilization of foreign exchange and to a beginning of budgetary control.

Economic stabilization in the Congo is inseparable from a political solution.

As solution of political problem we propose a package including essential irrevocable steps to be implemented immediately affecting Katangan secession, which Adoula requires, and agreement on principles which two parties would agree they would support in drafting a new constitution which would assure Tshombe of reasonable autonomy. We consider that two parties should be asked to accept constitutional principles agreed to in London unless they can reach prompt mutual agreement on another basis. In this connection product of constitutional commission which has been working in Léopoldville since January, if agreed, might serve as a useful base.

The two parties in our judgement can be persuaded to agree to this package by the following measures:

A. Of interest to Adoula

1. Irreversible agreement on reunification of Katanga. Adoula would be informed that if Tshombe did not accept or implement agreement government of Belgium would withdraw its technicians from Katanga, and our two governments would support United Nations protection of customs collection by GOC at some point on railroad leading out of Katanga. The irreversible character would be assured by the immediate measures worked out in London with addition of following: a. to ensure that Katanga gendermarie is not used in the future to reverse the agreement, Katanga would agree to immediate stationing of major elements of UNOC troops in Jadotville, Kolwezi, and Kipushi.

b. foreign exchange on all exports from Congo including Katanga will be paid to a technical organ which we propose be set up to control utilization of foreign exchange and eventually budget.

2. An additional fund would be established to support Congolese foreign exchange.

B. Of interest to Tshombe

1. The agreement on constitutional principles, the implementation of which we would do our utmost to ensure. We would link the donation of funds to support Congolese foreign exchange to the acceptance and implementation of the constitutional principles the two parties agree to support.

2. The reluctance of Tshombe to join his somewhat brighter economy to that of the rest of the Congo would be overcome by our insistence that the GOC agree to procedures assuring sound fiscal management along the lines of the attached paper.

Subheading

Policy envisaged with regard additional funds to support Congolese foreign exchange and measures to assure sound fiscal and foreign exchange management 1. Any further donations will only be given upon establishment of some satisfactory form of control.

2. Such control would include, among other things, foreign exchange control. Included in foreign exchange would be that generated in the Congo including provincial as well as central government and that donated by other governments or persons.

3. A further condition would be an arrangement to assure that internal expenditures would be not in excess or outside of the existing budget.

4. Control would be exercised through a semi-autonomous authority responsive to the Prime Minister and to the United Nations, and agreeable to the donors. This authority would not be immediately within jurisdiction of Prime Minister so as to avoid political consequences of denying improper requests. However, the authority should not be directly under United Nations either because that would deny too completely the sovereignty of the Congo.

5. The authority would not itself issue individual import and exchange licenses but would approve categories for which licenses might be issued. Authority would have right to audit licenses issued with understanding that funds could be withheld if individual licenses were improperly issued.

6. No new long-term economic aid would be provided unless the central government would accept the setting up of a new budget perhaps only for six months more reasonably balanced than the present one. Responsibility for review and coordination concerning the budget would be vested in the aforementioned authority.2

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–1062. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Vance, Williams, Hutchinson, and Spaak's private secretary Viscount Etienne Davignon; cleared by MacArthur and McGhee, in draft by Wallner, and in substance by Hutchinson and Rusk; seen in draft by Rothschild; and approved by Williams. Repeated to Brussels, USUN, London, and Paris.

2 Telegram 2072 to Léopoldville, June 10, stated that Spaak and Rusk had agreed in principle on the package set forth in telegram 2073. It requested Gullion's comments on the package, on the Congo's economic and financial situation, and on the prospects for Adoula's acceptance of the package. (Ibid.)

247. Letter From the British Ambassador (Ormsby Gore) to Secretary of State Rusk 247. Letter From the British Ambassador (Ormsby Gore) to Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, June 11, 1962.

Dear Mr. Secretary Of State, Thank you very much for your letter of June 82 about the Foreign Secretary's message on the Congo and the exchange of messages between the Prime Minister and the President.

The Foreign Secretary has found this exchange most valuable, and the definition of the extent of your support for the United Nations in the President's message is very helpful. But he has the impression that there may still be some misunderstandings between our two Governments which he would like to see cleared up.

For example, we agree that the Congolese constitution must provide the central authority with power to tax and the exclusive power to raise federal armies. We would certainly not ask you to argue to the contrary with the Congolese. Indeed, we hope that the Central Government will act in the sense of a hint which M. Spaak recently gave them and produce detailed legislation about the country's finances, thus implementing the general provisions of the Loi Fondamentale, providing a legal basis for the division of revenues.

You favour a federal constitution under which Tshombe accepts the authority of the Central Government and under which the provinces are given a considerable degree of autonomy. Again, we agree. Certainly it is not our aim so to weaken the federal structure that it ceases in fact to have any meaning and encourages secession and civil war. As we see it, however, we must be careful to preserve the level of administrative competence of Katanga. If destroyed, the result would be a drop in net revenues which would affect the whole Congo.

The President suggests that we should use our influence with Union Miniere and its affiliates to get them to pay their taxes to the Central Government. As we see it, there is no question of Union Miniere "electing" to support Tshombe in his secession. But they have to take account of the undeniable facts of the situation. Operating in a territory under the sole de facto control of the Katanga Government, they have little alternative but to accept the laws enforced by that Government. They are entirely dependent on Tshombe's goodwill for supplies of foreign exchange, so far as their operations in Katanga are concerned. They have recently once again passed their dividend because the exchange has not been made available. From a legal point of view, they might have been wiser to place their protests more formally on the record, but that is another matter.

The conversations which Dr. Linner has recently had in Brussels have, so he told us, been hopeful. There is now a better understanding between the United Nations and Union Miniere which the Foreign Secretary hopes will lead to a more equitable sharing of Katanga's revenues. He does not, however, believe that Union Miniere could simply declare that henceforth they are going to pay their taxes to the Central Government and rely thereafter on the United Nations for protection. Their operations cover such a vast area and their communications are so vulnerable that the United Nations would not be capable of ensuring their unimpeded working if they were to defy Tshombe. And Adoula would not thank the United Nations for returning to him a Katanga in ruins.

Dr. Linner is also canvassing the idea that senior representatives of Union Miniere and Tanganyika Concessions should to go Léopoldville for discussions with the Central Government and the United Nations. At the appropriate moment, of which Gardiner would probably be the best judge, we are in favour of this as being a practical step forward. Other practical steps which we fully support include the reopening of the traditional route for exports from Katanga to Port Francqui and thus to the sea. Once the bridges over the Lubilash have been completed (and we have been able to provide some material for the road bridge for which the United Nations asked us), we would hope to see this route used to the maximum and would be ready to urge both Union Miniere, through Tanganyika Concessions, and Tshombe to that end. This seems to us the least risky method of ensuring that a fair proportion of revenues on copper exports accrues to the Central Government, unless of course there is some agreement between Adoula and Tshombe on the division of revenues meanwhile.3

Yours sincerely,

David Ormsby Gore

1 Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204, UK Officials' Correspondence with Secretary Rusk, 1962. Secret.

2 Rusk's June 8 letter to Ormsby Gore responded to a May 18 message from Home, which declared that only persuasion could bring about a settlement in the Congo, that an attempt to impose a plan by force would be worse than any probable alternative, and that the British felt if pressure was needed, it might be necessary to apply it equally to Adoula and Tshombe. (Ibid., Rusk's Correspondence with UK Officials and UK Officials' Correspondence with Secretary Rusk, 1962) Rusk's letter acknowledged Home's message and referred to the President's message to Macmillan (see Document 244).

3 Rusk replied in a letter of June 16, which stated that despite U.S. and U.K. differences, there were significant areas of agreement, and that it was all the more important for the two governments to exercise their influence in pursuit of the objective of a reunified Congo. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–1662)

248. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 248. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, June 25, 1962, 9 p.m.

4110. Congo.

1. Stevenson and Yost met with Spaak, Loridan and SYG this AM to discuss Congo and make presentation of plan as instructed Deptel 3707.2 Thant, however, gave latest report he had of situation and then spent most of mtg describing the way he sees next steps. At the end it was agreed reps from US, UK, France and Belgium would meet with Thant tomorrow AM to go over Thant's view on outlook in Congo.

2. Thant reported he had just received message from Gardiner that Adoula has offered Tshombe Vice-Presidency of Republic (requiring parliamentary action to amend Constitution establishing office of VP). Gardiner reports Tshombe's first reaction was somewhat negative on grounds his followers would feel he had been negotiating in Léopoldville for his personal future and not interests of Katanga. Gardiner also reported Tshombe scheduled to see Kasavubu on afternoon of 25th; presumably Kasavubu would urge Tshombe to accept position. Thant's view was that if Tshombe accepted VP and Conakat took two Cabinet posts which Adoula has offered "problem as good as solved" from UN point of view.

3. Thant then gave his views on next steps. He noted present situation hopeful in view of today's news. However, if UN mediation should not succeed, (a) he would continue to seek ways to get establishment of UN troops in Kolwezi, Jadotville, and Kipushi, (b) urge Belgians to withhold in Brussels export revenue for Katanga. Thant said June 28, before he leaves for Europe, he intends to meet with Congo Advisory Comite to report situation up to date. He would not at that time set forth his views on next steps. Fol CAC mtg, Thant will hold discussions in London, Paris, and elsewhere. If by July 20 when he returns to NY progress has not been made, Thant will, after reviewing situation with UN Reps to US, UK, and France, call SC mtg.

4. In SC Thant would propose economic sanctions to block flow of exports from Katanga except via Matadi. He admitted UK at present unlikely to agree to such proposal. Rikhye (UN military advisor) reports Lubilash Bridge be completed by mid-Aug opening way for use of Matadi for Katanga exports. Thant noted Welensky (Cent Af Fed) appears to have stopped assisting Tshombe, probably because he has too many problems at home. While position of Portugal in Angola doubtful, if SC agreed to economic sanctions, UN force could probably blockade Angola RR route within Katanga near Angolan border; Thant admitted this might involve some fighting but he did not think it would be major military operation. It would depend on logistical support particularly from US for airlift. Thant said main problem for such economic blockage would be opposition from UK and France.

5. Thant then turned to financial problem facing UN. With all pledges UN has received or expects, 165–170 million dollars will be total from bond sales. That would be only enough money to keep UN operation in Congo going at present rate of expenditure until March 1963. Therefore, Congo problem as it now exists must be settled by end of this year. Thant said up to today he had been doubtful that talks could succeed but now he believes they look hopeful.

6. Thant recalled he had discussed with Stevenson US desire to proceed on next steps without SC mtg if talks fail. However, he felt he only had authorization to use force in pursuit of mercenaries and noted anti-mercenary initiative against places outside Eville unlikely to appear justified. He noted probability of strong reaction in UK, France, and Belgium, which were likely also to have effect in Western Germany and Italy, against UN bond purchases. Therefore, he concluded he should not launch important operation without SC res in view political and economic pressures on UN operation in Congo.

7. Spaak emphasized Thant's policies in recent weeks had been very good. He felt Govt of Belgium could offer two weapons to back up these efforts. One was willingness to withdraw technical aid from Katanga; second would be to support economic blockade of Katanga as envisaged by Thant. Spaak said he would urge UMHK officials to talk to Tshombe about urgency of agreement before such blockage put into effect. Spaak also suggested new statement by UN of its efforts in recent weeks, particularly through Gardiner's efforts, and revealing problems with Katanga.

8. Stevenson asked Spaak about Thant's suggestion of freezing in Belgium revenues from Katanga imports. Spaak said UMHK reply would be they had to take into consideration Tshombe's reaction. Spaak noted he had on several occasions advised GOC to pass laws which would provide basis for such action.

9. Stevenson asked Thant about Nigerian troops. Thant's reply was virtually identical with his earlier explanations to Yost concerning need for economy and for efforts discreetly to begin process of cutting expenses. He apparently does not want to block Nigerian withdrawal but may delay it.

10. Spaak expressed view Katangans should at least be threatened with economic sanctions as Thant suggested.

11. There was general agreement success of new measures short of military action would depend largely on British acquiescence. Stevenson noted Spaak's support for economic blockade and suggested another mtg at which UK reps be present in order to impress upon them support for such measure. It was agreed Dean (UK), Yost, Berard (France), and Spaak (Belgium) would meet with SYG tomorrow 10 AM to discuss with Thant his intentions (a) if Léopoldville talks likely succeed, (b) if they fail. We assume at that time we will have opportunity to discuss economic aspects of US-Belgian package which could not be raised before time ran out at today's mtg.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–2562. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, Paris, and London.

2 The reference should be to telegram 3307 to USUN, June 22. As modified by telegram 3309 of the same date, it instructed the Mission to suggest to Spaak a joint approach to Thant in order to describe the U.S.-Belgian plan set forth in Document 246, and to urge that Gardiner draw on the U.S.-Belgian package to strengthen U.N. mediation by including "irreversibles" and agreement on constitutional principles as an integral part of an Adoula-Tshombe agreement. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–1962 and 770G.00/6–2262)

249. Editorial Note 249. Editorial Note

At a meeting of the National Security Council at 10:40 a.m. on June 26, Ambassador Stevenson discussed in general the major issues expected to arise at the General Assembly session scheduled to begin in September. A summary record of the meeting includes the following portion pertaining to the Congo:

"Finance problems. (U Thant is deeply concerned about the immediate financial situation. He is cutting costs of the military in the Congo, but he fears that if the Congo situation is not resolved promptly, military units will be withdrawn and some states now committed to buy UN bonds will not fulfill their pledges.)

"There followed a discussion of current plans to bring agreement in the Congo. The President made clear his view that we must move in concert with the British and the Belgians and that the U.S. should make no commitment to use force in the Congo until there had been further discussion of any such proposal at the White House." (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda, NSC Meetings, 1962)

250. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 250. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, June 26, 1962, 10 p.m.

4119. Congo.

1. As planned, SYG this A.M. met with Spaak and Loridan (Belgium), Berard and Millet (France), Dean and Crowe (UK), and Yost. Narasimhan, Rikhye, Amachree2 and Rolz-Bennett from Secretariat also present.

2. SYG summarized what he had told Stevenson and Spaak yesterday. He will meet with CAC June 28 to give them the facts of situation as he sees it but will not discuss his views for next steps. His "chief concern" is financial problem for UN which Congo operation poses making it imperative that UN be able to withdraw much of military force by end of year. Thant said when he returns to New York about July 20 if situation is "still drifting as it is today" he will call mtg of SC to get new Congo mandate.

3. In SC he will propose economic sanctions against Katanga. He foresees three elements in program: (1) Based on agreement between the Belgian and Congo Govts at time of independence, Belgium should freeze all income for all parts of Congo in Brussels and hold it until political problem solved. (Money would not immediately be paid to Leo.) (2) If Tshombe tries to take action directly against major firms in Katanga (Thant mentioned UMHK and Tanganyika Concessions) UN troops would provide "absolute security" at installations. (3) When Lubilash Bridge completed near end of Aug, mineral exports would move from Katanga only via Matadi.

4. Thant said he realized all SC mtgs were unpleasant and this one would be no less than others; but if no progress by late July, the situation must be reviewed by Council. He noted Adoula has offered to include two Conakats in Cabinet of 18 (in addition to present Balubakat member) and has also confidentially offered Tshombe position of Vice-Pres of Republic. He said Tshombe had not yet given reply to this offer. (Thant noted in passing Tshombe probably not master in his own house and therefore trip to Eville at this time may be necessary to reassert influence.) Thant urged UK, France, and Belgium who had influence with Tshombe to use all their influence in direction of getting Tshombe and his party to participate in central govt on basis Adoula offer.

5. Spaak said on whole Thant's policies were wise and Belgium should be able to support them. He agreed that if no political solution came soon, economic measures should be tried next and said he would speak with his govt as soon as he arrived in Brussels to try to devise ways of supporting Thant's plans.

6. Dean said he could not make comment. Obviously UK favors end of secession and successful talks but he believed UK continued to be worried about force and strongly opposed to any action which might lead to use of force. Spaak replied that threat of program along lines outlined by Thant must be made to Tshombe; if no solution found soon, we will face chaos in remainder of Congo.

7. Millet said France favored end of Katanga secession.

8. Narasimhan repeated importance of putting pressure on Tshombe now while he is in Eville, in particular to get his participation in central govt as offered by Adoula and in general so that talks may be successful when he returns to Leo. Narasimhan also urged that none of govts represented participate in any way in "independence day" celebrations in Eville July 11.

9. Re celebrations, Rikhye said Katanga wants to bring into Eville 1000 troops, mostly from Kolwezi and Jadotville. This would raise total in city to 4000 which he said was too many in view of size of UN forces. He foresaw that local UN commander would have to refuse Katanga proposal.

10. Yost expressed U.S. hope progress soon be made through Gardiner's mediation efforts. But if not, situation could not be allowed to drag on; both because of UN financial problem and because of precarious situation of GOC. Economic pressures should be applied rigorously and enforced if necessary. Threat of their application should be put promptly to Tshombe. We are in full accord with kind of measures cited by SYG but continue to have reservations about SC mtg.

11. Thant then referred to Amachree's recent visit to Washington where he was briefed on U.S. efforts to raise funds to meet present Congolese emergency. Yost said there were two needs to be met urgently. One was to provide adequate financial assistance to Congo and other was to develop controls over funds which would make expenditure effective.

12. Both at beginning and end of mtg, Thant urged that what was said be closely held.

Plimpton

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–2662. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, Paris, and London.

2 U.N. Under Secretary Godfrey K.J. Amachree.

251. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 251. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, June 27, 1962, 8:55 p.m.

3346. Re Congo. Léopoldville pass E'ville by pouch. In today's meeting with Spaak on next phase Congo strategy you should take following line: 1. Breakdown in Adoula-Tshombe talks2 without final agreed communique laying down basic agreement and establishing technical commission brings us to another critical juncture on Congo. In our judgment UN mediatory efforts must continue and new proposals for Gardiner are needed that have reasonable prospect stopping dangerous drift, bringing about early end to Katanga secession, and avoiding early Security Council meeting which we believe USSR and African nationalists will press for at early date. We agree with Spaak we must reaffirm our determination support UN in pressing forward with steps necessary to bring its mediation efforts to successful outcome.

2. In these circumstances, we believe it essential for US and Belgium together put forward new proposal to Thant and Gardiner which latter can present, after appropriate prior private consultations, to Adoula and Tshombe as UN's considered judgment as to what is reasonable solution to present impasse. Our intention would be to help UN both publicly and privately to secure acceptance of Adoula and Tshombe such reasonable solution. Our proposal would involve renewed attempt by Gardiner to seek balanced agreement between Adoula and Tshombe on constitutional principles and on practical measures for achieving reintegration Katanga along lines London agreement (London's 4208)3 and proposal agreed here with Spaak (Deptel 2073 Léopoldville, rptd USUN 3194).4 We would combine inducements and measures to secure agreement.

3. Proposal would encompass two parts designed (a) to get two parties to agree to constitutional arrangements and practical measures for resolution of major issues involved in Katanga reintegration and which have been mandated to four technical commissions, and (b) measures to secure agreement which would be divided into two parts, those that can be taken now by governments and by UN and those that are more likely to risk possible use of force and might require new Security Council mandate. Such Adoula-Tshombe agreement could become directive to four technical commissions to work out necessary details of implementation.

4. As first step, we envisage Gardiner seeking agreement of Adoula and then Tshombe to constitutional principles and to practical measures for bringing about Katanga integration into Congo. Constitutional principles would define redistribution of powers between Central Government and provinces which would give genuine local autonomy to latter but give essential powers to Central Government. Such powers would include foreign affairs, national defense (including integration of non-police functions of Katanga gendarmerie), customs, currency post and telecommunications, exchange control, national taxation and national and foreign commerce. This is distribution agreed on in London and should be acceptable to GOB as well as UK. Included in the practical, immediate measures for bringing about integration would be: (a) sharing of Katangan revenues on 50–50 basis; (b) Katanga agreement for gradual practical integration of its forces into national army under provisions to be worked out by technical commission; (c) Katangan agreement to stationing UN troops in Jadotville, Kolwezi, and Kipushi; (d) reopening of national route; (e) resumption interior trade and communications; (f) allocation to Katanga of some ministerial portfolios in Central Government. As previously discussed with Spaak, we believe above agreement would be facilitated by offer of financial support to GOC subject to establishment of controls that would ensure sound fiscal and foreign exchange management (see Deptel 2073 to Léopoldville marked "Subheading").

5. Measures to secure agreement would be planned in two stages, with the second coming into play only if necessary and only after further consultations and agreement between US and GOB and UN. a) Measures that can be taken under present mandate provided GOB, GOC and UN cooperate include the following and would be adopted as soon as possible and as needed to back up Gardiner mediation: i) Seek GOB agreement withhold dividend payments UMHK shares belonging CSK portfolio holdings;

ii) Seek GOB agreement take measures freeze Katangan assets in Belgium and make outpayments subject to individual licensing;

(iii) US and GOB urge GOC to pass legislation on division of revenues which will make it illegal pay taxes and surrender export proceeds to GOK except as specified in legislation. Belgian Govt could collect import taxes on shipments to Congo in Belgian ports. Request GOB take supporting action bring Belgian trade with Katanga under fiscal control Léopoldville.

(iv) Seek GOC agreement to program for fiscal and foreign exchange controls to ensure sound and effective use external aid. UN, US, GOB and donor countries would concert soonest on working out such control scheme.

(v) Threat of GOB to withdraw its technicians from Katanga if Tshombe did not accept or implement agreement.

(vi) Increased economic assistance which would benefit entire Congo, including Katanga; such assistance being linked to agreement of two parties on constitutional principles.

b) If no effective progress made toward integration within reasonable period (30 days), US and GOB would consult with Thant about other measures and determine at time whether Security Council meeting required give mandate for such UN action. Measures that would be taken by UN with US and GOB support after agreement, could include some or all of following: (i) Stationing of UN troops in three towns (if not achieved previously by agreement), to provide security at company installations and important economic facilities.

(ii) UN backing of GOC customs authorities who will halt shipments on which taxes not paid to protect them against Katangan attacks on Elisabethville perimeter and at such points along railroad as are feasible and effective. This would be basically military judgment depending on capabilities at time. Meanwhile, UN would proceed with contingency plans and preparations.

(iii) UK would require all mineral and copper exports to move from Katanga via Matadi after Lubilash bridge completed near end of August so that GOC could assert customs authority over such shipments.

(iv) If necessary, blockade would be established at border points leading to Angola and Rhodesia in order enforce (iii) above.

Above is to be regarded as broad outline of plan. Points we regard as essential are: 1. UN undertake new mediation effort (along lines Bunker model on issue of West New Guinea)5 in which formula for negotiation and pattern of ultimate agreement is developed and presented by mediator. We have results of London meeting and our discussions with Spaak in Washington earlier this month to guide us on acceptable and reasonable formula. At appropriate time this formula might be made public if such disclosure would be likely promote agreement.

2. Sequence would be: (a) get Belgian agreement; (b) secure Thant agreement by means joint US-Belgian demarche; (c) get Thant recall Gardiner for consultations to discuss our plan; (d) get Gardiner make proposal to Adoula emphasizing appropriate inducements, including fact our plan effectively reintegrates Katanga into the Congo, and that united Congo could expect increased economic assistance. Adoula would also be informed of inducements and other measures to secure agreement; (e) assuming Adoula agreement, proposal would be made to Tshombe stressing that constitutional arrangement would leave Katanga with substantial measure of autonomy with opportunity participate on national scene, and prospects of Katanga continuing retain equitable share Katanga revenue. Tshombe would also have to be made fully aware as to consequences his failure to agree; (f) UK would be kept informed throughout.

3. Constitutional arrangement should be viewed separately from measures to secure agreement on which we must be flexible and uncommitted in first phase.

4. Such measures in turn must be viewed as divided into two parts: those (mainly economic) which can be taken unilaterally and without further mandate since they involve limited risks; those that involve greater risks of force and which therefore broaden mandate on which Thant would judge he must go to Security Council.

5. We would like avoid latter since Security Council meeting unpredictable and may involve loss of control by responsible parties.

Comment on SYG's Ideas

We hope SYG will keep situation fluid in CAC June 28 meeting and that in fact he will avoid discussion specific next step. While we are not sanguine as to its positive effects, we prepared, pursuant Thant's request, to encourage Tshombe agree to participation of Conakats in Central Government and to accept offer of Vice Presidency. As to economic sanctions against Katanga suggested by Thant, you will note that his ideas have been incorporated as appropriate stages above plan. In particular, however, we wish you to note that freezing of assets by Belgians would contemplate as first stage measure which does not require broader mandate whereas other steps suggested by Thant properly belong in second stage enforcement measures.

Subject results your conversations, Dept plans on drafting above proposal in as precise terms as possible which might become document that Gardiner would present to Adoula.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–2762. Confidential. Drafted by Sisco and Pelcovits; cleared by Cleveland, Burdett, Tasca, Ball, and Dungan; and approved by McGhee. Repeated to Brussels, London, Léopoldville, and Paris.

2 The Adoula–Tshombe talks ended early in the morning of June 26 without agreement on a joint communique The two sides had previously agreed to establish four commissions: military, monetary, transport and communications, and economic and fiscal. They had determined the terms of reference for the four commissions but had agreed that none of them would start to function until the final joint communique was signed. A statement issued to the press by Gardiner on June 26 (U.N. doc. S/5053/Add.10/Annex 46) is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 862–863.

3 Reference is to the paper transmitted in Document 236. Telegram 4208 transmitted a draft of that paper; see footnote 2, Document 235.

4 Document 246.

5 Former Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker was acting as mediator in negotiations between Indonesia and the Netherlands on this issue; documentation is printed in vol. XXIII, Documents 143 ff.

252. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 252. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, June 28, 1962, 9 p.m.

4139. Congo.

1. Stevenson, Yost and Loridan (Belgium) met with SYG and Bunche this A.M. to review discussions between U.S. and Belgian reps yesterday (ourtel 4131).2 Stevenson reported on conversations with Spaak: (a) Belgium willing to urge Katangan participation in central govt as Thant proposed Tues,3 (b) Belgium willing to withdraw technical personnel from Katanga as sanction if that necessary, (c) Belgium would cooperate with UK, U.S. and others in joint economic sanctions if they were undertaken jointly, (d) Belgium did not feel it could have much effect on UMHK re remittances to Katanga.

2. Loridan then reported on procedure he and Spaak had worked out fol yesterday's talk with Stevenson. In first stage Belgian rep would tell Tshombe terms he has been offered by GOC with UN help are very good and should be accepted. In this connection Loridan said Belgium would need precise info on status of negots: fiscal terms, Katangan participation in govt, constitutional terms, etc., so that it would know precisely what Tshombe had been offered. Bunche said he felt latest report from Gardiner to SC (S/5053/Add.10)4 should provide most of info Belgians desired. Loridan said during first stage Belgian rep would tell Tshombe SC mtg imminent with probability of tougher mandate against Katanga being issued, that economic sanctions were likely and that Belgium would probably have to withdraw technical assistance (Loridan said this would mean particularly teachers).

3. If no change came in Katanga policy, second approach would be made in which specific sanctions would be spelled out. Stevenson asked why two-stage approach required. Talks so far had made no real progress. Time was running out. Loridan replied specific sanctions not yet agreed upon. First stage approach could be made right away and in meantime precise sanctions could be discussed.

4. Bunche confirmed Stevenson's estimation that little progress had in fact been made in recent weeks. He said Kimba has recently been demanding UN get Katanga agreement for its administrative arrangements in Katanga; he mentioned specifically that Kimba has demanded Katanga clearance for financing of fuel UN bringing in from Rhodesia to use in movement of Baluba refugees. Bunche said UN has drawn line against this demand and refused any such authority to Katanga, a provincial govt. Thant noted Munongo and Kimba consider time on their side and seem to be stalling. Bunche added they are probably right since Katanga appears to be receiving about 65 million per year income from UMHK while in meantime danger grows that Adoula will fall.

5. Stevenson then asked Loridan if first stage approach to Tshombe could be taken next week. Loridan said Spaak would meet with Cabinet on Friday and soon thereafter instructions could probably be sent to Belgian rep in Katanga.

6. Discussions then turned to question of possible sanctions. Loridan noted financial burden for blockade of Katanga would be heavy. There was discussion of problem of getting UK support (it was considered impossible to get Portuguese support) for stoppage of Katanga exports. When Stevenson asked point blank whether any effective blockade enforceable, Thant said UK would not agree to complete shutoff of traffic through Angola; however, that was not required. His objective was to restore what he called "normal" traffic by which he meant that majority of Katanga exports should move via Matadi (as at time of independence) while some would flow through Angola.

7. Loridan's response to Stevenson was that "we should not bluff" since for two years we have been telling Tshombe his time running short. His advisors "who are intelligent men" would tell him new threats were not real.

8. Bunche said he would like to inquire further about Spaak's position that Belgian Govt could not have much effect on UMHK. Loridan said UMHK's position was that if they took measures against Tshombe he would nationalize their property. Bunche and Thant both replied UN give protection immediately to UMHK and other major properties in such eventuality under UN mandate to maintain law and order. Bunche said only provisos would be UN force would need (a) some advance notice and (b) transport support (he mentioned 200 trucks). Thant added UMHK should be aware financial pressure on UN such that unless solution found soon new mandate would be required from SC.

9. Loridan replied UN action against Katanga nationalization could lead to fighting and that should be avoided. Thant replied it was necessary achieve objectives even if some use of force required.

10. Discussion then followed concerning fundamental question of kind of pressure could be organized, economic or military, and whether any effective pressure on Tshombe was possible without willingness ultimately to use force. Loridan took position that secession must be ended and that force should be avoided.

11. During conversation Bunche noted UN has now taken firm decision that Katanga must not bring additional troops into Eville for Independence Day parade. He said Katanga now talking about bringing in from 1000–3000 troops. Bunche also reported Gardiner feels we should stay in Leo for national independence celebration and therefore probably would not return to New York until Monday.5 In meanwhile, we understand Rikhye leaving tonight for Leo to act as counter-balance to Khiari who would otherwise be in charge during Gardiner's absence.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/6–2862. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, Paris, and London.

2 Telegram 4131 from USUN, June 27, reported a meeting among Stevenson, Yost, Wallner, Spaak, and Loridan. (Ibid., 770G.00/6–2762)

3 June 26; see Document 250.

4 Dated June 27; it summarized the March 15–June 26 Adoula-Tshombe discussions. For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 863–869.

5 July 2.

253. Memorandum of Conversation 253. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, June 29, 1962, 2:33 p.m.

SUBJECT

Congo, including Nigerian Troops in Congo

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Mr. Henry J. Tasca, Acting Assistant Secretary for African Affairs

Mr. Woodruff Wallner, Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Organization Affairs

Mr. Wendell B. Coote, Deputy Director, Office of West Coast and Malian Affairs

His Excellency Jaja Wachuku, Nigerian Foreign Minister

His Excellency J.M. Udochi, Nigerian Ambassador to the United States

Mr. D.C. Igwe, Head of the International Division of the Nigerian Foreign Office

Mr. George Dove-Edwin, Counselor, Nigerian Embassy

Mr. Victor Chibundu, private secretary of the Foreign Minister

Miss Agnes Wachuku, sister of the Foreign Minister

In raising this particular item, Foreign Minister Wachuku said that he was very worried about the situation in the Congo. He asked if the Secretary agreed with him that the problem now was in London and not in Brussels. If the economic aspects of the Katanga problem could be settled, a successful solution could be found. However, as long as Katanga was assured of support by the financial interests of the Union Miniere backed by the Tanganyika Concessions, Tshombe would shy away from the integration of Katanga with the central Congo Government. The Secretary agreed that in this framework the problem was in London and not in Brussels.

Continuing, the Foreign Minister said that the United Kingdom should not be so short-sighted since it too had a lot to gain by peace and tranquility in Africa. The Foreign Minister suggested that the U.S., West Germany, the United Kingdom, and Nigeria (if asked to participate) should be able to find a solution.

The Secretary stated that he had discussed the Congo problem in detail with the British and had made clear his view that the UN must be in a position to put severe pressures on Katanga. (In this respect Spaak had been very hopeful—an opinion with which the Foreign Minister agreed.) The main difficulty with the British, according to the Secretary, was that they shuddered at the possibility of another round of fighting. The Foreign Minister did not think that any fighting would be necessary if a firm position were taken that the Loi Fondamentale provides that taxes from the Union Miniere must be paid to the central government. It would then be necessary, of course, for the central government to allocate the funds fairly among the various regions. It was important that the best developed region not suffer in the distribution of the funds. A successful arrangement was worked out in Nigeria where one region, the Western Region, was much better off than the other regions. The Foreign Minister concluded that if the British came out as forthrightly as the U.S., and cooperated as Brussels is now cooperating, Tshombe would realize he had no backing and would then be reasonable.

In response to a question by the Secretary as to whom Tshombe listened to, Wachuku quickly responded that he listened to the British. In addition, Tshombe had secret agreements with Sir Roy Welensky and South Africa. Although he might not listen directly to London, he listened indirectly through the financial interests of London. The Foreign Minister said he intended to discuss this subject with Lord Home when he was in London and the Secretary encouraged him to do so.

The Secretary then queried the Foreign Minister on the status of the Nigerian troops in the Congo. His reply was that Nigeria had three battalions at home and two in the Congo, one of which it was desirous of withdrawing as soon as possible. He said he was personally agreeable to keeping the two battalions there for a longer period, but the Nigerian military did not look at the problem with the same eyes, especially in view of the state of emergency in western Nigeria. Furthermore, the Nigerians knew what their "sister country" was trying to do, and a large country like Nigeria could not leave its borders open to possible outside aggression.

The Secretary said he understood fully the reasons why the Nigerians wanted to have the battalion back home under the present circumstances and he was not in a position to assess how critical the situation in Nigeria was. Nevertheless, if we went down the trail with the UN and the Belgians toward applying additional pressures on Tshombe, violence could result. It would not be in the interest of either of our countries to take away from U Thant the kind of help he needs if he is to do what we are urging him. Furthermore, if trouble was to break out, we would like the Nigerian troops to be there. He hoped therefore that Nigeria would be able to keep its two battalions in the Congo.

The Foreign Minister said that he was not happy about the situation and that he had to intervene personally in order to get them to stay there until the end of June despite some objections by the military. The United Nations wants the troops to remain until the end of the Adoula-Tshombe talks. However, Tshombe is back home and no one knows when the talks will resume. On the face of it the Nigerian troops should be leaving but, nevertheless, Wachuku said they would stay there a little longer and he would do what he could regarding the matter. He had not had a chance to discuss the problem with the Prime Minister yet and he also planned to have talks with the Secretary General in New York next week. He added that a personal message from the President to the Prime Minister to keep the troops in the Congo until the conclusion of the Adoula-Tshombe talks would help considerably. The Secretary promised to explore the possibility of a Presidential message further.2

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/6–2962. Confidential. Drafted by Coote and approved in S on July 24. The time of the meeting is taken from the Secretary's appointment book. (Johnson Library) Other topics of discussion were recorded in separate memoranda of conversation. Documentation concerning Foreign Minister Wachuku's visit to Washington is scheduled for publication in volume XXI.

2 Telegram 71 to Lagos, July 14, transmitted an oral message from the President to Prime Minister Balewa urging against the withdrawal of any troops from the Congo at that time. (Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/7–1262) Telegram 103 from Lagos, July 21, reported that Ambassador Palmer had conveyed Kennedy's views to Balewa. (Ibid., 332.70G/7–2162) Telegram 180, August 7, transmitted the text of Balewa's August 6 reply, which stated that he would maintain two battalions in the Congo for the time being and expressed support for the policy the United States was pursuing as the best hope for solution of the Katanga problem. (Ibid., 332.70G/8– 762)

254. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 254. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, July 2, 1962, 8:18 p.m.

6. Dept has studied problem of formulating principles for constitutional revision, immediate measures to be taken to achieve substantial progress toward integration Katanga, and pressures that might be applied to achieve integration. Following cable2 contains text of formulation that we believe Gardiner might propose to Adoula and, if acceptable to him, to Tshombe for immediate implementation.

In light Dept's knowledge positions taken by Adoula and Tshombe in recent talks, does not appear any substantial change needed in constitutional principles outlined Tripartite London paper.3 In recent talks Tshombe appeared willing accept in principle (though not for immediate implementation) some of most important powers of national government as outlined in London paper: foreign affairs, national defense, currency and foreign exchange.

Immediate practical measures outlined in following telegram are substantially the same as those set forth in Deptel 3346 to USUN4 and in London paper. They have been enlarged somewhat with respect to fiscal, foreign exchange, and budgetary control measures.

We believe that Adoula agreement to "Gardiner formula" in following tel and to financial controls will be facilitated by offer of external financial support to GOC and that Tshombe's agreement will be facilitated by establishment of controls that would insure sound fiscal, foreign exchange, and budgetary management by GOC. In addition there are other measures which might persuade Adoula and Tshombe to agree. Many of first stage measures outlined Deptel 3346 to USUN are deemed impractical by Spaak. Taking account his views it nevertheless would appear that following are possible: a) Threat of GOB to withdraw its technicians from Katanga if Tshombe did not accept or implement agreement.

b) UK and GOB to urge British and Belgian companies to use their influence on Tshombe and, in particular, not to pay dividends.

c) Pressure on BCK to facilitate more rapid rebuilding Lubilash Bridge.

d) USG and GOB to urge GOC to pass legislation on collection and division customs and tax revenues.

e) Increased economic assistance which would benefit entire Congo, including Katanga, such assistance being linked to agreement on foreign exchange controls.

f) Collection of Congolese import duties by Antwerp Customs Office.

If no effective progress made toward reintegration within reasonable period (end of July) and if Adoula accepts proposal like that contained following telegram and Tshombe refuses accept such proposal or carry it out, US and GOB would urgently consult with UN about other measures to be taken, including question whether Security Council meeting necessary or desirable. Measures which be urgently considered would be following: a) Stationing of UN troops in Jadotville, Kolwezi and Kipushi provide security for company installations.

b) UN backing of GOC customs authorities for tax collection scheme at such points as are deemed feasible and effective.

c) Embargo on all imports of copper from Katanga. Dept urgently studying pattern UMHK exports to determine which countries could most effectively implement embargo. Preliminarily, it appears US does not import any substantial quantity Katangan copper and that most of it goes initially to Belgium, UK and Germany.

As Thant leaving New York July 4, USUN should discuss with Thant and Gardiner July 3, after prior consultation with Loridan. If GOB reaction not then available, such discussion would have to be subject to Belgian reaction.

Brussels requested discuss urgently with GOB and report soonest. Views other addressees appreciated.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–262. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Ford; cleared by Fredericks, Wallner, and Burdett; and approved by McGhee. Also sent to USUN and repeated to Léopoldville, London, Paris, and Elisabethville.

2 Telegram 7 to Brussels, July 2. (Ibid.)

3 See Document 236.

4 Document 251.

255. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 255. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, July 3, 1962, 7 p.m.

21. Deptels 6 and 8 to USUN.2 Yost, Sisco, Vance and Dickinson met with SYG, Bunche, and Gardiner this afternoon to discuss "Gardiner" formula of constitutional arrangements and practical measures (reftels).

It was immediately and strikingly apparent however that package approach not what they have in mind, however much they may approve individual elements of package. Gardiner still fol commission approach and encouraged (soberly optimistic) by Tshombe notification to Adoula and UN of names of commission members. First step in his view is acceptance by Adoula of this move as de facto ratification of mandates outlined in recent Leo talks in spite failure sign joint communique. SYG and Bunche fully supported Gardiner's unwillingness to introduce any new package into negotiations at this advanced stage.

Although Yost pressed for idea of how much time Gardiner thought commissions should be allowed for production results, Gardiner refused commit self. He hoped four weeks might be sufficient. He does think Belgians should maintain pressure on Tshombe and mentioned this respect Belgian withdrawal or threat withdrawal of technicians, accompanied by pressure on companies to refuse payment duties to Katanga. Latter step in his view should be accompanied by request to UN by companies that it protect their properties.

SYG, who obviously preoccupied with number matters on last day in New York, took exception to idea it within UN competence to suggest to Adoula what Constitution arrangements he should make. Gardiner added Tshombe would find fault with any constitutional provisions. At same time Adoula very sensitive this subject. Gardiner then suggested we might discuss constitutional problem with Bomboko when he visits Washington.

SYG thought it important that Consuls not attend July 11 independence ceremonies Katanga and said UN has approached govts concerned. We said US willing support their efforts. SYG thought effort should also be made convince Tshombe of need abandon July 11 plans but had no practical proposal how accomplish this.

Yost again sought pin down timetables for completion work of commissions, stressing necessity avoid drift. However, it was clear that neither Thant nor Gardiner yet prepared establish time limits. SYG, after talking Gardiner and Bomboko, now seems less positive and precise in his proposals than he was last week. He did not once mention SC mtg, as he had done on previous occasions. He proposed further assessment of situation after his return from Europe July 20. In reply Yost's query what we can best do in meantime, he said exert strongest possible pressures on Tshombe.

Mtg revealed one thing beyond doubt: We cannot just produce a plan and expect UN adopt it. Most our points are in their scheme of things and are already embedded in negotiations and in commissions' mandates. We should follow UN negotiations closely as we have been doing, letting them know if we see something we think is off base or is omitted. We must simply accept fact Gardiner, with Thant and Bunche backing, is proceeding on own course, but remain alert to make individual suggestions we think helpful. Our most effective contribution at the moment will be in devising, selling to our friends and applying pressures which might induce Tshombe to work honestly and rapidly in commission framework. SYG is at moment slightly reassured by Gardiner's report and attitude, but he is likely to return to SC gambit if by July 20 no substantial progress has been made, particularly if British and French seem reluctant re pressures.

We hope submit before end of week more thorough assessment Congo prospects as seen from here.

Plimpton

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–362. Confidential. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, Paris, and Elisabethville.

2 The reference should be to telegrams 8 and 9 to USUN, which were sent as telegrams 6 and 7 to Brussels; see Document 254 and footnote 1 thereto.

256. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 256. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, July 7, 1962, 5:03 p.m.

41. Following based on uncleared memcon2 is summary of Bomboko and Kamitatu3 two-hour meeting with Secretary, Ball and McGhee on July 5.

Secretary opened conversation by saying that there was no other problem including Berlin on which President, Secretary and senior colleagues have spent as much time as Congo. This fact a measure USG's deep interest in future welfare Congolese people.

Bomboko then gave full chronological account of negotiations with Tshombe since Kitona stressing Tshombe's elusiveness and intransigence. Bomboko and Kamitatu emphasized gravity Congo situation and predicted Adoula Govt might be overthrown in August by Tshombe coalition with MNC and PSA extremists unless prompt solution found to Katanga crisis. New pressures on Tshombe are therefore necessary.

Secretary asked about significance Tshombe's action in naming his members to four commissions. Bomboko replied GOC troubled by action since Tshombe had earlier insisted that final communique a prerequisite to bring commissions into being and Tshombe had refused sign final communique until certain conditions met. Appointment Katangan members commissions could be interpreted as renunciation conditions. Secretary said might be worthwhile for GOC appoint members to commissions to test whether Tshombe had abandoned conditions. Bomboko replied GOC studying new situation to exploit every possibility of concluding matter peacefully.

Subsequent discussion focused principally on desirability GOC making clear its position on constitutional and other arrangements to be made with Tshombe in order provide reasonable basis on which US and European countries can base pressure on Tshombe with wide popular and Congressional support.

In course this discussion Bomboko stated draft constitution drawn up by Constitutional Commission with Conakat representatives has now been approved by GOC and submitted by it to Parliament as Projet de Loi. It provides for a federal form of govt. It was suggested this be published.

Secretary stated GOC could be assured USG determined do all it can to bring about early settlement. If there is any way Katanga crisis can be settled promptly without further violence, we would prefer this course. Only purpose further violence could have would be to facilitate settlement. If settlement could be reached without it, Congolese and all concerned would obviously be better off.

Bomboko asked why USG permits Struelens to continue his activities in US. Ball replied that Struelens' activities not in violation US law, which reflects long US tradition of freedom speech. Pointed out that number representatives of other non-recognized or non-existent regimes carry on similar activities in US. Ball took this occasion to emphasize again real problem with US public opinion is not Struelens but insufficiently clear public picture GOC's position.

McGhee asked if there was law requiring all foreign exchange and taxes be paid to central government and if there was legal basis for suit to enforce such payments to central government. Kamitatu replied that there was gap, that Loi Fondamentale contemplated that such law would be passed, and that GOC had discussed passage such law during most recent Adoula-Tshombe talks. Tshombe had insisted that only fiscal commission should propose basic terms for such law. In course this discussion Bomboko reiterated that Loi Fondamentale clearly envisaged payment of foreign exchange and taxes to central government and also that only central government could be considered as owner of portfolio.

In conclusion Ball stated USG shared anxiety GOC re present drift and is working hard obtain increased Belgian and British support. Reason we suggest publication of position of GOC is to help us marshal more support. We recognize time not necessarily working for GOC or for peaceful solution.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–762. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Vance, cleared by Wallner and Fredericks, and approved by McGhee. Repeated to Brussels, London, Paris, and USUN.

2 Drafted by Vance. (Ibid., 770G.13/7–562)

3 Kamitatu was at this time Minister of the Interior.

257. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 257. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, July 10, 1962, 2:03 p.m.

45. Deptel 40.2 Your comments requested on following suggested approach to Adoula; which we would discuss with Spaak in order enlist his support:

As follow-up to Bomboko and Kamitatu visit here, as means avoiding misunderstanding in event Adoula hears about our recent approaches to UN and member govts, and as means break present impasse and hopefully obtain some immediate progress on reintegration Katanga, believe Ambassador should approach Adoula and attempt persuade him propose to Tshombe "package" acceptable within stated short-time limit (e.g., two to three weeks) that would clearly appear to be reasonable to American and world public opinion. In our view "package" should include (1) detailed outline constitutional division of powers that would result in truly federal form of govt (we awaiting your report on draft constitution); (2) immediate practical measures to be undertaken by both GOC and GOK (Ambassador should draw on measures outlined Deptel 7 to Brussels, repeated info 6 to Léopoldville,3 as appropriate); and (3) GOC willingness appoint its members to commissions and clear outline of its position on what mandate and time limit of commissions should be.

If Adoula willing propose to Tshombe "package" along foregoing lines and if package contained clearly reasonable solution to Katanga problem, it would greatly facilitate support for GOC by USG and other govts. If Tshombe refused accept, USG would support firm UN action to achieve solution along those lines even at risk incurring hostilities.

If Adoula takes suggested action Dept believes it might be desirable have DCM go Elisabethville see Tshombe. Adoula should of course be advised in advance of such visit. DCM should advise Tshombe he calling with Hoffacker at request Secretary to express USG's deep concern present state of affairs and lack progress toward reintegration despite many months passed since Kitona. DCM would also point to Adoula proposal and express USG's belief it is reasonable one and urge Tshombe accept it and thereby lay basis for permanent solution to Katanga problem. DCM should also point out that USG believes Tshombe should continue have role in Congolese politics but reassert USG's firm belief that Congo unification inevitable and that substantial progress must be made toward reintegration Katanga in immediate future if Tshombe is not to lose present chance resolve problems by negotiation. Realize similar approaches have been made repeatedly by Hoffacker to Tshombe but new approach by DCM at request Secretary might have additional impact.

We would hope Spaak make similar approach to Tshombe and would if necessary use threat withdrawal technicians.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–1062. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Ford; cleared in draft by Fredericks, Wallner, Burdett, and McGhee; and approved and signed by Rusk. Also sent to Brussels and repeated to USUN, London, Paris, and Elisabethville.

2 Telegram 40, July 7, instructed Gullion to stress with Adoula, as Rusk had stressed with Bomboko and Kamitatu, the need for the Congolese Government to improve its public posture on the Katanga issue and to urge the publication of Congolese proposals for settlement of the constitutional and Katangan issues, which would provide the basis for a settlement and make it easier for the Congo's friends to help it. (Ibid., 770G.00/7–762)

3 See footnote 1, Document 254.

258. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 258. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, July 13, 1962, 7 p.m.

113. Adoula-Tshombe talks. Discussion on resuming talks deadlocked. Adoula told Gardiner flatly he would not name personnel to commissions unless and until goal of these organs was defined in terms of integration as final communique was supposed to do. He has made similar assertions to me and to other diplomatic representatives. He has pointed out that Gardiner himself and also Tshombe had all along contended that without communique mandates were in suspense.

Although Adoula's reaction was predictable, Gardiner seemed shocked. He has communicated Adoula's demurrer to UNNY with special formalities having invited Adoula to read and edit his telegram. His present intention (subject to change) is to sit tight and let pressures build up on Adoula.

I am concerned at indications that Department also may think this course will produce results. Earlier I gave Gardiner as merely my own personal assessment view that it would probably be impossible to get Adoula to start up again as if nothing had happened.

Tshombe's tactics on final communique were hard to dismiss as mere bargaining tactics. Breach revealed by debate on communique so wide that institution of commissions seen in new light by GOC. Neither Adoula nor any other head of GOC could accept Tshombe conception.

Moreover, all chancelleries here had upheld Adoula's line at time of break-off and condemned Tshombe's. Implication is that Tshombe owes some concession if talks are to be renewed. I thought Gardiner ought to see Tshombe and get something out of him which would warrant Adoula in resuming, at very least a time limit and some unilateral statement paying a first installment on final communique. Said I regretted I could not easily dream up formula but one had to be found. If Adoula tried to move into talks without formula, his political goose was cooked.

Gardiner rejected these views out of hand. Said if Adoula not such "a silly man" he would see where his opportunity lay. This was in constitution military commission which would then ask to be represented in Kolwezi, Jadotville, et cetera. If refused, said Gardiner, admittedly oversimplifying, "I fight."

I doubt very much that the issue would ever become so clear cut or that UN or our allies or USG could back action thus conceived. I am confident Adoula would share these doubts. In fact, he sees in whole Gardiner-Tshombe commission apparatus merely device for stifling and fuzzing issues until revelation of Tshombe's ultimate refusal to integrate would be deferred until UN is bankrupt and the will to cope with secession has evaporated.

In meantime, he has not made it easier for Adoula to come to him. His offer of tribute in phoney money to GOC to help the hungry; his nomination of a turncoat Congo general and Belgian Ultras to commissions; his "independence day celebrations"; his bribes; his campaign against Bomboko; and his cohabitation with far left have all widened breach.

We here still puzzling as to what next steps should be, especially in light of multiple consultations in so many capitals. We will try to communicate our ideas fairly soon. As of now I am inclined to feel that we will not get simple transfer of negotiations to commissions on a "bygones are bygones" basis, nor should we push it.

Some version of the "package" should be made the framework in which commissions work. But we repeat we must know now how far UN and Belgians are really prepared to go in support of sanctions component of package. And finally Union Miniere must be jolted out of its ostrich-like stance before it seals its own doom and drags everybody into crisis.

We in Congo greatly appreciate Spaak's understanding of this need.

As Department aware we think UMHK must be prepared accept UN protection. UN must be militarily prepared to give it.

As to threat of sabotage, we cannot prove it, but suspect this is bogus. Should have thought hard headed UMHK managers would themselves have taken measures. It is not inconceivable, however that there are die-hards in company lower ranks who might themselves be involved in sabotage plans. (The mercenary who blew Lubilash Bridge seems to have had cooperation from within Societe Generale companies.)

N.B. Foregoing written before latest Katanga roadblock episode.2

If this affair takes path toward solution it may collaterally produce formula to get talks going. On other hand, believe it defers Gardiner trip to Katanga at least until roadblock issue is settled without loss of face.3

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–1362. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to USUN, Elisabethville, Paris, London, and Brussels.

2 On July 11, 2,000 Katangan soldiers entered Elisabethville for Katangan "Independence Day" celebrations, in violation of an agreement between Katangan and U.N. forces limiting the number who would participate. On July 12, U.N. forces established a roadblock, or checkpoint, at the only entrance to the city without one; Katangan troops dug in opposite it, and tensions rose. On July 17, a demonstration by approximately 3,000 Katangan women and youths at the checkpoint ended in violence, with 2 deaths. Telegrams reporting on these incidents are ibid., 770G.00. For text of a U.S. statement of July 17 and Katangan and U.N. statements on the July 17 incident, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 874-875.

3 Telegram 76 to Léopoldville, July 16, stated that in view of Gullion's comments, it would be useful for him to come to Washington for consultations. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–1362)

259. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State 259. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State1

London, July 17, 1962, 8 p.m.

243. Williams' consultations on Africa:2 In course of luncheon given by Lord Home, where he was most cordial and gracious, and in previous general review African policy problems with Crawford (acting as successor to Sir Roger Stevens), there was some discussion also of Congo situation with British talking along usual lines but perhaps with some new nuances.

Home and others saw "package" essentially consisting only three elements of constitutional reform, equitable division of foreign exchange income, and UN economic assistance including adequate controls. In each case Williams expressed agreement with principles but stressed that taxing powers and control of Katanga gendarmerie by Central Government should constitute integral element of package. British said they putting every possible pressure on Tshombe to participate in Congo Government and as usual said more pressure must now be brought on Adoula.

Conversation then turned to question how pressure can best be put on both sides to come to terms, with British agreeing on urgency but as usual warning against UN use of force. Furthest they went with regard to pressure on Tshombe was to say they are warning him that SC meeting likely result in resolution dangerous to him.

Only new element in these conversations, other than evidence growing British alarm at prospect SC session, concerned origin of idea that Wachuku might play mediating role. According to British (whose Ambassador, as reported Brussels 92 to Department,3 was present at lunch with Wachuku), it was Spaak who proposed mediation role. Wachuku responded favorably on condition that Adoula, Tshombe and U Thant agree.

Home was intrigued but somewhat dubious about mediation idea. [2 lines of source text not declassified] and he agreed that among dangers that must in any case be avoided are impairment of Gardiner's status and impression that mediation implies placing Adoula and Tshombe on equal footing.

Bruce

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–1762. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, Paris, USUN, Léopoldville, Elisabethville, and Lagos.

2 Williams visited Paris, Bonn, London, Brussels, and Rome July 9–22 for consultations on various aspects of U.S. policy toward Africa.

3 Telegram 92 from Brussels, July 14, reported that Spaak had told MacArthur about a luncheon meeting the previous day with Wachuku and the U.K. Ambassador, at which they discussed the possibility of mediation by Wachuku. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–1462)

260. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State 260. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State1

Brussels, July 19, 1962, 10 p.m.

122. Congo—Williams visit (meeting with Spaak July 19). (Third of three messages)2

Meeting at FonOff this morning of Governor Williams, Ambassador, Herz3 and DCM with Spaak, Van Den Bosch, Rothschild and Uppers helped crystalize yesterday's discussions (Embtels 120, 121) re means and procedures for coping with Congo problem and breaking present impasse for ending Katanga secession.

Belgian thinking as outlined by Spaak and colleagues may be summarized as follows:

There is grave danger Security Council may now intervene in Congo on terms unfavorable to Western nations and hence West must produce plans soonest to ward off this possibility. Time therefore of essence. While there seems to be general awareness of this fact, one trouble has been tendency of parties concerned to try and get someone else to take action. No one group or country, however, can produce solution. While Union Miniere, for instance, can probably do more than it has, it alone cannot end Katanga secession despite widespread belief expressed in this greatly over-simplified approach to the problem. It is equally difficult for Belgium alone or limited number of countries such as those purchasing Katanga copper take initiative or engage in economic warfare in absence of an international mandate. Even US, which has expressed determination to help in acting to end secession, as Spaak has frequently warned Tshombe, cannot act alone. Therefore, plan involving international action sanctioned by UN in which all concerned can cooperate remains essential. In general, such plan might logically consist of two basic steps: (a) first to offer both Tshombe and Adoula, through good offices or some other such means, reasonable compromise constitutional solution based on federal organization of Congo coupled with threat of effective international pressures under UN mandate being brought against party refusing acceptance of equitable solution; (b) secondly to apply these pressures in event of recalcitrance on either side.

With reference to first step of defining and presenting to Tshombe and Adoula federal compromise plan, use of FonMin Wachuku (Embtel 92)4 as mediator on good offices basis seems to offer good possibility which could be profitably explored on urgent basis. Spaak felt Gardiner's approach, while sincere and helpful, was based too much on discussion of details and did not get down to essential point of defining what Tshombe position would be under federal Constitution. Katanga must naturally know its position in federated Congo before it would be willing to take measures end secession. While it true that Adoula presented Tshombe with constitutional proposals on May 16, they were undiplomatically couched [garble] substantively unacceptable, including their failure contain procedural assurances for Katanga leading to implementation of proposals. Therefore they were "water over dam" and new constitutional approach would have to be made. While admitting some use of Denis might be made along lines discussed yesterday (Embtel 120), Spaak today did not warm up to this possibility. If Wachuku willing extend his good offices, it would, of course, be necessary obtain agreement of Tshombe and Adoula together with blessing of U Thant. Action to sound out parties concerned, however, could be initiated immediately and simultaneously. Meanwhile Western ideas for compromise plan, which could be essentially those emerging from London discussions, could be formulated for consideration and use of Wachuku, even though as mediator he would have to have freedom of action to modify initial proposal in light of Adoula's and Tshombe's reactions.

Belgians believed second step of applying pressures to recalcitrant party rejecting reasonable solution involves complicated problems. It would be less difficult with Adoula who could be informed that only way for him to obtain fair share of Katanga revenues and recognition of central govt's authority without involving Congo in chaos and war, would be acceptance of compromise plan. Tshombe could be informed that if he failed to accept such compromise, he would have to face economic sanctions applied on international basis, such as cutting of rail routes in Katanga in order terminate export of all Katanga mining production. Spaak however believed this action could not be taken except on basis of Security Council resolution which, of course, involved danger of possible British veto and certain legal complications. Best basis for such resolution would be central govt's request to UN for economic sanctions to end Katanga's secession. Even if U Thant had authority to take such steps without Security Council resolution, he had made it quite clear that he would not do so except with Security Council authority. Once approved by UN, simplest form of sanction would be cutting of rail lines which would have effect of not only drying up export tax revenue by stopping Union Miniere production but cutting Katanga off from most important source of foreign exchange produced by some of Union Miniere exports abroad. Whereas Union Miniere would not be expected to take initiative just by itself in refusing payments to Katanga govt or stopping production, it would be in much better position to cooperate on basis of "force majeure" imposed by international sanctions. Otherwise Union Miniere could be subject to Katangese retaliation against its installations and personnel laying it open to bitter criticism of stockholders and employees.

Williams expressed appreciation for outline of Belgian thinking which he thought reasonable although it was not entirely along lines he felt Department pursuing. He said he had already informed Dept of yesterday's conversations with request that Dept consider Belgian approach in connection with consultation with Ambassador Gullion who expected in Washington shortly. He thought some more definitive US conclusion could be reached by Monday or Tuesday. Meanwhile Governor and Ambassador considered it would be most useful if Belgians would reduce to writing resume of their ideas both on substance of proposals and procedures for Dept consideration over weekend. Belgians agreed and promised paper reflecting our discussions by early tomorrow, which we will transmit promptly.

Governor commented that any Belgian-American variation in views did not concern objectives, but possible tactics. He felt Dept's approach re sanctions emphasized UN support of tax collection by central govt and suppression of Katanga National Bank as symbolic of exertion of Léopoldville's sovereignty in Katanga. Belgians countered that attempting to collect tax revenue in Elisabethville and other urban centers impractical and most liable result in hostilities in more heavily populated areas. In any case tax collection would have less effect than more simple process of cutting rail lines and thus depriving Katanga of all foreign exchange produced by copper and other mineral exports. Governor said this point should be considered.

Referring to Belgian recognition of need of new constitutional proposals, Governor commented that we had been giving thought to idea of presenting both sides with definite package program, as Ambassador Bunker did in case of Indonesia-Dutch negotiations, which might be difficult if Wachuku should undertake "Bantu" approach to good offices involving lengthy consultations with both sides. Spaak replied that Wachuku's terms of reference could include definite time limit and that Wachuku would probably in any case want to present both parties with quite concrete compromise proposals, which we could try to have reflect as much of London principle as possible.

Meeting ended most cordially with agreement that Belgians would submit memo for Department's immediate consideration giving details their thinking re compromise federal solution and procedures for effecting it.5

Comment: While Spaak seems prepared, if necessary, to support cutting of Katanga exports through blockade of exit routes, he remains opposed to tax collection plan for reasons cited above.

MacArthur

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.15–WI/7–1962. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, USUN, Elisabethville, London, Paris, and Bonn.

2 Telegrams 120, 121, and 122, all July 19, reported Williams' discussions of the Congo with Belgian officials. Telegram 120 reported a meeting with senior Foreign Office officials on July 18. Telegram 121 reported a meeting that evening with Spaak, the U.K. and French Ambassadors, Nokin, Robiliart, and senior Foreign Office officials. (All ibid.)

3 Martin Herz was at this time Special Assistant for Planning in the Bureau of African Affairs.

4 See footnote 2, Document 259.

5 Telegram 141 from Brussels, July 20, transmitted the translation of a document that Spaak had given the Embassy with his thoughts on measures that the Western powers might take. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2062)

261. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 261. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, July 21, 1962, 6:38 p.m.

164. Re Congo. For Yost. As indicated by Cleveland in telecon, we will be discussing next steps on Congo with Gullion Monday July 23, with UK, Belgians and French here July 24, and with U Thant July 25 or 26 during Cleveland New York trip. As preparation for these talks, following is indication our tentative line of thinking. Would like your reaction by Monday A.M.

1. Failure establish resumption meaningful dialogue between Adoula and Tshombe after breakdown recent talks, series of events demonstrating Tshombe's complete intransigence, Adoula's decreasing parliamentary support and probability early Security Council meeting lead us conclude that time is fast running out in Congo.

2. US has engaged in extensive consultations in recent weeks with UK, Belgium, and France to explore possibilities breaking current deadlock. Prevailing opinion holds that Tshombe will not reach agreement unless convinced to do so will mean he deprived of means maintain independent operation. It equally clear, despite our concerted efforts, UMHK not prepared take actions necessary to cut off Tshombe's income. Studies also reveal effective measures against Tshombe cannot be taken by turning valves outside of Congo but can only be applied on ground. However, before it feasible undertake far reaching steps, described later, it essential Adoula convince world public opinion he has made reasonable negotiating offer to Tshombe which latter rejects or accepts. We believe major weakness in Adoula's public position is failure make public convincing case he has been prepared grant Tshombe reasonable amount regional authority in federal constitution.

3. Unfortunately Gardiner's attempt keep palaver alive through commissions, despite its potential value, has simply not worked. Accordingly, we wish SYG re-examine possibilities taking "package" approach to problem. After reviewing various possibilities open to us we continue believe package described Deptel 2073 to Léopoldville2 remains logical and valid approach.

4. We recognize SYG has preferred not engage UN in negotiating constitution since this internal affair of Congo. If he prefers not have package advanced by UN this can of course be done by third party or parties. However, we believe U Thant should consider Congo crisis now at stage where upgrading of effort necessary and desirable. Moreover in view tremendous stake UN has in Congo would seem appropriate SYG personally engage himself at this point in mediation effort, including possible trip to Léopoldville after appropriate preparations with parties. Prestige his office supplied to this situation would mean increase of pressure on both Adoula and Tshombe and his skill and patience as negotiator likely make significant difference in prospects for success. FYI. U Thant's personal involvement would also help forestall radical pressures for SC meeting. End FYI.

5. We recognize SYG unlikely wish undertake this difficult task without (a) general agreement among outside parties most concerned on the constitutional framework into which we should push Tshombe and (b) clear understanding of just how far US, Belgians, British and French are willing to go in backing up the leverage he will have to exercise in pressing two sides reach agreement. We continue believe that tax collection scheme, to be applied by UN in support GOC Customs Collectors on railway lines used for export of copper from Katanga is adequate "ultimate weapon" vis-a-vis Tshombe. Belgian agreement requires this scheme be implemented outside major population centers such as Elisabethville. We recognize this poses major logistics problem and would require maximum effort of UN forces in Congo. US would stand ready provide all necessary additional logistics support required carry out operation. We continue see advantage this scheme lying in fact that UN would be acting in support of GOC exercise its legitimate authority, initially any use of force would have to be by Katanga, and in our view can be undertaken within scope existing UN mandate without further reference to SC.

6. If SYG unwilling undertake this task personally we wish know if he willing designate an individual on behalf of UN undertake task. This would, of course, raise question relationship to Gardiner, who should retain present position. Nevertheless we believe there is advantage in injecting new element in this situation to supplement Gardiner effort by designating some prominent individual or individuals of higher level than Gardiner (including perhaps Wachuku) who could take appropriately tough line with both Adoula and Tshombe. We think U Thant would wish have this task undertaken by individual or individuals designated by UN since essential ingredient his negotiating effort will be threat to commit UN to more far reaching measures than it has taken in past.

7. If SYG still prefers not engage UN in this exercise, then some of major govts concerned would have to select individual or individuals to undertake third party role with full UN knowledge and acquiescence. But our strong preference is for direct mediation by UN, which is already so deeply committed in this affair that any SYG reluctance commit his full prestige seems out of keeping with his responsibility under Charter.

8. Supplementing work of any mediator could be an individual or group of political-level experts in constitutional law from countries with federal structure such as India, Nigeria, Canada, and Australia.

For Geneva: Secretary may wish comment before our meeting with UK, Belgium, French here July 24.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2162. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Buffum; cleared by Cleveland, Tasca, and Burdett; and approved and signed by Ball. Also sent to Geneva for Rusk and repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and Paris. Rusk was in Geneva for the conclusion of the conference on Laos.

2 Document 246.

262. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 262. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State1

Geneva, July 23, 1962, 5 p.m.

Secto 36. Eyes only Acting Secretary. Reference Tosec 272 believe maximum effort should be made to press serious constitutional discussions with help efficient outside legal advice. Problem about early application of economic or military pressure on Tshombe is that we have no clear position into which we wish to push him. His acceptance Loi Fondamentale is not our target but rather a reasonable constitutional settlement on federal lines. We should not overestimate capacity UN or US to exert pressure in situation where those being pressured could simply withdraw few thousand yards into bush and guarantee chaos. With everything else on our plate we do not need protracted guerrilla fighting in Congo. Why not move fast to present Adoula and Tshombe with a reasonable constitutional settlement and then get behind it. I'm inclined to agree with Hoffacker approach reported Tosec 313 on constitutional matter. If this seems conservative remember I've had great skepticism about UN being able or willing to impose political solution by military action. We need a specific solution around which UN, our principal allies and US public opinion can rally.4 Just being impatient with clowns5 is not good enough.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2362. Secret; Niact. Received at 1:21 p.m.

2 Telegram 164 to USUN (Document 261) was repeated to Geneva as Tosec 27.

3 Tosec 31 to Geneva, July 22, summarized developments on a variety of subjects' including a proposal by Hoffacker for an informal suggestion to Tshombe that he send a letter to Adoula proposing that the commissions agreed upon at Léopoldville should start work and that an additional commission with internationally recognized experts attached should make proposals for a federal constitution. (Department of State, Central Files, 700.00(S)/7–2262) Hoffacker sent this proposal in telegram 158 from Elisabethville, July 22, which reported that two of Tshombe's European advisers had conveyed word that he was seeking a formula that might be acceptable in Léopoldville. (Ibid., 770G.00/7–2262)

4 Rusk made similar comments at a meeting of a small group of his senior advisers on July 19. Brubeck's record of the meeting states in part that Rusk "felt that Gullion must be careful not to aim simply at a course and objectives acceptable to Adoula but to a moderate formula viable for all parties in interest which could thus command the support for a program of sanctions and which Tshombe could tolerably accept." (Ibid., S/S Files: Lot 66 D 147, Secretary's Small Staff Meetings)

5 Reference is to a statement by U Thant at a press conference in Helsinki on July 20, in which he reportedly referred to Tshombe and the other Katangan leaders as a "bunch of clowns." See The New York Times, July 21, 1962.

263. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 263. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, July 23, 1962, 7 p.m.

223. Congo: Reference: Department's telegram 164.2 Yost had one-hour preliminary mtg with U Thant this AM to get general idea his thinking on Congo after three weeks absence from NY.

SYG, who had not seen Spaak during trip, first asked Yost about current Belgian attitude and thinking which he seems to feel is key to satisfactory solution. Yost reassured him that Spaak still vigorously seeking push ahead toward solution though most effective tactics not yet decided.

Thant then reviewed his own views on constitutional approach. He did not believe UN had authority or right to interfere in internal affairs any country. This would apply specifically to public efforts with respect revision Congo Constitution, although Gardiner had of course expressed his views privately in Congo. SYG said he seeking Stavropoulos' opinion this point but still strongly inclined believe this not proper field for UN. It would set "bad, or rather, important precedent."

Lord Home had communicated to him in Dublin UK's views on certain points he had raised in London. UK still unwilling support measures requiring use of force in Congo but attitude seemed have improved somewhat. Home had suggested Wachuku be employed in constitutional question under guise UN technical assistance to Congo. (Wachuku had also offered his services to SYG when last in New York.) In addition his reluctance for UN become involved, SYG objected strongly to Wachuku, saying he is "highly controversial figure and other African states would take serious exception to his being named by UN for this important task. Balewa would be all right but he was PriMin and probably would be unavailable."

De Gaulle had been cordial (see separate tel)3 but had in no way changed attitude of two years ago toward Congo. He wanted liquidation UN effort in Congo, congratulated SYG on beginning "disengagement," and expressed complete lack concern over probability GOC turn to bilateral military assistance in that event. He opposed even economic measures against Katanga, leading SYG to fear French veto in SC, though Couve seemed more flexible on this point.

SYG expressed to Yost his determination bring about end of UN involvement in Congo by Jan. He based this date on fact that 175 million dollars he expected from bond issue would carry him only that far, since he believed it should be used to repay loans from other UN funds. British and Irish however were inclined let Congo operation continue indefinitely. Lord Home had told him not to worry about money, that it would always be forthcoming. Yost interjected at this point that he didn't agree and wondered where funds would come from.

SYG said he had everywhere in his consultations in Europe stressed his belief UN should not initiate use of force in Congo. He believes most Eur states would withdraw bond pledges if it did so. However he obviously still believes that effective measures will require willingness use force in reaction to force and that he must have new authority for this. He still thinking both of UNOC blockade Katanga Railway and of UN protection UMHK properties if it stops payments to Tshombe. He said that his present plan was to consult "Big Five, less China" on draft SC res, hoping formula could be found on which UK and France could agree to abstain. If this could not be done, SC mtg would be counter-productive.

Thant said Gardiner due NY 4:30 PM today. After consulting with him, SYG said he would go before CAC. (Said he would call Yost in for discussion once more before that but did not set time.) He would not tell CAC everything he had on mind now but would give general report on impressions from his European visit. He set 11:30 AM Wed July 25 for mtg here with Cleveland.

Bunche told us earlier that 2 or 3 mtgs with CAC would probably be required. He also said SYG had returned last week determined to push forward with SC mtg but Bunche had cooled him off considerably by convincing him he might come out worse off than he now is.

Yost

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2362. Confidential; Priority. Received at 9:39 p.m. and repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and Paris.

2 Document 261.

3 Telegram 224 from USUN, July 23. (Department of State, Central Files, 751.11/7–2362)

264. Letter from Prime Minister Adoula to President Kennedy 264. Letter from Prime Minister Adoula to President Kennedy1

Léopoldville, undated.

My Dear President: Learning that Ambassador Gullion was called to Washington I wished to profit from his trip to address to you this very personal note.

You have followed the development of the situation in the Congo since the last talks which I had with Mr. Tshombe in Léopoldville. You have certainly been apprised of all the efforts which I have made, first of all to avoid a rupture in the talks—a rupture which Mr. Tshombe desired at any price—and then in order to arrive at a peaceful solution to the Katanga problem even when the mandate vested in me by the parliament was not always respected. The point of view of the Central Government was revealed to you I believe by Secretary of State Dean Rusk after the meeting which he had in Washington with Ministers Bomboko and Kamitatu. The disappointments which I am unceasingly confronted with in this affair have considerably affected my morale. My political opponents are profiting from them in order to propagandize against the Government to the extent that the population more and more is losing confidence. For my part, I am becoming pessimistic, if not desperate. I wonder if it would not even be preferable to abdicate my duties if a solution is not forthcoming in the next month.

At the same time, conscious of the necessity of sparing the Congo a new crisis which would only have grievous repercussions on world peace, I struggle still against my conscience to keep courage and my nerve.

You are not unaware, my Dear President, of how much the problem of the Katanga is tied to peace and especially of the consequences that a failure of the UN operations could engender not only for the Congo but also for all those who have supported this operation. Notwithstanding the numerous difficulties lining my path, I still have confidence in the future of my country when I consider the efforts which your Government and you do not cease to expend in our behalf. I know also that your task is not easy. Several of your countrymen did not always understand the problems of the Congo. I know also that my policy of non-alignment is not always understood by the tax-paying American; but the acts which I present should suffice to clarify opinion, since I have never renounced the principles of liberty and democracy which reign in the free world. I would not wish to inject a pessimistic tone in my letter in saying that if a positive result is not obtained in the coming weeks I would be perhaps forced to submit my resignation to the Chief of State. This would be the result of the unfortunate efforts of those who in desiring happiness for the Congolese people continue to pursue their own interests.

I would be ill-mannered in ending these lines if I did not reiterate to you in my name and in the name of the Congolese people the feelings of gratitude which we owe to you personally as well as to the American people for the material and moral support which you have not ceased to furnish us.2

Believe me, my dear President,

Yours very sincerely,

Adoula3

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Secret. The source text is an English translation prepared in the Department of State and sent to the White House with a July 24 covering memorandum from Brubeck to Bundy, which states that Adoula had given the letter to Gullion just before Gullion left Léopoldville to return to Washington for consultations. A copy of the original letter, handwritten in French, is in Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2462.

2 Kennedy replied in a letter of July 30, stating that the U.S. Government was "urgently considering further measures in aid of your country" and was "determined to cooperate with the United Nations in taking the necessary steps to restore the integrity of the Congo." He concluded by assuring Adoula that "you can count on my support." The letter was transmitted to Léopoldville in telegram 172, July 31; telegram 288 from Léopoldville, August 2, reported that Godley had delivered it to Adoula that day. (Ibid., 770G.00/7–3162 and 770G.00/8–262, respectively)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

265. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 265. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, July 24, 1962, 9:59 p.m.

186. Following based uncleared memcon.2 McGhee called in Belgian Charge de Bassompierre, British Counselor Greenhill, French Counselor Winckler to discuss Congo. Also present were Gullion, Williams, Cleveland and Tyler.

In response McGhee's request, Gullion gave his evaluation Adoula's weakening domestic political situation with combination of left and right wing forces against him. Under these circumstances Adoula fatigued and discouraged and cannot afford long drawn-out discussion constitutional principles. Gullion believed Adoula would be willing to accept liberal set of constitutional principles giving genuine autonomy to provinces (perhaps modeled on US Constitution) provided he knows he will get effective backing from US, Western countries, and UN for pressures on Tshombe. Not much future in path of Commissions in view absence time limit and executive functions and Gardiner and UN also pessimistic about Commission framework. We therefore tending towards introduction package solution, as is UN.3

McGhee then said that we did not wish let situation drift as inaction dangerous. Not technical question of negotiations, but of Tshombe's willingness negotiate and come to agreement, which depends upon effectiveness pressures which could be brought to bear on him. We therefore believe package solution should be introduced through UN, through U Thant if possible and if not through Gardiner, which would include constitutional principles and would include immediate steps by Tshombe toward reintegration.

McGhee then handed out memorandum to de Bassompierre, Greenhill and Winckler for their consideration, which being sent in immediately following cable.4 McGhee explained contents of memorandum not new and had been discussed previously with Belgians, British and French. USG conceived of this proposal as analogous to Bunker's, not necessarily acceptable either side, but which has chance acceptance both sides. If U Thant or Gardiner would agree introduce this proposal, we would envisage UN showing it first privately to Adoula to obtain his agreement and then officially, but not publicly, to Adoula and Tshombe. Critical point would come if Tshombe refused accept package. Before going on describe possible pressures which could be brought bear on Tshombe, McGhee asked for reactions to contents of proposal. All three replied memorandum appeared reasonable in principle although they would of course have to check with their governments. De Bassompierre and Greenhill also questioned short time limits of five days attached to fulfillment of some of measures.

In presenting this package to Adoula, McGhee continued, we would inform him that increased Western aid, subject to controls, would be given if he accepted proposal and re-unified Congo resulted. We would also give him assurances about type pressures West would be willing exert on Tshombe in order to get Adoula accept this proposal. Of pressures which could be used on Tshombe there are some which might result in use of force but we wish keep those far in future. Similarly other proposals made, such as embargo of copper, which would involve UN Security Council action, which we prefer not pursue at this meeting.

Intermediate steps, not involving use of force or UN action, we now wished discuss with GOB include following three steps: 1) withdrawal Belgian technicians Katanga; 2) institution legal proceedings by GOC against UMHK in Congo to force payment UMHK taxes GOC; 3) Belgian cooperation with GOC in allowing latter to exercise voting rights on shares in Congo portfolio. Points 2 and 3, McGhee explained, in framework of recent UMHK statements it would be willing cooperate against Tshombe if legal basis laid. UMHK would go to Tshombe and explain it being forced into position of paying taxes to GOC and that present arrangement whereby it paid all taxes to Katanga would have to come to end. Additional steps which could be taken could include: refusal USG, GOB, French and British issue visas to Katangans except on basis GOC passports; collection Congolese import duties at Antwerp; UN could stop positive actions aiding Katanga and UMHK such as facilitating rail transportation sulphuric acid, etc. Above represented range of first round pressures, McGhee indicated which we hoped, but did not know, would be sufficient induce Tshombe accept package. Key to their effectiveness lay primarily in UMHK willingness cooperate. If they not sufficient or successful, next step would be UN sanctions or embargo, which, however, we not discussing now.

Bassompierre posed three questions: 1) Whether USG should discuss above course action with U Thant before receiving reactions from Belgium, Britain, and France, to which McGhee replied we would obtain U Thant's and Gardiner's views on memorandum, but would not go into details of pressures envisaged, since these depended upon agreement and cooperation Western countries concerned; 2) What US reply to Spaak's proposal for Wachuku mediation was since would be difficult send report Brussels for new plan without reply on earlier Belgian initiative, to which McGhee and Cleveland replied that USG not enthusiastic about Wachuku mediation at present time in view U Thant's view of him as unreliable, although if U Thant and Gardiner refused mediation role, we would wish look around for other suitable mediator who could be introduced in UN framework. Gullion added Adoula would reject outside mediator, and recalled Adoula had done so in December when Wachuku, Senghor and others considered; 3) Finally, Bassompierre raised question UMHK, saying GOB had no legal power over UMHK and difficult Spaak exert pressure on UMHK. Bassompierre, speaking frankly, asked if it possible avoid pointing finger publicly at UMHK since this would make it appear UMHK acting under pressure USG, which difficult psychologically.

In response latter point, McGhee said our objective give UMHK pretext or excuse cut off tax payments to Katanga, in line recent UMHK statements. McGhee stated in all frankness he had, as Bassompierre knew, done his best on previous occasions by going on TV dampen criticism of UMHK, but feeling in USG was that UMHK had not done enough, and this feeling extended to President, as evidenced his recent press conference.5 Plain fact is that income of UMHK subsidizes Tshombe's secession and intransigence, and that ridiculous situation results from West being seriously threatened as result actions of Western company. Williams added question is one of alternatives. USG willing assume responsibility for tax collection plan, but we thought interim measures referred to earlier would be more palatable to GOB. McGhee emphasized USG determined see Katangan reintegration through, and that President fully agreed.

Gullion added Adoula needed friendly gestures from Europeans he could point to, and mentioned examples UMHK personnel flying into Elisabethville on Sabena planes without GOC visas or GOC agreement Sabena flights. Bassompierre agreed this point.

Greenhill at end mentioned US press had given impression British dragging feet on Congo policy which decreased effectiveness British demarches to Tshombe who tended discount them. McGhee said reports reaching USG indicated British, through their Embassy here and their spokesmen in Geneva and London had themselves disclaimed willingness support pressures on Tshombe.

Meeting ended with understanding that three Counselors would obtain their Governments' views as soon as possible to package proposal, including both memorandum and program pressures, and that US would in meantime obtain UN reaction to memorandum and discuss possibilities U Thant or Gardiner pursuing mediatory role.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2462. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Andrews, cleared by the Executive Secretariat, and approved by Cleveland. Also sent to Brussels, Léopoldville, London, and Paris and repeated to Elisabethville and to Geneva for Rusk.

2 Not found.

3 Gullion set forth his views in an untitled paper dated July 23, which is unsigned but indicates that he was the drafter. It begins as follows: "Time has run out. Shortly, Adoula will resign rather than be forced out. The MNC/Lumumba would dominate any new government but Mobutu would seize power first. The extremists would retire again to a Pathet Lao status in Orientale, but this time with wide support in Africa and Asia." (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Files, Congo, May–July 1962)

4 Telegram 502 to London, July 24, transmitted the text of the paper, headed "Proposal for National Reconciliation." It proposed the immediate creation of a tripartite drafting committee to draft a constitution providing for a federal government with provincial autonomy in local matters and a series of "Immediate Practical Measures," including appointment of representatives to tripartite commissions, sharing on a 50–50 basis by the Congolese Government and the Katangan provincial government of all tax revenues raised in Katanga, and the appointment of at least three Conakat nominees as Cabinet ministers. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2462)

5 At a press conference on July 23, the President replied to a question on the Congo in part as follows: "The Union Miniere, the company which controls these vast resources in the Katanga, pays its taxes just to the Katanga, not to the central government. It leaves Mr. Adoula without resources. It has weakened his position and I think that those who are sympathetic to the Katanga's effort are liable to find complete chaos in the rest of the Congo." (American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, p. 877) For complete transcript of the press conference, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1962, pp. 568–576.

266. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 266. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, July 26, 1962, 8 p.m.

263. Congo. Reference: Department's telegram 187.2 Cleveland, Yost, Gullion and Fredericks had two-hour mtg with SYG yesterday to discuss Congo. Also present were Bunche, Narasimhan, Amachree and Gardiner.

SYG first reported on his recent consultations in Europe. He stated he had found the English negative and the French more so. Both opposed economic measures to coerce Tshombe. Ireland opposed "dispersion" of UN troops in Katanga and their stationing in Jadotville and Kolwezi. No doubt they were influenced in this stand by the experience of their troops in earlier fighting. SYG had come back convinced that SC mtg was not desirable because nothing would come out of it.

SYG then described his mtg with Congo Advisory Comite July 24 (he was indignant at "distortions" in Hamilton N Y Times story and had authorized issuance corrective UN statement to press). He had asked CAC members whether they thought he should call SC mtg and had encountered no pressure to do so at this time. Only Quaison-Sackey (Ghana) wanted mtg now which would be confined to oral report by SYG. Guinea wanted subject discussed by GA and indicated Sekou Toure would like mediate. SYG informed us he intends submit written report on situation and his intentions to SC in near future.

He had also described to CAC economic measures for which he had sought support from European govts during his trip. These included: freezing UMHK assets in Belgium accompanied by UN protection UMHK properties in Jadotville, etc., protecting copper exports via Lubilash Bridge to Matadi and, if necessary blocking copper exports on other routes. He had informed CAC that he had met with considerable reluctance from European govts on these points. He had emphasized that he was firmly opposed to any UN military initiative and CAC had supported this stand.

He told us that he is at present inclined to give somewhat different interpretation to provision in SC res Feb 21, 1961 urging UN take all appropriate measures to prevent civil war. At that time there was, he maintained, no central govt in Congo. Now that there is central govt he would not interpret this provision to oblige UN to resist military action by that govt to restore its authority throughout Congo. He would also interpret broadly provision of Nov 24 SC res authorizing assistance to central govt in maintaining "law and order and national integrity." In his view, he has authority to assist ANC in transport and logistics, indeed in all ways short of actual participation in combat. These interpretations of existing SC reses account for his belief that his present mandate is adequate and no further SC mtg required at this time.

Cleveland presented "proposal for national reconciliation" (reftel). SYG asked whether constitutional proposal was based on premise Tshombe would negotiate seriously. Cleveland replied it not necessarily so based. It was put forward in belief that reasonable federal constitutional proposal published by Adoula or with his consent would convince interested govts and world opinion of his reasonableness and would permit govts, if Tshombe rejected this proposal, to participate in necessary pressures upon him.

SYG and other UN Reps present raised several serious objections to proposal, primarily on basis that Adoula is politically too weak to risk making further public concessions, which this would be, until Tshombe had demonstrated more convincing readiness to accept integration. Bunche objected "tripartite drafting comite" unjustifiably grants powers over constitutional revision to Katanga and Tshombe to detriment of Parliament and other provinces. He argued that what are required at this time are measures to strengthen Adoula and weaken Tshombe, not the contrary.

Gardiner then made following specific comments on Dept paper:

[Here follow his comments on five specific provisions of the paper.]

SYG agreed on desirability of proposals contained in paper, but reiterated Tshombe could not be trusted to accept them.

Cleveland agreed but reemphasized importance of Adoula adopting forthcoming public opinion. In response to question how proposals should be presented, Cleveland said he believed Gardiner, backed by 4 Western Ambassadors in Leo, should sell proposal to Adoula. Gardiner emphasized that this would be feasible only if Adoula were informed that simultaneous announcement would be made of series of agreed measures to be taken vis-a–vis Tshombe to assure his compliance. These measures must all be agreed in advance and implemented one after the other at intervals of hours or days, thus convincing Tshombe his house falling in on him. Cleveland emphatically agreed.

SYG reiterated his basic position that funds likely to permit continuance Congo operation only until end 1962 (unless GA decides not to pay all outstanding debts with proceeds bond issue, which might permit continuance into spring). Thant stated he anxious disengage UN from Congo and outlined steps he proposes to take shortly: (1) He would write letter to Belgium requesting it withdraw technicians from Katanga; (2) He would write all member states asking them apply all possible economic pressures on Katanga; (3) He would write Adoula informing him UN intends assist with integration by all possible means; (4) He would ask Tshombe withdraw his troops from their positions in northern Katanga (Congolo, Kabongo and Badouinville) and would replace them with UN troops; (5) He would ask Adoula request UN assistance in fields immigration and customs control; (6) He would request UPU and ITU to cease recognizing separate Katanga postal and communications activities.

SYG promised prior consultation with USUN on drafts of letters mentioned above. He also promised further comments on Dept paper shortly. He concluded with suggestion further mtg with Cleveland after Jul 31 CAC mtg.

Yost

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/7–2662. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, Paris, and London.

2 Sent to London as telegram 502; see footnote 3, Document 265.

267. Record of Understanding 267. Record of Understanding1

Washington, undated.

Record of Understanding of the Meeting with the President, July 25, on the Congo

Following is our understanding of the course of discussion with the President on July 25:2

The Department reported to the President that the situation produced by Adoula's weakness, Tshombe's intransigence and the unwillingness of Union Miniere to put effective pressure on Tshombe, cannot be allowed to continue to drift. A continuation of the present inconclusive trend would probably result in the fall of the Adoula Government within weeks due to the combined opposition of the Lumumbist and Katanga parliamentarians; Adoula's successor would doubtless be from a group more prone to work with the radical Africans and sooner or later to accept an intimate association with the Soviet Bloc.

In a meeting in Washington on July 24, we tried out on the British, French and Belgian Governments a proposal which in our judgment should be saleable as a least common denominator of Western policy in the Congo: 1. A collection of constitutional precepts for a federal structure of the Congo nation (allocating essential functions to the Central Government and reserving other powers to the provinces) would be proposed publicly by Adoula, together with a proposal for a series of irreversible steps to carry out these principles. Adoula himself could not indicate receptiveness toward such a project by renewing negotiations unless he could at the same time counter his critics by pointing out that such measures were being applied, largely as a result of his diplomatic activity.

2. At the same time, a series of measures would be instituted, designed to induce Union Miniere, and through it the Katangese authorities, to cooperate in integrating the Katanga into the Congo. These are measures which do not seem to involve the risk of force being used against the United Nations by the Katanga; their purpose would be to rebuild the political position and morale of the Adoula Government, and to indicate to Union Miniere and Tshombe that the game of waiting and equivocating is up. These measures would be scheduled in such a way as to produce a cumulative effect, a new measure being instituted every day or two as a demonstration that the United Nations and the main Western governments mean business.

3. Accompanying these measures would be steps by the United States and hopefully other governments to create in other ways increased confidence on the part of Adoula and a better atmosphere between his government and others. These might include a statement by the President indicating his support for Adoula, and an early token shipment of aid from the United States to the Congolese National Army subject to approval of the United Nations.

4. Beyond these measures, the actions contemplated would realistically involve the risk of fighting. Under no circumstances will the United Nations take a military initiative; U Thant has made this abundantly and publicly clear in each of the European capitals he recently visited. Such actions would have to be done at the request of the Government of the Congo. These might involve the following: (a) The United Nations would cease to cooperate in facilitating UMHK shipments (especially the makings of sulphuric acid) through the UN-held perimeter in Elisabethville.

(b) ONUC would interdict the rail lines which carry Katanga's exports out through Angola and Rhodesia.

It was agreed that we should continue to explore the foregoing possibilities with our Allies in an effort to assure the maximum amount of support for an agreed course of action.

It was also reported to the President that the Acting Secretary General is considering a new policy whereby the United Nations would no longer interpret its mandate "to prevent the occurrence of civil war in the Congo", even by "the use of force, if necessary, in the last resort", as requiring ONUC to interfere with military efforts of the Central Government to establish its authority over the whole of the Congo, including the Katanga. The Acting Secretary General is also considering the possibility that the United Nations might assist the Central Government's military forces to fulfill this objective, by providing training, supply and logistic support.

U Thant has abandoned the idea of seeking a new mandate from the Security Council. Instead he has asked the Congo Advisory Committee, and particularly the nations which now have contingents in ONUC, some hard questions about "exactly where we stand with regard to the use that can be made of each contingent" of the UN Force in the Congo in circumstances that would entail the defensive use of force by United Nations troops or United Nations assistance and support to a more active role by the Congolese National Army. The answers from the governments concerned, most importantly India, Ireland, Nigeria, Ethiopia and Malaya, are expected at another meeting of the Congo Advisory Committee, Tuesday, July 31.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Files, Congo, August 1962. Confidential. The source text is unsigned and includes no drafting information, but it was evidently prepared in the Department of State. It is filed as an attachment to a memorandum of August 2 from Brubeck to Bundy headed "Progress Report on the Congo," which summarized developments since July 25 and stated that a detailed report would be submitted to the President the next day.

2 According to Kennedy's appointment book, the meeting began at 5:17 p.m. and ended at 5:56. Present were Williams, Ball, McGhee, Cleveland, Gullion, Fredericks, Dungan, and Military Aide to the President Major General Chester V. Clifton. (Kennedy Library) No other record of the discussion has been found.

268. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to President Kennedy 268. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to President Kennedy1

Washington, August 3, 1962.

SUBJECT

Proposed Action on the Congo

Since our last discussion on the Congo crisis with you on July 25, Prime Minister Adoula has announced his commitment to the adoption of a federal constitution with a division of powers similar to the US Constitution.2 The Acting Secretary General on August 1 issued an appeal to all UN member countries to use their influence to persuade the principal parties in the Congo that a peaceful solution is in their own interest. He also announced his intention, if such persuasion should finally prove ineffective, to urge the UN member countries to propose economic pressures upon the Katangese authorities, and, in the last resort, bar all trade and financial relations with secessionist Katanga.3

In working level talks held in Washington with the Belgian, British, and French Embassies, we have drafted on an ad referendum basis, a program of action to achieve the prompt integration of Katanga. (See the enclosed "Course of Action" and "Proposal for National Reconciliation",4 to be submitted to the interested parties.)

Adoula's Position

Prime Minister Adoula's commitment to a federal constitution constitutes a crucial concession to Tshombe's demands for local autonomy and was made with considerable risk for Adoula's domestic political position. While Tshombe has indicated his readiness to negotiate on this basis, the need for early practical measures towards integration of Katanga remains paramount. Without such measures Tshombe could drag out the negotiations and break off the talks at any given moment, relying on the assumption that the West is unwilling to support a vigorous UN action against Katanga. If we were to allow the situation to continue to drift, Adoula's position would become untenable. The fall of the Adoula government would be followed either by a government supported and controlled by Lumumbist parliamentarians or, more probably, by a Mobutu-led military coup. Such a coup is likely to fragment the Congo into a pro-communist regime in Stanleyville—this time with much wider international support (including logistics), a military dictatorship in Léopoldville, and the continuance of Tshombe's secessionist regime in Elisabethville.

Agreement on Program

A new series of meetings was held in Washington on July 31 and August 2 with Belgian, British and French representatives. The papers which emerged from those discussions reflect a real effort by the participants to accommodate each other's views. In these meetings, agreement was reached ad referendum, with the Belgians on a vigorous program to achieve the prompt reintegration of Katanga.

The Belgians were represented by their Charge d'Affaires and by Viscount Davignon, Mr. Spaak's personal secretary sent to Washington to present Spaak's views directly.

The British were represented by Counselor Greenhill and Embassy Secretary Shaw, who indicated that the British Government would probably associate itself with the Proposal for National Reconciliation and join in the first two phases of our Course of Action and possibly the third. The British would not, however, join a boycott or approve any action that would risk hostilities. On the other hand, they may conceivably not try to hinder others from taking such measures.

The French Government was represented by Counselor de Commines, who stated that he was not certain of the attitude his government would take but believed that it could agree to the Proposal and at least Phases I and II of the Course of Action. Government views will be conveyed to us urgently.

Proposed Program

The program drafted in these meetings and now submitted to the respective governments for approval follows the general approach which was outlined in the discussions with you on July 25.

Phase One:

The first phase of our program calls for presentation of our Proposal for National Reconciliation and the Course of Action to the Acting Secretary-General and, if he approves, to Prime Minister Adoula by a representative of U Thant. The Proposal for National Reconciliation calls for Adoula to make firm his commitment to submit to Parliament a federal constitution.

The Proposal also calls for: the immediate sharing of tax revenues and foreign exchange earnings between the Central Government and the provinces; rapid reunification of currency; integration of armed forces; closing of provincial "foreign offices" and withdrawal of representatives abroad; a general political amnesty; freedom of movement of UN personnel (including forces) over all the Congo; and representation of the Tshombe party in the National Government.

Acceptance and implementation of this proposal would therefore bring Katanga secession to an end. Tshombe would no longer be able to administer Katanga as an independent state.

Simultaneously with the presentation of our proposal to Adoula, the participating governments and the UN will undertake a series of measures. These are designed to strengthen Adoula's position and demonstrate to Tshombe our determination to see an early end to Katanga secession. The measures are spelled out under Phase I. E, items 1 through 11 of the enclosed "Course of Action."

They involve: public statements; collection at Antwerp of Congolese duties on goods exported from Belgium to the Congo; a small impact shipment of US military equipment for the Congolese army; additional economic aid to the Congo by the US and hopefully also by other governments; appeals to Congolese neighbors and all UN member nations to help prevent the entry of mercenaries, arms and military equipment into Katanga; refusal of visas and entry to Katangans unless they have Congo passports; and similar measures.

Phase Two:

The second phase of the program provides that the Proposal for National Reconciliation, if acceptable to Adoula, will be presented to Tshombe. Tshombe will be asked to give a definite answer within 10 days. The US and other governments will urge Tshombe to accept the proposal. If he indicates any intent to refuse or delay decision, these governments will advise him that refusal will result in a boycott of Katanga copper. He will be warned that, if necessary, even more stringent measures will occur. These could include, he will be informed, the withdrawal of Belgian technicians; the suspension of postal and tele-communications with Katanga; UN control of air traffic into Elisabethville; the stoppage of petroleum imports; and the blockade of Katanga exports and imports on the rail lines in Katanga.

Phase Three:

Under Phase III of the program, if Katanga does not accept the Proposal within the specified time, the Government of the Congo will ask all governments to boycott Katanga copper unless it is exported under its authority. The US and Belgian Governments (Belgium imports approximately 75% of Katanga's copper exports) will comply and urge all other governments to do likewise (the UK still has reservations on joining in this action and the French position is not yet known).

Phase Four:

If the foregoing steps do not achieve Katangan reintegration, the US and Belgium and as many other governments as possible will consult with regard to supporting the UN in more stringent measures. It is important to note that possible application of such measures will have been announced earlier to Tshombe (see Phase II).

The significant step in Phase IV would envisage UN action in Katanga to block copper exports in support of a Congolese request if all else, including the voluntary boycott, failed. It should be clearly recognized that this step, if carried out, would risk the outbreak of hostilities. The Belgian representatives have indicated that Spaak, if necessary, is prepared to consider such a blockade. However, the position of our allies can only be definitely known at the time when firm decision on Phase IV may be required.

Relation of Program Phases

Although the Department believes that we should at this time resolve to take such measures as are required to assure the reintegration of the Katanga, a final decision to proceed with Phase IV would be made only after further consultation with our allies and decision by you. We propose at this time to proceed only with steps outlined in Phases I–III. A decision as to which of these actions may be necessary or appropriate will be made in the light of circumstances prevailing at the time.

The Belgian Ambassador to the UN and Viscount Davignon outlined the main elements of the program to U Thant who, they said, indicated his willingness to back the plan. We have explored for many months every conceivable means of applying pressure that would not risk renewed hostilities in Katanga. The West's determination to force Tshombe to act on other than his own terms has not, however, been credible and, accordingly, his position has remained essentially unchanged.

There is reason to believe that fighting is not inevitable and may be entirely avoided if the UN and the US are able to make clear to Tshombe their determination to see an end to Katanga's secession. Tshombe is not likely to go down fighting if he is convinced that prompt reintegration of Katanga is inevitable and if reasonable terms are available.

The Military Problem

It is clear that the UN is not able to and will not embark on an effective course of action to end Katanga's secession unless it is assured of US support. It is equally clear that, regardless of what happens with reference to Katanga, the UN cannot remain in the Congo indefinitely.

In order to develop a basis for its withdrawal, the UN is now discussing a plan calling for the gradual disengagement of UN forces. There would be a contemporaneous build-up, under UN supervision, of a responsible Congolese army. As the training and re-equipping of that army progresses, the UN will gradually relinquish to it military control, first over areas outside of South Katanga.

The Department would regard this plan favorably only if the Congo army were retrained and became a responsible force, which it is not at present. Building a responsible Congo army as rapidly as possible will result in the development of a Congolese capability to maintain law and order. This is essential to the launching of a much needed comprehensive effort at national economic rehabilitation.

The early initiation of this program of assistance will also have a desirable psychological effect on Tshombe. It should contribute to the effective implementation of our proposed action program. Indeed, if the program is not successful the Central Government will conclude it has no alternative to reliance on its army to end secession. We would then have all the more reason to wish this army to be disciplined and responsible.

We are planning to assist the UN in training and equipping the Congolese army. The Department of Defense has already sent a small informal military assistance survey team to the Congo. The team's report,5 and the actions to be taken on the basis of it, are now under study in the Departments of State and Defense. Initially, a small impact shipment of military equipment is planned for the immediate future as part of the Phase I measures in the proposed action program.

Recommendation

Your authority is requested to adopt this program and carry it through to the extent necessary to achieve our objectives. It is understood that if Phase IV actions become necessary at a later time, they will then be presented to you for decision.

As you are aware, we may lose the active cooperation of one or more of the Western European Governments as the course of action moves into the late phases. We expect to obtain the approval of the Government of Belgium. We hope that the British and French Governments, if they do not agree to all the program, will go along with most of it and will not oppose any of it outright.

In support of the foregoing program, we intend with the help of all interested agencies to conduct an intensified effort to enlighten public opinion and Congress on the situation in the Congo and on US policy. As appropriate we will explain the need for the application of this program, including such stringent measures as may become necessary.

George W. Ball6

[Here follows a draft National Security Action Memorandum stating the President's approval of the course of action outlined in the enclosures. It was not signed, but see Document 269.]

1 Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Congo Security 1962. Confidential. The source text includes no drafting information, nor does the Department of State copy. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–362) A covering memorandum of August 3 from Brubeck to Dungan states that the memorandum reflected revisions directed by Ball but that he had not seen it in its final form. Another covering memorandum of August 3 from Dungan to the President states that he had reviewed the memorandum, found it consistent with his understanding of the President's wishes, and recommended approval.

2 For text of the Congolese Government's July 28 communique outlining the principles for a Constitution, see U.N. doc. S/5053/Add.11/Annex XII; also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 877–878.

3 The statement was issued on July 31; for text, see U.N. doc. S/5053/Add.11/Annex XXVII; also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 880–881.

4 Not printed. Revised texts are printed as enclosures to Document 274, which summarizes the revisions.

5 A Special Military Advisory Team headed by Colonel Greene visited the Congo June 7–July 12; it set forth its findings and recommendations in a 116-page report dated July 23. The report recommended that the United States propose a broad program under a U.N. umbrella for the modernization and training of the Congolese armed forces and indicate U.S. willingness to organize such a program. (Report of Special Military Advisory Team, Republic of the Congo, July 23; Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, 320.2 Congo) The recommendations are filed as an attachment to an August 1 letter from Johnson to Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs Paul H. Nitze. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.5/8–162)

6 Signed for Ball in an unknown hand; see the source note above.

269. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (McGhee) to the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Fredericks) 269. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (McGhee) to the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Fredericks)1

Washington, August 6, 1962.

SUBJECT

White House Approval on Congo Package

General White House approval has now been received on the Congo package contingent upon: 1. Our not making any firm commitment on new assistance to the ANC. We would make a general statement to U Thant that we will do so if this proves desirable, but would withhold final decision until the situation arose;

2. Our not making any final commitment on stages 3 and 4 until a review of the situation at the time and re-referral to the White House. This should not necessitate any change in our position vis-a–vis British, French and Belgians since it has always been clear that our final decisions in III and IV would not be taken until necessity arises.

The hope is expressed, although this is presumably not a condition and is apparently not realistic, that progress toward an agreement could be achieved before the UN bond issue comes before the House.

Deep regret was expressed over the leaks on Congo policy over the week end.

Apart from this, the Department is authorized to proceed with discussions with U Thant and in the carrying out of the plan insofar as it applies to Phases 1 and 2 subject to the above.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–662. Confidential. Drafted by McGhee. Also sent to Tyler and Cleveland.

270. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (McGhee) to President Kennedy 270. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (McGhee) to President Kennedy1

Washington, August 9, 1962.

SUBJECT

U.S. Contact with Tshombe in Geneva

The Consulate General in Geneva has learned indirectly that Mr. Tshombe would like to talk on a secret basis to Assistant Secretary Harriman or someone designated by you during his stay in Geneva.2

A talk with Tshombe by a high-ranking American might be helpful in bringing home to Tshombe the determination of the United States Government that the Katangan issue be settled promptly. It would further weaken Tshombe's spurious claim that there has never been an effort to negotiate with him. It could also help convince him of the pressures building up against his secession throughout the world.

However, in balance, the Department is persuaded that a visit by a ranking American to Geneva to contact Tshombe now would not be desirable for the following reasons: 1) Contact with Tshombe at this stage would jump the gun on our national reconciliation proposal and course of action which still need UN and GOC approval; it would be out of phase with the timing of the national demarches envisaged by the course of action worked out, after lengthy negotiations, with the other governments and the UN, which provides for such demarches only after UN presentation of the proposal to the two men.

2) Unless Adoula agreed and cleared the proposed visit with his cabinet, the knowledge in Léopoldville that the Americans are contacting Tshombe before their new proposals have been cleared with Adoula would undermine Adoula's position and that of the U.S.

3) It would not be possible to keep Mr. Harriman's meeting with Tshombe from becoming public knowledge. Even if we attempted to do this, Tshombe would have every incentive to exploit the visit. The result would be not only to enhance Tshombe's prestige but to strengthen him in his contest with Adoula.

4) Mr. Harriman would not at this stage be able to present Mr. Tshombe with a definite proposal which he could urge him to accept. Tshombe would unquestionably make proposals making it difficult for Mr. Harriman to avoid getting into the position of mediator. This would not be considered an appropriate role for an important American official at this time.

5) Tshombe would, in all probability, attempt to use such a meeting as a further excuse for delaying tactics, thus making it difficult for us to carry out our coordinated reconciliation proposals.

After the national reconciliation proposal has been presented to Adoula and Tshombe by the United Nations, which is the present plan, it might well be appropriate for Mr. Harriman or some other senior American to see Tshombe as a means of emphasizing the need to accept the proposal. National efforts in this regard were envisaged by the cooperating countries in the course of action agreed to.

Mr. Spaak has suggested that he might speak with Tshombe, and has sought Adoula's reaction. If Tshombe should come to Europe for this purpose, it might be desirable for Mr. Harriman to see him, not necessarily at the same time and place. Both Mr. Harriman and Mr. Spaak might assume the role of "Dutch Uncle" as a means of persuading Mr. Tshombe to accept the national reconciliation proposals.

George C. McGhee

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Secret. The source text includes no drafting information, but the Department of State copy indicates the memorandum was drafted by Vance, Carlucci, and McGhee. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.70G/8–962)

2 Telegrams 148 and 151 from Geneva, August 7, reported that Tshombe had told David Morse, Director General of the International Labor Organization, who had met him at a dinner party, that he wanted to talk to Harriman. (Ibid., 770G.00/8–762) Telegram 161, August 9, reported that Tshombe had told Morse he was "ready now for settlement." (Ibid., 770G.00/8–962)

271. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 271. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, August 10, 1962, 6:44 p.m.

235. From Under Secretary Ball for Gullion. Léopoldville's 3402 and Geneva's 168 to Dept.3 We have long been impressed with probability Tshombe, due to advice from Struelens and others, does not really believe in USG determination bring about satisfactory reintegration Katanga. Your point appears sound that Tshombe's desire to see prominent American in Geneva is motivated by his increasingly desperate desire to find some way out of developing pressures on him to accept reintegration. We would not wish to take an action which might deflect or slow down the proposal and course of action we have now laboriously worked out with the Belgians and British and which, we have reason to believe, will shortly be approved by the SYG. Phase II of the course of action envisages efforts by the participating governments to persuade Tshombe that his acceptance of the proposal for national reconciliation is not only reasonable but offers him the only path which he can follow without risking disastrous consequences for himself.

I will be in Western Europe until Tuesday4 on Common Market purposes and can find ostensible reason to be in Geneva and meet Tshombe Monday afternoon.5

I believe Tshombe's presence in Geneva offers us an opportunity to bring home to him effectively our determination and at the same time avoid the pitfalls mentioned above. Ideally this could be achieved if SYG's concurrence in our proposal and course of action could be obtained today and if Gardiner could then tomorrow obtain Adoula's concurrence. A meeting between Tshombe and me for the sole purpose of making abundantly clear to Tshombe the USG determination could then be explained to Adoula as an implementation of the course of action which Adoula would have already approved. However, USUN tells us that U Thant has only this morning begun staff consultations on our papers and action in New York and Léopoldville which would be required to move these papers through acceptance by Adoula could not be completed before Monday at the earliest.

Accordingly, we are hopeful you believe you can, in the light of your discussions with Adoula to date on the effort we have been endeavoring to mount plus description in general terms of its present status, be able to convince Adoula that my receiving Tshombe would be in our mutual interest.

Request you see Adoula Saturday along these lines and emphasize that the success of the effort we are mounting will depend to a very considerable extent on convincing Tshombe that the analyses of American determination he has been obtaining from Struelens and others are inaccurate. I would decline to countenance any Tshombe proposal or effort to discuss substance in mediatory fashion and advise Tshombe to return immediately to Elisabethville and in his own interests react favorably to the proposals which will shortly be put to him.

If necessary, am prepared to deprive Tshombe of possibility misrepresenting this talk by myself or Dept explaining to press exactly what I told him either immediately after seeing him or later if news of talk reaches press.

We would inform Belgian, British and French Govts at high level and SYG all in utmost secrecy of this meeting only after it has occurred taking position that it was impromptu meeting arranged while I was in Geneva for disarmament consultation. You should ask Adoula to say nothing of this to anyone until we have had opportunity tell SYG, following which you would inform Gardiner.

Geneva has told Tshombe some high ranking American might be in Europe who could conceivably receive him although no assurance whatever given along this line. Tshombe has stated he remaining Geneva until Tuesday.

Request Niact message on Adoula meeting repeating reply Paris Eyes Only for Ball attention Mrs. Helen Hanainy.6

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1062. Secret; Niact; Eyes Only; No Distribution. Drafted by Vance; cleared in draft by Burdett, Fredericks, and Cleveland's Special Assistant Thomas W. Wilson; and approved by Ball.

2 Telegram 340 from Léopoldville, August 9, commented on the reports of Tshombe's interest in meeting with Harriman. Gullion thought a meeting with Tshombe would alarm Adoula, prejudice chances for success of the new approach to the Congo, and lead to the United States being held responsible when Tshombe again failed, as Gullion anticipated, to carry out his promises. (Ibid., 770G.00/8–962)

3 Telegram 168 from Geneva, August 10, reported that Tshombe was postponing his departure from Geneva in the hope of seeing a U.S. official. (Ibid., 770G.00/8–1062)

4 August 14.

5 In a telephone conversation that afternoon, Bundy told Ball that the President thought someone, perhaps both Harriman and Ball, should see Tshombe. Bundy said he thought that "the President would like to have Ball's convictions and Averell's blarney." (Memorandum of telephone conversation, August 10, 5 p.m.; Kennedy Library, Ball Papers) In a telephone conversation shortly afterward with Bundy, Rusk told him that both Harriman and Ball would "make too much noise" but that Ball would see Tshombe. Bundy said the President had an idea that "Harriman might pull it off" but Rusk said "not for this particular job." (Notes by Phyllis Bernau of telephone conversation, August 10, 5:09 p.m.; Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations)

6 Ball's personal assistant.

272. Message From Foreign Secretary Home to Secretary of State Rusk 272. Message From Foreign Secretary Home to Secretary of State Rusk

London, August 10, 1962.

[Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204, UK Officials Correspondence with Secretary Rusk. Secret. 4 pages of source text not declassified.]

273. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 273. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, August 11, 1962, 7 p.m.

374. Paris eyes only for Ball attention Helen Hanainy. Policy. Deptel 235.2 Faithfully described to Adoula purposes your proposed visit as described in reference telegram. Moreover drew extensively upon "proposal for national reconciliation" plus "course action". Explained these yet to be finalized but agreement on essentials already certain.

In response Adoula will not say "yes" and will not say "no". He understands fully—and will be prepared to write you to that effect—that your mission is not entreat or solicit Tshombe nor to negotiate with him nor to propose mediation but to describe to him true temper of American people and to make it clear to him that he has no alternative but to accept proposals which will be made to him.

In spite of all this Adoula will not say to you any more than he did to Spaak that you should or should not go. There is no doubt however that he would be much disturbed if you made trip. He did say that it would be "grave error" and would "threaten American position in Congo". He made these points: 1. He would take my word on what propositions might contain, he knew them only to be US propositions. He did not know how far Belgians and British would go nor when he would see proposal in writing.

2. Tshombe will agree with anything you say but as soon as he gets back to Elisabethville he will do nothing in way he said he would. This he says is history of dealing with Tshombe.

3. Any further actions Tshombe takes will be explained to his people as being forced by American pressure. If he wants to get out of any agreement he will say it was not valid because of American duress. Adoula said this was Kitona pattern.

4. Adoula cannot understand why we would agree to see Tshombe when Tshombe has violently attacked us. It was Tshombe that American President saved in December and yet Tshombe has not ceased to revile him.

5. It is idle to think as I urged that anybody from Department of State could convince Tshombe that Struelens was wrong about American people and Department of State was right.

6. He was incredulous about keeping action secret until after event and very disturbed at idea that UN would not be informed about it.

7. Said best effect he thought on Tshombe was achieved by Spaak's denial to him of visa and his own measures drawing noose around Katanga. If now Spaak and Ball processioned to Geneva no matter what they told him Tshombe would say these visits vitiated finality and forced decision to end secession.

In response to his queries I explained to Adoula that visit might well take place. In any case you would know his reservations about it. I invited him to give me letter for you but he is reluctant to do so. I have no doubt however that above represents his opinion and that of Congolese. I have already indicated what I conceive to be insofar as it can be judged from Léopoldville (reaction of Belgians and UN).3

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1162. Secret; Niact; Eyes Only. Also sent to Paris.

2 Document 271.

3 Gullion argued against the proposed visit in telegrams 365 and 370, both August 11. In telegram 365, he reported that Gardiner had heard Tshombe was trying to see a special U.S. representative in Geneva and that Gardiner thought this would be disastrous. In telegram 370, he predicted that Spaak would drop the idea of seeing Tshombe in Geneva in view of Adoula's refusal to comment on it, and he argued that under the circumstances, it would be a breach of faith to undertake such a mission without giving Spaak advance notice. (Both in Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1162)

274. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 274. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, August 11, 1962.

SUBJECT

Current Status of Proposed Action on the Congo

In a memorandum to the President of August 3, 1962, we outlined and enclosed drafts of a proposed program of action to achieve the prompt reintegration of Katanga. Those drafts were worked out in discussions with the British, Belgian, and French Embassies in Washington. At the same time those drafts were submitted to the President, they were also shown to U Thant and referred to the British, Belgian and French Governments for their views. We now have the comments of those Governments and the texts have been revised accordingly and again referred to the Governments for final approval. Copies of the revised texts are enclosed.2 It is hoped that the revised texts will be approved quickly and that Gardiner can be authorized to present the program to Adoula no later than early in the week of August 13.

In the meantime, there have been some relevant developments in the Congo, which are described below.

Comments on Program

In general, the British and Belgian Governments approve and will support the "Proposal for National Reconciliation," although the British Government has reservations on requiring Tshombe to agree to a definite division (50/50) of revenues and foreign exchange while a definitive distribution is negotiated. The Belgian Government approves and will support the "Course of Action" through Phase III, but does not commit itself to any specific action under Phase IV at this time. The British Government, in general, approves and will support the "Course of Action" through Phase II, although it has reservations on a number of details and will not take any action that would imply British participation in or approval of economic sanctions against Katanga or of actions that might lead to hostilities. The British Government will not participate in a voluntary boycott on Katangan copper, which is called for in Phase III. They will not, however, take any action to oppose other governments' participating in such a boycott. There is enclosed an aide-memoire setting forth Lord Home's position, which was given to the Department on August 9.3

The French Government will not participate in the program (although it will not oppose it) primarily on the ground that it is a program to be implemented by the United Nations.

Change in Texts

The major change in the text of the "Proposal for National Reconciliation" is the deletion in paragraph 7, at the request of the British and Belgians, of an explicit reference to freedom of movement of UN personnel. The two Governments believe that such a reference would decrease the likelihood of Tshombe's accepting the Proposal. The Belgian Government is, however, willing to support the UN in pointing out to Tshombe that its forces have a right to freedom of movement and that such movements will be made only in the event circumstances indicate they may be necessary.

The major changes in the "Course of Action" paper are: 1. Changes to reflect the deletion of the specific reference to freedom of movement of UN forces.

2. The deletion of specific measures from Phase IV with the understanding that, if we should get to that point, the participating governments would consult with each other and with the UN on these and other measures.

3. The addition of cobalt to the boycott called for in Phase III. This was done at the request of Belgium. Since the United States imports approximately 75 percent of Katanga's production, this is undoubtedly an effort by the Belgian Government to get the US materially involved in any boycott that should be imposed.

4. The following phrase was added to the introduction of Phase III to conform to the President's decision that American participation in any steps beyond Phase II would be subject to his further review and decision: (The voluntary boycott will be applied) "subject to review and further consultation in the light of circumstances existing at that time".

Developments in the Congo

In the past few days, the Government of the Congo has taken action to reassert its authority over air travel across Congolese territory, and particularly over air travel to and from Katanga. The UN in Léopoldville indicated it would cooperate with the Congolese Government by instructing its technicians who handle air traffic control at Congolese airports not to clear flights in and out of Katanga that are not authorized by the Central Government. The Government has also declared a suspension of telecommunications services between Katanga and other countries, unless such communications are sent via Léopoldville. In addition, the Government announced that business enterprises that support Katangan secession will not be permitted to conduct activities elsewhere in the Congo, and the Government created a special commission to study and propose legislation to carry out this policy.

The foregoing actions were interpreted in the press as the first steps in implementation of the plan of action reportedly being worked out between the US, Britain, and Belgium. The Belgian Government indicated that the timing of these measures created serious domestic political difficulties for it and would, in their view, adversely affect the prospects of Tshombe's accepting the Proposal for National Reconciliation. The British also expressed their concern.

In view of the foregoing, the Department promptly registered a complaint with the UN because it had, contrary to our understanding with the UN, acted without prior consultation with us. At the same time, Ambassador Gullion pointed out to Adoula the difficulties that the taking of such actions at this time could put in the way of our efforts to get our action program approved and launched. Adoula indicated that he would prefer to act in a manner consistent with our action program, but in the absence of such a program he had had to begin a series of measures which would enable him to maintain his position. In response to a suggestion that a way could be found to apply his measures only pro forma, he indicated that he would go slow and would review his plans in light of our program when it was revealed to him.4 We believe that, once our program is presented to Adoula, he can be persuaded to soften the implementation of his measures in such a way as to relieve the Belgian Government's difficulties. In the meantime, Adoula's actions are not entirely without positive aspects since they have made clear to Tshombe and Belgian business interests the kinds of actions that will be taken if progress is not made soon on the reintegration of Katanga. More important, they have dramatically enhanced Adoula's prestige in his own country.

As further views from the participating governments and the UN are received and as other significant developments occur, we will keep you fully and currently informed.

WB

Enclosure

5 COURSE OF ACTION

The Representative of the Acting Secretary General will take the following course of action and will be informed that governments are prepared to take the actions mentioned below in order to support the adoption of the Proposal for National Reconciliation and to achieve the reintegration of Katanga.

Phase I

A. The Proposal for National Reconciliation and the course of action set forth in this memorandum will be presented immediately to the Acting Secretary General of the United Nations.

B. If the Proposal and the course of action are approved by the Acting Secretary General, the Governments' final approval to presentation of the Proposal will be conveyed by their Ambassadors in Léopoldville to the representative of the Acting Secretary General, who will then present it to Prime Minister Adoula. At the same time, he will outline orally in general terms the course of action. Prime Minister Adoula will be urged to accept the Proposal and to carry out immediately all actions by the National Government called for in the Proposal. If the Proposal is accepted by Prime Minister Adoula, it will then be presented to the Katanga authorities by the same representative of the Acting Secretary General.

C. The Katanga authorities will be requested to indicate their agreement to the Proposal within ten days after it is presented to them. The Proposal will be explained to the Katanga authorities in detail and their attention will be called to the fact that, if accepted by the Katanga authorities, the UN and Governments will use all means available to them to assure that the Proposal is carried out. The representative of the Acting Secretary General will explain to the Katanga authorities that the UN resolutions give the UN a right to free movement of its military forces throughout the Congo. The Katanga authorities will be informed that the UN will exercise its right to freedom of movement should a need for it arise, but for the time being the UN has no intention of establishing new garrisons in Katanga. Governments will, in their approaches to the Katanga authorities, support the position thus taken by the representative of the Acting Secretary General.

D. Contemporaneously with the actions called for in paragraph C above, Prime Minister Adoula will be urged to enact or decree legislation (in the event it does not already exist) regulating exports and imports to and from the Congo and, in particular, forbidding exportation or importation from or to the Congo of goods not authorized by the National Government in Léopoldville.

E. As soon as the Acting Secretary General has indicated his approval of the course of action set forth in this memorandum, the following measures will be carried out in rapid succession: 1. Governments will make public statements indicating their support of the Central Government of the Congo and make clear their determination to see an early end to Katanga secession. These statements will also express these Governments' approval of the recent action of Prime Minister Adoula in announcing his intention to submit a draft federal constitution to the Parliament by September. The Governments will consult with each other and with the Acting Secretary General on the text, tactics, and timing of these statements.

2. The Congo Government will enter into negotiations with the Belgian Government to obtain its assistance in establishing arrangements for the collection in Belgium of duties on all goods exported from Belgium to the Congo (including Katanga).

3. In making reconnaissance flights over South Katanga, UNOC will avoid very low-level flights that might frighten the local population.

4. The US will, via the UN, immediately consider giving the Congo Government a small impact shipment of military equipment, and the UN will urgently commence a modernization program for the Congo army.

5. As soon as there is agreement on controls over utilization of foreign exchange to be established by the Congo Government, the US will make available additional aid to the Congo, and Belgium and other governments are considering similar action.

6. The Congo Government will solicit the help of the governments of neighboring countries in cooperating with the Congo Government in establishing arms control and anti-smuggling measures.

7. The UN would, in accordance with the Security Council's resolutions, again urge all member nations to take appropriate steps to prevent all movements to the Congo, which are not authorized by the National Government, of mercenaries, arms, war material, or any kind of equipment capable of military use. Governments will engage in extensive diplomatic efforts to support such action.

8. The Congo Government will invite representatives of UMHK to enter into discussions of matters of mutual interest, including the Congo Government's attitude toward the activities of UMHK.

9. The UN would invite the Belgian Government and UMHK to discuss with it the problem of protecting Belgian nationals and Union Miniere's installations in Katanga.

10. At the request of the Congo Government, Governments will, to the extent possible, refuse to grant visas to Katangans or permit their entry when using travel documents other than Congo passports. Similarly, Governments will indicate publicly their acceptance of the Congo Government's request and will urge holders of their own passports to seek and receive authorization from the Congo Government before traveling to Katanga. Governments will urge the Congo Government to make convenient arrangements for the issuance of passports to all Congolese nationals desiring to travel for purposes which are consistent with the Proposal for National Reconciliation.

Phase II

During the ten days immediately following the presentation of the Proposal for National Reconciliation to the Katanga authorities, the following actions will be taken: 1. Governments will solemnly urge the Katanga authorities to accept the Proposal. They will advise the Katanga authorities that the Governments consider it a reasonable one. Governments will also urge other governments and private companies and individuals to support their efforts to gain Katangan acceptance. If the Katanga authorities indicate that they will refuse or delay, the Governments will advise them that, if the Proposal is not accepted within ten days, Governments will, if requested by the Government of the Congo, take all measures available to them to comply with the National Government's laws and regulations on exports of copper and cobalt from Katanga. The Katanga authorities will also be told that, if in spite of that boycott, Katanga secession continues more stringent measures will be inevitably applied. These may include the withdrawal of Belgian technicians, the suspension of postal and telecommunications services, the cessation of air traffic in and out of Elisabethville, and a blockade of Katangan exports and imports by the establishment of road blocks on the rail lines leading out of Katanga. Governments will consult with each other on the timing and tactics to be used in making their approaches to the Katanga authorities.

2. In connection with the action called for in paragraph E(8) of Phase I, UMHK will urge the Katanga authorities to accept the Proposal for National Reconciliation.

Phase III

If the Katanga authorities should fail to accept the Proposal for National Reconciliation within the stated period of time, the following actions will be taken subject to review and further consultation in the light of circumstances existing at that time: 1. The Government of the Congo will request all relevant governments to refuse to permit the importation into their country of copper and cobalt exports from Katanga which are not authorized by the Central Government in Léopoldville.

2. Governments will take such actions as are available to them to comply with this request and to assist in achieving the objectives.

Phase IV

If the measures in Phase III do not induce the acceptance by the Katanga authorities of the Proposal for National Reconciliation, Governments will consult with each other and with the UN on other measures that could be then taken in light of the circumstances existing at that time.

Enclosure 2

6 PROPOSAL FOR NATIONAL RECONCILIATION

1. Constitutional Arrangements.

The National Government will by September 1, present and support in Parliament until it is placed in effect, a draft Constitution that will establish a federal system of government for the Congo. To this end, the National Government has requested the UN to assist it by making available to the government the services of international experts in federal constitutional law. The National Government calls attention to its communique of July 29 and invites all state governments and interested political groups in the Congo to submit their views on the dispositions to be made in this Constitution. Their views, insofar as they are consistent with the federal character of the Constitution, will be taken into account to the greatest extent possible. Subject to receiving the views of the state governments and the interested political groups, the National Government instructs the experts to be supplied by the UN to draft, by September 1, a Constitution containing the following division of powers between the National Government and the States: A. The following powers will be attributed exclusively to the National Government: a. Foreign affairs.

b. National defense (other than local police functions).

c. Customs.

d. Currency, exchange control, and fiscal policy.

e. Interstate and foreign commerce.

f. Taxing powers sufficient for National Government needs.

g. Nationality and immigration.

h. Post and telecommunications.

B. The state governments will of course have control over their own administration and will be given all powers not expressly delegated to the National Government, including local police powers as well as taxing powers sufficient to meet the costs of local government activities.

2. Revenues and Foreign Exchange.

A commission composed of representatives from the National Government and from the provincial government of Katanga will, with the assistance of experts supplied by the UN, draft a law establishing definitive arrangements for the division of revenues between the National and state governments and regulations and procedures for the utilization of foreign exchange. All state governments and interested political groups will be invited to submit their views on the laws to be proposed. In drafting these laws the commission will take into account the views expressed by state governments and interested political groups, the economic and financial abilities and needs of the several states, and the division of powers to be established by the new federal constitution as set forth above which will particularly affect the future financial needs of the individual states and of the National Government. The financial arrangements should as far as possible assure the individual states to the maximum extent possible of revenues generated within their area and give the National Government as well as the state governments their own sources of taxation. With regard to the utilization of foreign exchange, the arrangements should take into account the essential needs of each state, in particular those connected with the operations of industries which generate foreign exchange earnings.

The National Government commits itself to support in Parliament such legislation as may be needed to implement these definitive arrangements drafted by the commission. Until the commission has completed this task and the definitive arrangements proposed by it have been implemented, the National Government and Katanga agree (a) to share on a 50–50 basis revenues from all taxes or duties on exports and imports and all royalties from mining concessions; and (b) all foreign exchange earned by any part of the Congo will be paid to the Monetary Council or institution designated by it which is acceptable to the parties concerned; the Monetary Council will control utilization of all foreign exchange and make available for essential needs of Katanga at least 50% foreign exchange generated in that state.

3. Currency.

The National Government will invite the UN to request the IMF to have its experts work out a phased plan for currency unification, based on the report of the currency commission of June. The unification will begin to be implemented in all parts of the Congo within 10 days after the plan is approved by the National Government.

4. Military.

The Commanders of all military, para-military or gendarmerie units who have not already done so will swear the usual oath of allegiance to the President of the Republic. A Commission composed of one representative from the National Government and one representative from the state Government of Katanga, with the assistance of experts supplied by the UN, will develop a plan within 30 days for the rapid integration and unification of all military, para-military, or gendarmerie units into the National Army and gendarmerie structure. The plan thus developed will be implemented within the next 60 days. All national, state, and local authorities will insure the complete freedom of movement throughout the Congo of this military commission and of the UN experts assisting it.

5. Foreign Affairs.

Since the conduct of foreign affairs is an attribute of the National Government there will be no need for any state authority to maintain foreign offices, or diplomatic or consular offices abroad. States desiring to maintain other types of representation abroad may do so with the concurrence of the National Government.

6. Amnesty.

In connection with the settlement of differences effected by this agreement, the National Government will immediately decree and, if necessary, propose and support legislation in Parliament declaring a general amnesty.

7. Cooperation with the United Nations.

All national, state, and local authorities will cooperate fully with UNOC in the fulfillment and carrying out of United Nations resolutions.

8. Reconstitution of National Government.

The National Government will be reconstituted so as to provide equitable representation for all political and provincial groups. The following ministries (or—of the following—ministries) will be filled by members of the Conakat Party:7

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Series, Congo. Confidential. The source text bears no indication of the drafter, but the Department of State copy indicates that the memorandum was drafted by Fredericks. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1162)

2 Telegram 310 to USUN, August 9, reported that the latest phase of consultations had concluded on August 8. (Ibid., 770G.00/8–662) The revisions were transmitted in telegram 223 to Léopoldville, August 9. (Ibid., 770G.00/8–962)

3 It reads as follows: "Lord Home is prepared to recommend the plan to Tshombe and to press him hard to accept it. But this must be a negotiated settlement between Adoula and Tshombe. The Foreign Secretary is not prepared to use words which might later be quoted to imply that the United Kingdom would be party to imposing a settlement by economic sanctions or in any other forceful way. Nor is he prepared to use words which suggest that Her Majesty's Government would approve such action by others. He considers it a profound mistake. Her Majesty's Government have already told Tshombe that if he rejected a settlement he should be in no doubt that there would be a move to exercise sanctions against him, which they would be unable to oppose or prevent. They are ready to repeat this warning."

4 Gullion reported this conversation in telegram 331, August 8. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–862)

5 Confidential. Prepared in the Department of State on August 8.

6 Confidential. Prepared in the Department of State on August 8.

7 The document ends at this point.

275. Editorial Note 275. Editorial Note

Secretary of State Rusk discussed the proposed plan for Under Secretary Ball to meet with Katangan Provincial President Tshombe in Geneva in telephone conversations on August 11 and 12. He telephoned U.N. Under Secretary Ralph Bunche on August 11 at 12:50 p.m., apparently after receiving Ambassador Gullion's report in telegram 365 from Léopoldville that Robert Gardiner had heard that Tshombe was trying to see a special U.S. representative in Geneva. (See footnote 2, Document 273) He told Bunche that this was "only a possibility" and "would only be after everything has been talked out with Adoula and if things were on the line in B's shop and if it seemed wise to him." Bunche said "they could not do anything with Adoula if this happened." Rusk assured him that it "has not been done and will not be done behind their backs" and that the idea was to talk to Tshombe "on the basis of helping to get on with the job and to clear up misapprehensions on T's part." (Notes of conversation by Phyllis D. Bernau; Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Calls)

On August 12 at 3:55 p.m., Ball telephoned from Paris to report that he had talked by telephone with Belgian Foreign Minister Spaak, who fully approved of the proposal. At 4:10 p.m., Rusk talked with Bunche, who told him the United Nations had received a memorandum indicating that the British would cooperate only with the first part of the planned program of action on the Congo. Bunche thought this made it imperative to have further discussions at the United Nations the next day as to what Gardiner should present to Prime Minister Adoula. He also thought it would be a "grave error" for any U.S. official to see Tshombe before Gardiner had seen Adoula, since Adoula would assume the plan had been presented to Tshombe before it was presented to him; furthermore, such a U.S. approach to Tshombe would "get the UN in 'dutch' with the Congo Advisory Committee." He therefore "strongly recommended" to Rusk that any meeting be deferred. At 4:35 p.m., Rusk telephoned Paris and left a message with Ball's personal assistant Helen Hanainy that the United Nations had recommended strongly against an approach at that time. (Notes of conversations by Emory C. Swank; ibid.)

276. Telegram From the Consulate General in Geneva to the Department of State 276. Telegram From the Consulate General in Geneva to the Department of State1

Geneva, August 13, 1962, 1 p.m.

181. Under instructions from Under Secy called on Tshombe this a.m. accompanied by DCM. Tshombe accompanied only by Diur.2

Stated Under Secy had planned come Geneva today from Paris confer with Tshombe but pressure of business including Berlin crisis had proved be so intense that Under Secy recalled Washington unexpectedly and would have to forego planned Geneva trip. Expressed regret that Tshombe's own plans had been altered in hope of meeting, and thanked him for copy Aug 7th letter to SecGen UN proposing formation constitution federated state (ourtel 174).3

Tshombe launched into temperate review his position. Hoped reasons cancellation Ball meeting were not subterfuge ("echappatoire") and did not result from intervention other US officials who had done everything to prevent greater understanding through contact of US and Katanga officials. (Development this theme made clear reference to Amb Gullion.)

Tshombe stated counted heavily on talking with senior US official like Harriman who had open mind. Sure it would advance prospects solution Congo crisis by formation federated govt. Believed US misinformed of true facts. Present steps will only forestall if not doom prospects peaceful solution. Sanctions do nothing but antagonize populace already aroused. People do not eat copper, and embargo and efforts to crush economy by ban communications etc. will infuriate populace and convince them West not sympathetic to people Katanga and drive them into opposite camp.

Only solution is prompt formation federated govt. Congo too big and unbalanced for anything else. But this cannot be achieved by refusal to even discuss matter and US attachment to man who is supported by no one but a palace guard and dares not set foot outside Léopoldville (Adoula).

Tshombe reiterated that if reasons cancellation Ball visit not "subterfuge" could not plans be made for another high official US Govt see him any place desired. He had deferred departure Geneva to see Ball but now must leave next plane leaving Geneva Aug 15 noon local time. Will await further word from us.

Throughout Tshombe remained subdued if intense especially while referring to lack contact US officials in Congo. Appeared in excellent health.

My remarks confined to delivery message as stated above, assurance Tshombe's comments would be relayed to Washington and polite platitudes. Detailed memcon follows pouch.4

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1362. Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to USUN.

2 His representative in Paris.

3 Dated August 10. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1062)

4 It was transmitted in telegram 186, August 14. (Ibid., 770G.00/8–1462)

277. Editorial Note 277. Editorial Note

Under Secretary of State Ball, McGeorge Bundy, and Ralph Dungan of the NSC Staff discussed the Congo in a telephone conversation on August 14. According to a memorandum of the conversation, Ball said he was "very concerned about the Congo" and thought "we had a bankrupt policy." Bundy and Dungan agreed.

The memorandum of conversation continues as follows: "Ball continued he thought we were going to have to do some very careful and adroit disengaging from this, shift the courses of it into something that is much more feasible as far as acceptability in Katanga is concerned, and resume some direct connections with these people. He thought that what happened here was that this has become a kind of religious war and it is on both ends. He thought Gullion's wires were hysterical. Bundy said it was most uncalled for.

"Ball said the situation was that this end hasn't a single tough-minded fellow working on it. Dungan said their analysis of the difficulty is identical with Ball's and they leave it to Ball to talk with the Secretary."

Ball said he was going to discuss the matter with the Secretary whose views he thought were not much different from his own. Bundy said "he thought they would all feel better if Ball or the Secretary were running the Congo," and Ball replied he was going to do it.

After further discussion, the memorandum continues: "Ball continued we had two problems of which he is aware. We have to have someone tough-minded in the AF bureau. We are getting a lot of mush out of there, and it is based on assumptions which he is not sure we are going to like very much when we pull them out and look at them. It is the assumption that we have to play the major role in every effort; we have to beautify the greens for them; we have to produce regional agreements; we have to arrange for better understanding of the white settlers problem. This thing is way over-due. Bundy said to put it another way it is one sector of the Department which is being run by the preceding Under Secretary. Ball agreed the spirit certainly hovered.

"Bundy said they would tell the President that Ball is talking with the Secretary on this whole matter." (Memorandum of telephone conversation, August 14, 9:40 a.m.; Kennedy Library, Ball Papers)

In a telephone conversation with Rusk later that day, Ball told Rusk that he would like to "get a reading" from Lewis Hoffacker, who had just been transferred from Elisabethville to the position of First Secretary at the Embassy in Léopoldville, but that he did not want to offend Gullion. Rusk asked "if they would be suspicious," and Ball replied that he didn't know but that it was "not an unreasonable request," since Hoffacker could give a first-hand report on the situation in Elisabethville. (Memorandum of telephone conversation, August 14, 1:50 p.m.; ibid.)

Telegram 262 to Léopoldville, August 14, transmitted a message from Rusk to Gullion requesting that he arrange for Hoffacker to return to Washington for consultation as soon as possible. (Department of State, Central Files, 123– Hoffacker, Lewis) Ball told Dungan in a telephone conversation the next day that he had "discovered as a result of sending the wire that Hoffacker had expressed quite violent reservations to our policy some time ago which was never communicated to us." (Memorandum of telephone conversation, August 15, 5:25 p.m.; Kennedy Library, Ball Papers)

278. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 278. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, August 15, 1962, 9:24 p.m.

380. From Ball for Secretary and Stevenson. Re: New York's 467.2 Not clear from reftel whether SYG would propose to publish as "U.S. Plan" the paper on internal Congolese constitutional arrangements entitled "Proposal for National Reconciliation" or the paper on steps to be taken to persuade Union Miniere and Tshombe to accept it, entitled "Course of Action". In either case, publication by SYG in a report to the Security Council is simply impossible, and it is essential to restrain SYG from any such intention.

"Proposal for National Reconciliation" is useful as a document to be floated by the UN (Gardiner) with Adoula and Tshombe. It would represent the UN's judgment, after the consultations SYG has now had with all relevant members, regarding what kind of deal Adoula and Tshombe should make with each other. For this proposal to become officially the U.S. Plan would be surest way to kill it in a hurry.

Our briefing of some twenty CAC and other ambassadors in Washington convinces us that they readily accept characterization of proposal we submitted UN August 9 as suggestions we have presented to UN in response to Thant appeal. Out of this and other advice he has solicited, SYG is to develop a UN espoused plan. But if SYG publishes "U.S. Plan" and then delivers it to Adoula and Tshombe with a UN label on it, he presents himself and the UN as merely an appendage or vehicle of U.S. policy, which is certainly not a good thing from his point of view or from ours.

Any suggestion that "Course of Action" paper might be published by UN as U.S. Plan is possibly even more fantastic. The thing to do about "Course of Action" is to start taking the measures for which it provides, not publish an official list of them to which everybody can start to object as being either too much or too little. Moreover, Bunche suggestion that "UK reservations" to "U.S. Plan" should be published by UN would simply advertise, confirm, and freeze the differing attitudes of two close allies on this major question of policy.

Believe best way to get this back on track would be for you to make U.S. position perfectly clear to Thant personally at your luncheon Thursday.3 UN Secretariat need not be so sensitive to press treatment intergovernmental discussion on Congo. It is not even clear to us that Thant needs to report to Security Council at all until Gardiner has tried out on Adoula and Tshombe the "Proposal for National Reconciliation" and has something to report. Next steps, then, are (a) for SYG to instruct Gardiner to discuss "Proposal for National Reconciliation" first with Adoula and then with Tshombe within next very few days; and (b) after it has been discussed with Tshombe, to begin taking the graduated measures of persuasion which are contained in "Course of Action" paper. See no reason why this process could not begin forthwith, i.e. this weekend.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1562. Confidential; Niact. Drafted and approved by Cleveland; cleared by Fredericks, Buffum, and Ball; and initialed by Cleveland for Ball. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and Paris.

2 Telegram 467 from USUN, August 15, reported a conversation the previous evening with Bunche, who had stated that Thant intended to issue a report to the Security Council on steps being taken on the Congo following his July 31 appeal for support. In view of the widespread publicity given to U.S. consultations with the Belgians, British, and French, including press references to a "U.S. plan," Thant felt he must include a copy of the plan and the British paper of reservations as annexes to the report. He planned to state in the report that he agreed with the U.S. proposals and was therefore instructing Gardiner to proceed. (Ibid.)

3 August 16. No record of the discussion has been found.

279. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 279. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, August 17, 1962, 10 p.m.

501. Policy. Verbatim text. Congo. Following report not cleared with Secretary.

During day we have sought agreement with UN re text of statement Thant would include as part of his report to SC on steps he intends to take in Congo. Fol telecons from Dept this morning, Secretary and Stevenson invited Bunche to USUN to work on final version of text sent Dept ourtel 4892 as amended and revised by telecon instructions and Secretary-Ball conversations.

Bunche made several minor editorial suggestions and proposed two additions of substance. One is contained at end of 4th para from bottom in text below3 and relates to interdiction of arms, material and men, incorporating ideas from para I.E.7 of Courses of Action.

Other and crucial addition is last sentence next to last para.4

During morning's discussion of text, Bunche emphasized fundamental concerns of SYG: (A) Package must contain sufficient elements to make it salable to Adoula. Adoula is in very negative state of mind re UN, and Gardiner verges on being unacceptable to him fol SYG's instructions to Gardiner to return, in spite of GOC's opposition, Rhodesian aircraft and crew from Manono to Northern Rhodesia. Bunche stressed Adoula would have to be given in writing both National Reconciliation and Course of Action. (Question of tactics discussed only briefly and inconclusively with Bunche at morning meeting where focus was on text of statement.)

(B) Thant feels a key element in situation is public knowledge in detail of recent negots and two papers. Tactic must be devised therefore to handle problem of public appearance.

(C) Thant must have basis to defend himself against criticism which will inevitably come and has already begun from Casablanca members of Congo Advisory Comte, and Sovs, who insinuate Thant espousal of program, and mystery surrounding question, is somehow sinister and responsive to pro-Tshombe type pressures.

As part of public presentation which will cover press leaks, Thant believes he must go beyond statement of July 31st. Otherwise in face press stories and detailed knowledge by UN reps of recent consultations he will appear to be backing down under Western European pressure, particularly British, from position he took in July 31 statement. He concludes he must therefore say something in public indicating he prepared to move to carry out implications July 31 declaration should the circumstances require.

(D) Thant becoming uncertain and even doubtful of determination behind current attempt to find peaceful Congo settlement. This feeling greatly stimulated by our fear of damage public disclosure Plan of Action and National Reconciliation papers would have.

Fol morning drafting session Bunche returned to Secretariat with draft he considered minimum and discussed it with Thant. Draft below is resulting text incorporating certain editorial changes made by Thant. In handing it to us this PM, Bunche said Thant said it represented absolute minimum he could accept as his own.

At several discussions during day, in which US reps argued vigorously against last sentence in text to last para, we were unable to get it deleted. This evening at Dept suggestion, we presented fol alternative sentence: "In these circumstances I would anticipate that the GOC would request a cessation of illegal trade in major commodities with Katanga and I would wholeheartedly support such a request."

Bunche said while he would put this to Thant if we requested, he did not believe it should be put to him: (A) he was extremely doubtful that Thant would accept it; (B) he felt Thant increasingly doubtful concerning reality of support he has behind any initiative and does not want to undertake initiatives if it likely to fail since that would leave situation worse both in Leo and New York. US attitude toward sentence tended increase his doubts.

Since effort to get Thant to drop foregoing addition unsuccessful, issue was referred by Stevenson to Secretary who authorized that we have Bunche put alternative language to Thant as our best judgment but indicating we would agree to accept his decision as final if he decided to maintain sentence as drafted. Tonight when this put to him by Bunche, Thant decided to reject US alternative language and maintain sentence as it now stands.

[Here follows the text of the Secretary-General's draft statement.]

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1762. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, Paris, and London.

2 Telegram 489 from USUN, August 16, reported that, as an outgrowth of discussions among U Thant, Bunche, Rusk, and Stevenson, the Mission was preparing a draft statement for Thant outlining the National Reconciliation Proposal and Course of Action paper, which Thant had insisted should be treated as part of one package, and it transmitted the text of the U.S. draft. (Ibid., 770G.00/8–1662) The National Reconciliation Proposal and Course of Action paper are printed as enclosures to Document 274. A few revisions subsequently agreed upon by U.N. officials and U.S., U.K., and Belgian representatives were reported in telegram 511 from USUN, August 18. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1862)

3 The text of the draft statement transmitted in this telegram, not printed here, was identical in substance to the last 17 paragraphs (numbered 75–91) of Thant's August 20 report to the Security Council (S/5053/Add.11). Portions of his report, including those paragraphs, are also printed in Public Papers of the Secretaries-General, vol. VI, pp. 163–166, and in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 884–888. The sentence under reference reads as follows: "All members of the United Nations should take the necessary measures to assure that there are no unauthorized movements to the Congo of mercenaries, arms, war materiel or any kind of equipment capable of military use.

4 "The sentence reads as follows: "In pursuance of this, a firm request would be made by me to all member governments to apply such a ban especially to Katangese copper and cobalt."

280. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 280. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, August 19, 1962, 4:26 p.m.

293. For Ambassador from Secretary. Embtel 412 and 413.2 After reading UNOC contingency plan wish to make sure there is complete understanding on objectives between Department and Embassy. Our purpose in supporting the UN in the Congo is to bring about a stable and peaceful Congo free from the chaos that creates Communist opportunities. To this end we seek reintegration of Katanga through peaceful means. We recognize that continuing presence of UNOC in Congo may under certain circumstances provoke conflict with Kataganese elements resulting either from Kataganese inspired incidents or more ambiguous causes. As in the case of any armed force UNOC must be prepared to defend itself. Therefore contingency planning appropriate and justified, if limited to quelling any such incident or protecting civilian population in area concerned.

But we should be clear in our own minds that the resumption of military action between UNOC and Katanganese would have disastrous consequences both for UN and for US policy and we should be careful not to give it encouragement.

It is not the purpose of the UN to reintegrate Katanga by military force or to wage a Carthaginian effort to destroy Tshombe. If present attempt to bring about reintegration by economic persuasion does not succeed we must be prepared for reexamination of situation with a view to developing new tactical possibilities of securing peace in Congo and withdrawal of UNOC without creating chaos or seriously disturbing relations with our allies or with Afro-Asian Bloc. Would greatly appreciate your own thoughts on this matter since time does not appear to be working on our side.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1862. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Ball, cleared by Williams and Cutler, and approved by Rusk. A copy sent to the President bears the following note in Bundy's handwriting: "Mr. President: Ball begins to take charge." (Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Congo-Security, 1962 (A))

2 Telegram 412, August 18, reported that the U.N. military command and Gardiner had agreed on a draft contingency plan in case of renewed hostilities in Katanga. It provided for the concentration of U.N. forces at Elisabethville, which would be used as the base for subsequent operations. A U.S. airlift was "held to be absolutely essential to this plan." Telegram 413, also August 18, provided further details concerning the contingency plan. (Both in Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–1862)

281. Editorial Note 281. Editorial Note

On August 19, Robert Gardiner presented the Proposal for National Reconciliation and the Course of Action paper (slightly revised versions of the enclosures to Document 274) to Prime Minister Adoula. On August 21, the Congolese Government accepted the proposals with minor reservations. (Telegrams 419 and 430 from Léopoldville, August 20 and 21; Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–2062 and 770G.00/8–2162, respectively) Adoula formally conveyed Congolese acceptance in a letter of August 23 to Gardiner. (U.N. document S/5053/Add.13/Annex III) On August 24, Gardiner presented the Proposal for National Reconciliation to Katangan Ministers Kimba, Munongo, and Kibwe, in the absence of Provincial President Tshombe. (Telegram 322 from Elisabethville, August 24; Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–2462)

For text of a report from Gardiner to the Secretary-General, dated November 26, on the submission and implementation of the plan, see U.N. document S/5053/Add.13. The text of the document given to Adoula and Tshombe, subsequently known as the Secretary-General's Plan of National Reconciliation, is ibid., Annex I.

282. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 282. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, August 24, 1962, 8:23 p.m.

335. Eyes only from Acting Secretary to Ambassador. Hoffacker will be carrying letter from Sen. Dodd to Tshombe2 text of which follows. Hoffacker has been authorized to indicate to Tshombe that President has seen letter and concurs therein.3

You authorized to inform Adoula of substance of letter and exercise. Matter should be coordinated as you see fit with Gardiner. Realize that Adoula may be annoyed by this attention to Tshombe but you should underline to him that our pressure cannot be fully effective while Tshombe has separate channel of encouragement from strong Congressional sources. This letter should therefore give strong support to objectives which UN, GOC, and US share.

Dodd wrote letter to President Aug. 174 offering to be of appropriate assistance in convincing Tshombe that no substantial portion of Amer public supports Katanga independence. Hoffacker carries a copy of Dodd letter and is thoroughly familiar with recent developments here.

Begin Verbatim Text.

Dear Mr. President: I have had several conversations recently with President Kennedy regarding the problems of Katanga and the Congo. This morning I had a further discussion with Mr. Hoffacker and the Under Secretary of State, Mr. Ball. Knowing your confidence in Mr. Hoffacker, it seemed to me that it might be useful to use the occasion of his return to the Congo to write you my thoughts in the hope that they might assist you to understand the position of my Government and help lead toward a peaceful resolution of your differences with the Central Government at Léopoldville.

Let me say first of all that I am satisfied that the United States Government is in no sense unfriendly to you personally. In view of your recognized qualities as an African leader, the hope is widespread that you will be able to employ your exceptional abilities to the benefit of a larger Congolese community. As I have indicated in my statements, the vast majority of the American public share the views of the United States Government that the future of Katanga lies not in independence but in an integrated Congo based on a mutually satisfactory federal pattern.

With these considerations in mind, I have been pleased to note your recent statesmanlike expressions along these lines. I earnestly hope that in your conversations with Mr. Gardiner you will find a way to come to an early definitive settlement of the outstanding issues outlined in recent statements by the Acting Secretary-General.

I have been preoccupied with the feeling that time is running out on the situation facing the Congo and that in the interest not only of Katanga but of the whole Free World it is imperative that you and Mr. Adoula resolve your differences promptly. Knowing your great resources of energy and good will, I strongly urge you to tackle this problem with the determination to reach an early solution. In this effort I am sure that Mr. Gardiner can play a useful role by providing his good offices.

This is a matter of prime importance. If the cleavage between Léopoldville and Elisabethville persists I greatly fear that the whole Congo, including Katanga, will be threatened by chaos—a chaos that can envelop other parts of Africa as well. As you and I both know, only the Communists could profit from this.

On the other hand, if you and Mr. Adoula can work out the problems between you, I see a bright future for your country. I know that with the great good will of the American people my country is prepared to make a great effort to assist a reunited Congo in the vital business of becoming a strong independent nation.

As an American who has visited your country and who is impressed by your leadership and accomplishments, I have written you with a frankness that befits our warm friendship.

I take this occasion to convey to you once again my gratitude for your hospitality and cordiality during my visit to Katanga in November and December. Sincerely, Thomas J. Dodd. End Verbatim Text.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–2462. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Hoffacker, cleared by Williams, and approved by Ball.

2 Hoffacker, who at this time was First Secretary at the Embassy in Léopoldville, was in Washington for consultations. According to a memorandum by Godley, newly-appointed Director of the Office of Central African Affairs, of a conversation among himself, Hoffacker, and Senator Dodd on August 24, the letter was drafted by Godley and Hoffacker at Dodd's request after he agreed in an August 24 telephone conversation with the President to send a letter to Tshombe urging him to come to an early agreement with Adoula. The memorandum of conversation is filed with an August 20 memorandum from Kennedy to Rusk enclosing an August 17 letter from Dodd and asking, "Do his suggestions offer us any basis for consideration?" (Department of State, Central Files, 711.0155/8–2062)

3 A copy of telegram 335 was sent to the White House for the President. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

4 A copy of Dodd's letter is filed with the Kennedy memorandum cited in footnote 1 above. It describes an August 14 conversation between Dodd and Struelens and encloses an August 16 memorandum from Struelens to Dodd describing a telephone conversation of that date with Tshombe, in which Tshombe declared that Katanga would accept a federal constitution giving it a large measure of political autonomy, complained of Hoffacker's recall from Elisabethville, and argued for more regular and cordial contact between U.S. and Katangan officials.

283. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 283. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, August 25, 1962, 8 p.m.

466. Eyes only Acting Secretary. Reference Department telegram 335, August 24.2 I should like to appeal strongly to President Kennedy against Hoffacker's telling Tshombe that President concurs in Senator Dodd's letter.

Tshombe will brandish this letter to the world with its doubtless well meant flattery of man who has reviled President and our country. This will make us ridiculous in eyes of Africans.

With its implied presidential endorsement, Tshombe can use this letter to resist every summation to bring matters to a head and knock so-called "plan" into cocked hat. Presidential concurrence can be taken to extend not only to fair content of letter but to opening new channels of communication outside UN and some outside executive branch USG.

Strongly urge that this whole proceeding be cleared with UN which I fear will feel itself suddenly undercut in one of most delicate negotiations of its life.

In eyes of Congolese presidential concurrence will associate executive branch with Senator Dodd's special views on Katanga (not merely those in letter) to detriment our relations with government to which I am accredited. Nothing I can say to Adoula will alter this and our influence will be sadly reduced in these negotiations and thereafter.

These bad effects are inherent in this operation however managed. They will only be mitigated by omission of President's concurrence. I consider this omission essential and strongly urge all reference to President be omitted from text.3

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–2562. Secret; Niact. A copy was sent to Bundy with a covering memorandum from Brubeck. A handwritten note by an unidentified member of the White House staff states that the telegram was a "toned-down version" of a Ball-Gullion telephone conversation the day before, and that Ball thought it should not be shown to the President until they heard from Hoffacker, who would be talking to Gullion that night or the next day. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo Cables) In the Ball-Gullion telephone conversation, Ball urged Gullion to wait and send a telegram after he had an opportunity to talk to Hoffacker. (Memorandum of telephone conversation, August 25, 1:45 p.m.; Kennedy Library, Ball Papers)

2 Document 282.

3 In telegram 479 from Léopoldville, August 28, Gullion stated that talking to Hoffacker had merely reinforced his views and renewed his appeal that mention of the President's concurrence be omitted. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–2862)

284. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 284. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, August 27, 1962, 7:46 p.m.

351. Eyes only for Ambassador from Secretary. Language quoted your 4712 is correct. However, it seems to me fundamental that our maximum effort should be concentrated upon getting agreement to the reconciliation proposal. All other questions (such as exactitude of ten-day period or even question when ten days begin to run) are subordinate to possibilities peaceful settlement Congo problem within federal structure. Various moves now being undertaken are not, I am sure you are aware, a formality through which we are going in order to reach an automatic application of enforcement measures. The main object is agreement, and on this there is a high degree of unity among principal governments.

Any conclusion that there is no possibility of peaceful settlement would raise very grave and far-reaching questions. The unwillingness or legal inability of key governments to impose economic sanctions has now been made apparent. Attempted military solution offers most unpromising answer at end of road.

Believe therefore that we should concentrate on getting agreement to reconciliation proposal. If this fails, then key governments and UN would have to consider matter further. This does not mean that reconciliation plan plus "course of action" have been repealed or that SYG may not follow them in course of carrying out his own responsibilities. It does mean that failure of agreed solution would open up tortuous paths upon which we do not wish to embark if it can be avoided.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–2762. Secret; Priority. Drafted and approved by Rusk and cleared by Ball and Williams.

2 In telegram 471, August 27, Gullion requested confirmation of the fourth sentence in paragraph 1 under Phase II in the Course of Action paper, noting that the Embassy's version read as follows: "If Katanga authorities indicate they will refuse or delay, governments will advise them that, if proposal not accepted within 10 days, governments will, if requested by GOC, take all measures, etc." (Ibid.)

285. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 285. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, August 28, 1962, 1 p.m.

480. For Secretary from Ambassador. Deptel 293.2 There is surely no misunderstanding between embassy and Department upon objective of peaceful, stable, unified (reintegrated) Congo to be secured by peaceful means. I assume we also continue to agree: that Katangese separation works against US interests, accelerates centrifugal pressures in Congo and prepares way for communist influence.

We fully understand UN is debarred from initiating aggressive action in Congo. We are equally aware UN like any armed force must be prepared defend itself. There may be some differences between Department and embassy, or rather Department and UN about what such defense includes.

We also agree that time does not appear to be working on our side. There may be some divergence on courses of action needed to reverse this effect. In this connection we believe it particularly important to combine relation between UNOC's contingency planning and US-backed proposals for national conciliation.

I am grateful for opportunity you have given us to comment on these matters.

First, with respect to UNOC planning: the contingency plan which you have read (Embtel 413)3 is just that and nothing more—a plan drawn up by military men against contingency they may be attacked. We do not know whether this plan has approval of UNNY or any official status. It was dispatched to UNNY when it looked as if UNOC might be attacked at Albertville. It has, however, long been under study. US military and civil officers have urged UN to complete some plan and have deplored its absence. UN had been hesitant lest it be accused of aggressive intentions.

We hope it comes as no surprise that UNOC is convinced that if significant attack upon it develops it cannot submit passively to that attack. Self preservation requires it engage main body of attackers lest it actually risk isolation, defeat and annihilation. Embassy Léopoldville has repeatedly conveyed this UNOC opinion to Washington.

No armed conflict, of course, is wholly predictable.

There can be differences about choice of objectives, force requirements and elements of strategy. There have been such differences in our country team. We in Léopoldville unanimous, however, in believing UNOC force cannot sit down in Elisabethville while it is attacked all around perimeter and risks losing its sole links with outside through airfields near Elisabethville and Kaminaville. It may not be obliged to secure all objectives set in its plan.

This is not to say massive retaliation will be applied to any attack, however insignificant. To extent choice is left to it we are confident UNOC will limit its use of force to "quelling incidents or protecting civilian population". We know many cases in which UNOC has gone to great pains and taken real risks to avoid escalation of local incidents.

We have, moreover, repeatedly reported that UNOC believes its force must be absolutely, relatively and visibly superior if irresponsible Katangese are to be preserved from temptation of attacking.

Appreciation of UNOC intentions incomplete without reference evolving UNNY interpretation of its mandate from Assembly and GA. Department better able interpret this but UN has been acting under resolutions backed by US which presumably contemplate use of force to expel mercenaries and to authorize its use as last resort to prevent civil war. Lately UNOC has been acting under definitions we heard expressed by UN officials in meeting of U Thant, Bunche, Gardiner, Narisimhan with Ambassador Yost and Department officials4 and which are reflected in U Thant's latest report. UN considers it is in entirely different relation to Central Government, particularly under terms latest resolution, than Katanga or any other province. If negotiations failed or were abandoned and GOC undertook police action against GOK rebels UNOC would not interpose itself to protect latter. Presumably, converse is that it would intervene to protect GOC against GOK. I did not hear latter interpretation expressed at NY, but UNOC here was clearly prepared to act upon it last week when it pledged itself to defend Albertville and did act upon it in ordering Katanga to cease attack.

This concept UN role was perhaps already implicit in UN resolutions but it is increasingly in evidence since legal establishment of Central Government and as UN swings to view that its onerous commitment here may only be brought to end through increased cooperation with Central Government.

The foregoing interpretations are not inconsistent with "quelling incidents and protecting civilians" but they do go beyond it. It would probably have support of overwhelming majority of UN members if indeed they did not support something more drastic.

I am not sure your message reflects change in US policy or how far USG follows UN current thinking on its mandate. In past US has gone pretty far. We have affirmed to governments that US would support UN action (negotiations) "even at risk incurring hostilities" and declared "none of parties should operate under any different assumption" (e.g. Deptel 1953, May 19; 1961, May 25; 1905, May 11,5 et al).

The most detailed and categoric statement I know of the circumstances in which US could envisage UN's use of UN force in defense and in support GOC occurs in 14 paragraph of letter from President Kennedy to Mr. Macmillan on June 1.6

Presumably these statements still stand, even if subject to review as circumstances change.

This brings us to current UN proposals for national reconciliation to which US is important contributor. Under this plan Katanga has less reason to attack because GOC will not have introduced its tax agents into Katanga.

Nor will UMHK be so liable to reprisal because of any voluntary overt anti-Katanga actions on its part. UNOC correspondingly less likely confront situations which might involve hostilities. Whole purpose of plan is to provide reasonable peaceful solution to integration problem. If sanctions are required, newly available tool of economic pressure gives promise of effectiveness short of force.

Yet it is of utmost importance that we realize hostilities may nevertheless occur. Tshombe or his extremist followers may strike out in blind over confidence fairly soon. Or, if economic pressures are stepped up through phase II, III and IV risks go up proportionately.

There is no good putting forth this plan if we are not prepared to accept its implications and back it up. If we back away from it our position here, in UN and in Africa would be dismal. We here do not think it will come to fighting but UNOC must plan for eventuality that it will.

I wish to emphasize that UNOC does not believe it can carry out its mission nor defend itself unless US airlift is available to permit it to concentrate its heavy equipment from elsewhere in Congo in Katanga. If this is not also view UNNY we should know it soonest.

After September and VAC fighting this mission suggested measures which might reduce dependence on UN and US airlift in time of crisis (e.g. Embtel 1729, January 3, '62).7 Perhaps this concentration ought or could have taken place sooner. It is arguable that if it occurs now temperatures may rise dangerously but we believe it more likely that effect on Katanga would be salutary.

Point is that if hostilities do occur as result of plan US helped create and if US withholds airlift support which it provided in past emergencies in which it had less responsibility, and if lives of fighting men of many nations are lost as result, results for US policy would be grievous.

Let us turn now to time which works against US. It does so in several ways: UN has bear by tail and may have to let go; governing group friendly to US may lose its grip as it fails in its grapple with secession; radical leaders are emerging from wings to take over; parts of economy (e.g. Kasai) are falling into chaos; and meanwhile Tshombe brings in more mercenaries and makes common cause with far left elements to attack US and bring down Moderate Government.

It is partly use of force indecisively which has permitted situation to spin out so dangerously. When UN was obliged to reply with force of force in December it was within its power to have destroyed Tshombe's means to resist.

It did not do so because of its own restraint and because Tshombe called for US intervention in nick of time. At his request humanitarian US policy (perhaps influenced by exaggerated accounts of fighting) accorded him opportunity to make an agreement which he promptly dishonored.

If time is not to work adversely, therefore, UNOC draws at least two lessons from past: first, force if ever it must be used to resist attack should be not Carthaginian but sufficient; two, so long as Tshombe retains full control of his unfederated forces he feels free to upset any agreement (cf, President's letter to Macmillan).

Finally, I believe that unless we are prepared to support program of SYG with firmness even at some risk time will bring about very condition you describe in even worse form. There is evidence that Tshombe thinks governments behind SYG are both undetermined and divided. This is, I think, last round-up for both UN and Moderate Government in Congo.

Alternative to full support of SYG's program is use of force by ANC with help from whence it can get it.

This could indeed cause plenty of chaos and communist opportunity. Less likely, but possible as UNOC begins to conceive it, there could be an orderly turnover to ANC and this force could be brought level with its responsibilities under dependable influence. GOC would then try to consolidate its own territory by long and risky process. This at least would relieve our alliances and UN of strains which Congo has set up while civil war would be free to follow precedents of history.

Either way, however, war would be substituted for peace, cause of international organization would be set back incalculably, and lives and property of our friends in Katanga would be in far greater danger than anything to which plan of SYG, including economic pressure, would expose them.

If there is any change in our policy I should appreciate full opportunity to consult.

I wish to assure you that we here have some sense of wider concerns in light of which Congo policy must be judged and are aware of need for caution in field and fidelity to our instructions.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–2862. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

2 Document 280.

3 See footnote 1, Document 280.

4 See Document 266.

5 Telegram 1953 is printed as Document 238. Regarding telegram 1961, see footnote 2, Document 242. Telegram 1905 is printed as telegram 6037 to London, Document 230.

6 See Document 244. Reference is to the 15th paragraph, beginning "We have told Mr. Adoula".

7 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/1–362)

286. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 286. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, August 30, 1962, 5 p.m.

510. Eyes only for Secretary. Elisabethville eyes only for Consul. Hoffacker just returned from Elisabethville reports relay of Deptel 3582 unfortunately not received there by time his departure 10 a.m. Appointment made with Tshombe 5 p.m. yesterday when it announced he departing for interior at that time. As indicated in Elisabethville's 264,3 Hoffacker indicated President's association with letter. Specific effort made to impress Tshombe that there is solid American position in favor reconciliation and reintegration. Had appointment not been made at that time, it would have had to be postponed until Tshombe's return perhaps as late as Monday. By then, he presumably would have prepared reply to Gardiner proposals.

Re Elisabethville telegrams 264 and 265,4 Hoffacker made following supplementary notes on his and Dean's call on Tshombe yesterday:

"Tshombe speculated regarding Under Secretary's returning to Washington without seeing him in Europe but I tried to disabuse him of idea that Department intervened to prevent such meeting. He connected Under Secretary's inability to see him with my consultation in Washington. I explained that my consultation was routine since my predecessor had made similar trip in middle of his tour.

"As directed, I told Tshombe that Under Secretary appreciated his discretion in not revealing plans for Ball-Tshombe meeting. Tshombe proudly replied that he had not even revealed possibility to Ministers present (Kimba and Kibwe).

"Tshombe and Ministers expressed annoyance at manner in which Gardiner and Mathu had presented reconciliation plan. They said 'Take it or leave it' approach might invite equally abrupt reply. I urged them to look beyond tactics and to focus on plan itself which was fair and reasonable. Added that since everybody, including GOC, GOK, UN and US, was now federalist, it matter of trying find localities to effect this federalism. Said that since tempers were relatively cool and everybody speaking same language (federalism), there no good reason why August should not be month of national reconciliation.

"Tshombe and Katanga could not make concessions under threats and hostility such as USG made. Said I had noted no hostility toward Katanga during my Washington stay and Dodd letter confirmed this judgment.

"Tshombe wanted me to return to Elisabethville Monday to pick up his reply to Dodd and letter to President. I gave him various reasons why Dean was most appropriate to receive such letters."

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–3062. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Elisabethville.

2 Telegram 358 to Léopoldville, August 28, stated that it was important for Tshombe to understand that Senator Dodd had spoken with the President about the subject matter of his letter. It was not necessary that Hoffacker say the President had read and approved Dodd's letter but he should say that he had talked with the President and should outline the President's position, thus indicating that Senator Dodd's position was the same or very similar. The purpose was to impress Tshombe that "there is solid American position in favor of reconciliation and reintegration." (Ibid., 770G.00/8–2862)

3 Telegram 264 from Elisabethville to Léopoldville, August 29, sent to the Department as telegram 349, reported that Hoffacker and Consul Jonathan Dean had delivered the letter to Tshombe, who had expressed appreciation for the gesture from Dodd and for the "President's association with letter." (Ibid., 770G.00/8–2962)

4 Telegram 265 from Elisabethville to Léopoldville, August 29, sent to the Department as telegram 350, reported comments made by Tshombe on the U.N. proposal during Hoffacker's and Dean's meeting with him. Tshombe stated that the plan was receiving "minute study" and indicated that some aspects of it improved on previous Katangan proposals, but he referred repeatedly to "US and UN policy of threats" which "only enraged many Africans and heightened his resistance to pressure." (Ibid.)

287. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 287. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, August 31, 1962, 8 p.m.

522. Eyes only for Secretary from Ambassador. Re Deptel 351.2 Appreciate guidance and background in reference telegram. Agree our maximum effort must now be concentrated on getting agreement to reconciliation proposal and wish to reassure you we here have not come to conclusion there is no possibility of peaceful settlement.

If the past is any guide we are not likely to get rejection from Tshombe. He will say "yes, but" or "maybe" or "do I understand that". However his response is couched, he will probably describe it as acceptance. But what will he have accepted and what will he execute?

Answers to these questions are vital since GOC politically unable to engage in further negotiation with Tshombe unless concrete steps of integration as provided in US plan are carried out in soonest possible time. Neither Adoula government nor UN presence is likely to survive another run-around from Tshombe such as followed Kitona and marked the close of recent marathon Adoula/Tshombe conversation.

One possibility is that Tshombe who is well aware of UN financial straits will accept enough of plan and go through motions in effort to encourage UN to leave country after which he will secede again. Afro-Asians would hardly let UN pull out unless some irreversible steps toward integration had been taken.

But there is possibility Tshombe will not take those concrete steps as provided in UN plan (e.g. merging his army with ANC) until he knows what constitution will provide. He may consent to symbolic measures which do not really commit him to anything. If he can brush aside the time limits he will then sit back prepared to discuss a constitution ad infinitum.

If GOC and UN would fall in with such a plan a new Congo crisis might be suppressed a while longer. But I doubt very much that GOC would continue negotiations on this basis and U Thant has already declared UN cannot indefinitely last out the course financially and politically. Your message indicates that "key countries" would not be able to go along in application of economic pressures if Tshombe should renege. We do not know which countries these are or what technical difficulties amount to. We already know position of Britain and France and, of course, understand Belgium's reluctance but so long as latter will follow through the program should be sufficiently effective.

If we and the Belgians fall out and the fact is known in advance what will be effect? The consequences, I submit, would be grave: (A) For chances of peaceful integration, and

(B) For our own policies and for our faith and credit.

If Tshombe apprehends no pressures and no time limits he will feel free to drag feet on the practical steps of integration which are the real payoff while he engages in debate on semantics of federalism.

Adoula would not negotiate further although he will probably present a constitution to Parliament. He would prepare more actively for civil war.

The UN would try to turn over its responsibilities to him and a responsible legated government but it is more likely that Adoula would quit or give way to a government prepared to do business with the Casablanca bloc and committed, with USSR support, to military liquidation of Tshombe and of British/Belgian enterprise.

Of course we all abhor possibility of further bloodshed but collapse of UN plan because nations fail to take steps in a time of less risk may well cause blood to flow later.

Even now, as Tshombe senses deliquescence in the front opposing him there is a risk of collision as he moves his forces about in effort to confirm some countries in their worry about his reactions.

Possibly the worst effect of failure or flouting of UN plan will be failure of UN itself with implications which transcend Congo.

You will recall that it was only by description of possible pressures that Adoula was brought to accept the UN plan. (We let UN carry ball most of way on this one.) Certainly U Thant was persuaded that courses of action were married to proposal as integral part of new plan. Other countries were officially advised in their respective capitals of the possibility of pressure.

If Katanga reneges and none of these pressures comes into play it is US who will be blamed. As leader of West we will be held accountable for collapse of what is considered an American and a Western plan. Many new African nations do not believe we and West would sincerely apply sanctions to what they consider the creature of one of our number. I think this is one reason why they have so far been silent about the plan.

There can be no sure prediction of the effect of pressures. UN appears to believe that Tshombe will never integrate without them and that they carry less risk than their foreclosure would. UNOC has therefore maintained time limits in effect, sanctions in readiness, and their own forces in full view. It has rejected those recommendations for relaxation in certain particulars which I have repeatedly made to it in full accordance with my instructions. I assume these recommendations were also made to UNNY which has backed UNOC. UNOC estimates its firmness contributes more to a peaceful settlement than adjurations alone would do.

I understand that in our own planning the "courses of action" are not wholly rescinded but deferred while we wait and see what Tshombe does. I fear, however, that it may be difficult to revive the idea of pressures once they have been suspended and brought into question. Our chance for influence may thus be lost.

Tshombe may just possibly be coming to realize that international opinion in favor of integration is building up to irresistible degree. I hope so but I doubt it so long as he thinks he has more to gain by separatism than integration. I do not think therefore that we should let sanctions slide out of sight, this course contains risks but I am convinced that if the Congo question is not resolved under responsible auspices of UN and West it will be settled by others less responsible and not at all deterred by bloodshed.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/8–3162. Secret; Priority.

2 Document 284.

288. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 288. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, September 4, 1962, 9:31 p.m.

409. Department concurs in view that immediate steps should be taken to implement UN proposal and therefore carry forward present momentum.2 We consider it important UN follow up quickly to engage Tshombe actively in implementation of proposal by having him take concrete steps envisaged in plan. Once first steps taken it will be difficult for him to stall or renege.

For USUN:

While we recognize that responsibility for proceeding with mediatory efforts rests with UN and do not propose to blueprint their course of action, we believe it important to make known to UNNY our thoughts on next steps it should take.3 These steps are fully in line with what Gardiner has proposed. USUN should urge UNNY send appropriate instructions to Gardiner suggesting he approach Adoula along following lines: 1) Adoula should immediately name his member of military commission and have UN set up early meeting schedule.

2) Adoula should call upon UN to obtain IMF assistance on working out urgently (a) technical details of revenue and foreign exchange split during interim period and (b) currency reunification. Adoula should designate Monetary Council or other institution to receive 50% share Katanga revenue and serve as depository for foreign exchange as envisaged in the plan.

3) Adoula should publicize or otherwise call attention to existing decrees providing for all authorities to deposit foreign exchange with GOC.

4) Adoula should call on UN for assistance in drafting fiscal legislation.

5) Adoula should give immediate consideration to making offer broaden his cabinet to include Conakat representatives.

6) Adoula should issue invitation soonest to provincial governments and interested political groups to submit views promptly on new constitution and financial legislation.

7) Adoula should immediately announce amnesty as provided paragraph 6 of plan.

Once Gardiner has consulted Adoula, he should go to Elisabethville to urge following on Tshombe personally: 1) Tshombe should start paying 50%, as agreed, of his revenues to Monetary Council or other institution once Adoula has designated appropriate depository. In our view this constitutes single most important step in entire process and Gardiner's main efforts should be directed to accomplishing this quickly. It should be made absolutely clear to all concerned that we consider this the touchstone of Tshombe's sincerity.

2) Tshombe should immediately implement step 5 of plan re foreign offices.

3) Tshombe should immediately accept Adoula's invitation to provide advice on drafting of the constitution and financial laws.

4) Tshombe should name Katanga member military commission immediately.

5) Gardiner should reaffirm assurance contained his letter to Kimba of September 3 (Léopoldville's 535).4 In particular would be useful for Gardiner to reaffirm directly to Tshombe undertaking that UNOC will insure UN plan for reintegration will be fairly implemented.

6) Gardiner might discuss with Tshombe ways in which GOC passports could be issued to Katangans. This would be related to lifting the travel ban.

7) Gardiner should urge Tshombe to move ahead on Katanga gendarmerie oath of allegiance to Kasavubu.

8) We understand from telecon with USUN that Gardiner will give assurances to Tshombe re ANC brigading with UN. Details will be reported from NY.

For Léopoldville:

After coordinating with Gardiner, you should, unless objections perceived, approach Adoula and urge him take steps outlined above.5 You may tell him that we think GOK statement does contain number of positive factors upon which GOC can capitalize in order bring about full implementation of plan and his best interests would be served in treating it as acceptance. We hope Adoula shares this view and will be able to take immediate positive approach.

You should tell Adoula USG remains aware of delicate political balance in Léopoldville. As step to bolster position central government $8 million of US aid for import financing can be released as soon as control decrees approved and published. [For USUN: You should approach UNNY to expedite UN approval financial control scheme as requested Deptel 498.]6 As another step to strengthen Adoula's position we have decided send him shipment of communications equipment based on recommendation Greene team.7 Shipment should arrive next month consisting of 20 jeeps, 25 radio sets, 15,000 C rations and spare parts for radios.

Would appreciate report on progress commission constitutional experts. Believe it would be desirable they consult constitutional expert designated by Tshombe.

For Elisabethville:

Re Tshombe request for Western assurances in connection with implementation of plan8 you should, assuming Adoula's reaction not unfavorable, concert urgently with UK and Belgian consuls indicating you authorized individually, or in concert with them, to approach Tshombe expressing gratification he has accepted plan and tell him our governments will utilize all means at their disposal to assure that UN proposal will be equitably applied.

In order assure this approach to Tshombe not out of phase with Léopoldville developments, you should not take this step until confirming instruction received from Ambassador Gullion.

For Brussels:

You should inform GOB of above (as well as of Deptel 398)9 and express hope GOB will support Gardiner approach to Tshombe. You might also ask GOB if it can now move forward on increased aid.10

For London:

Embassy London should inform HMG of above as well as of Deptel 1272 to London.11

Assistant Secretary Williams seeing reps Belgian, British and French Embassies noon September 5.12

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–462. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Carlucci, Buffum, and Pelcovits; cleared by Williams, Wallner, Burdett, and Ball; and approved by McGhee. Also sent to Elisabethville, USUN, Léopoldville, and London and repeated to Paris, Rome, Lagos, New Delhi, and Bonn.

2 MacArthur had reported in telegram 377 from Brussels, September 3, that Spaak considered it imperative to take positive and constructive action to follow up on Tshombe's reply to the U.N. plan, which Spaak considered as close to complete acceptance as was possible to obtain. (Ibid., 770G.00/9–362) Tshombe's reply was set forth in a September 2 letter to Gardiner. (U.N. doc. S/5053/Add.13/Annex IV)

3 Telegram 675 from USUN, September 5, reported that Stevenson and Yost had met with U Thant and Bunche and given them the Department's suggestions. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–562)

4 Dated September 3. (Ibid., 332.70G/9–362)

5 Telegram 575 from Léopoldville, September 6, reported that Gullion had discussed these steps with Gardiner and Adoula. (Ibid., 770G.00/9–662)

6 Telegram 498 to USUN, August 29, urged U.N. approval and assistance in the implementation of a plan for Congolese financial controls set forth in an August 23 letter from Adoula to Khiari. (Ibid., 870G.10/8–2462) Brackets in the source text.

7 See footnote 4, Document 268. The President formally approved the shipment on September 14. (Memorandum from Williams to Rusk, August 21, and attachments; Department of State, Central Files, 770G.5/8–2162)

8 Tshombe stated this request in his letter to Gardiner; see footnote 1 above.

9 Telegram 398 to Brussels, September 4, repeated telegram 545 to USUN, also dated September 4, which instructed USUN to express to the U.N. Secretariat the Department's concern that stationing ANC troops under U.N. command in North Katanga would complicate the problem of implementing the U.N. plan. The telegram also recommended that Gardiner or Mathu repeat to Tshombe the assurance in Gardiner's letter to Kimba that the plan would be fairly implemented. (Both in Department of State, Central Files, 770G.5/9–462)

10 MacArthur reported in telegram 398 from Brussels, September 6, that Spaak was in general agreement with these U.S. views. (Ibid., 770G.00/9–662)

11 Telegram 398 to Brussels (see footnote 8 above) was also sent to London as telegram 1272. Telegram 943 from London, September 6, reported that the British Foreign Office was in general agreement. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–662)

12 The meeting is recorded in telegram 404 to Brussels, September 5. (Ibid., 770G.00/9–562)

289. Editorial Note 289. Editorial Note

On September 10, 1962, Robert Gardiner sent identical letters to Prime Minister Adoula and Provincial President Tshombe, enclosing a "Programme for Implementation of the Plan of National Reconciliation" and urging them to take the necessary actions with the speed required to ensure its success. The program included steps to be taken concerning the drafting of a new constitution, arrangements for allocation of revenue and foreign exchange, currency unification, military unification, consolidation of handling of foreign affairs under the central government, an amnesty, cooperation with the United Nations, and reconstitution of the central government with Conakat participation. For text of the letter and its enclosure, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pages 890–893.

290. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 290. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, September 13, 1962, 8 p.m.

633. Had tense and difficult discussion with Adoula concerning possible ANC troop movements within and in direction of Katanga.2 While I received few tangible assurances from him, I at least impressed him with difficulties that would be created for US understanding of problem and support for him if at outset of conciliation effort rash movements by ANC should come to world attention. I referred to issues before US Congress and UN at this particular time.

When I expressed myself in this sense, Adoula's mood switched to indignation. He found it painful that Americans should think it was GOC and not Tshombe who was responsible for psychological climate unfavorable to plan. He pointed out that when he accepted plan he had taken occasion to reiterate that this acceptance did not derogate from sovereign rights of Congo. Whether he moved troops from Stanleyville to Léopoldville or from Léopoldville to Luluabourg to Bakwanga was not concern of UN nor Tshombe nor US. He had not moved any troops into Katanga since Kamina.3

I recalled Adoula had told me soon after June 25 break with Tshombe that ANC had planned retake Kongolo. That plan was conceived in different circumstances and it was too late to put it into effect just as new conciliation effort started. I pointed out that UNSYG's press statement4 had said there was no need for movement of troops by either side in Katanga. While SYG had not mentioned movements elsewhere in Congo he did appear to include not only movements toward Katanga but movements of troops actually within Katanga. Moreover this halt on movements was part of plan just transmitted to him and Tshombe. Adoula first questioned that SYG press statement concerned movements within Katanga. He then said in any case he and I and certainly US knew Tshombe was constantly and at moment moving his troops within Katanga, both north and south. He asked why SYG should refer to "Katanga" when there were two Katangas.5 GOC had months ago called on Katangese troops to leave north Katanga.

Adoula then said General Mobutu had given orders to halt ANC column which had moved past Katanga [Bakwanga?]. (Whatever may be general intention and actual movement of ANC troops I am confident Adoula is really uncertain as to whereabouts and deployment of many of them.)

Adoula said detailed plan had not yet been accepted by Tshombe or GOC. I asked when he was going to name GOC members to commissions.

Adoula said he had picked them but first his government had to answer Tshombe's letter. (I received impression this may take more than day or two.)

I said there was indeed difference in moving troops in Kasai and in Katanga. I asked point blank whether movements had relation to "Kalonji affair".6 He resented term; said there was no "political affair"; that Kalonji had escaped and he was escapee until he was recaptured. However, he refused to be drawn with respect to where or when he might be moving troops in Kasai. (While he was vague on movements in Katanga he was evasive about Kasai. I have impression he is finding it difficult to move troops; perhaps for lack of transport or for fear of stripping other areas.)

I said I hoped there would be no delay on getting ahead with Constitution and measures required by plan on behalf of GOC. Adoula said that Constitution would be presented no later than [September] 25; that he had gotten Presidents of Assembly to state that session had been open since third and that Parliament awaited Constitution. He would again issue appeal for submission by provinces of their views on Constitution.

He cited statement by Léopoldville Province published here by newspapers.

I indicated desirability of showing that Katanga had full chance to present its views on Constitution. Adoula indicated he growing increasingly irritated at criticisms on this point. Tshombe had already presented his views on Constitution in exchanges with him over past year and through work on constitutional commissions. He could now present his views in way offered all provinces and GOC was extending dates for submission particularly to accommodate Tshombe. Thereafter he had still further opportunity to express his views in Parliament and in ratification process.

I asked about having Katanga constitutional expert meet UN jurists. Adoula emphatically rejected this. Said Léopoldville has not named its experts but taken those elected by UN. Why should not Katanga do same?

I considered it wise not to press this subject since it seemed likely to provoke Adoula into categoric position from which he would find it difficult to retreat. UN officials are quite aware of need of convincing public Katanga has had opportunity for consultation and Gardiner and Khiary think Adoula can be brought round. Gardiner however asks that US or Belgians refrain from indicating he is "convoking" any Katanga experts to meet with commission. His present efforts are more in nature of smuggling in experts, e.g. Gardiner tried to get Clemens up from Elisabethville but so far without success.

Comment: Adoula was tired after his barnstorming trip in Bakongo and irritated by Tshombe's blast on roadblock incident.7 I think habitual Congolese procrastination and difficulties in transport together with sharpened appreciation of effect on public opinion will cause Adoula at least to try to curb movements for present. We should not, however, underestimate his difficulty in making his intentions effective at long range nor fact that ever since inconclusive Adoula-Tshombe talks in June many Congolese here (and doubtless on Katanga side) have been increasingly dubious of any UN solution and feel that with or without UN sooner or later issue may be decided by arms. Even if there is agreement both are determined that its conclusion should find their military presence in north Katanga. If there is no agreement and UN pulls out they think this deployment all the more vital.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.54/9–1362. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to USUN, London, Paris, Brussels, Elisabethville, and Brazzaville.

2 Telegrams 609, 622, and 626 from Léopoldville, September 11, 12, and 13, transmitted reports that the Congolese army was preparing to move troops into South Kasai and perhaps to attack Kongolo in northern Katanga. (Ibid., 770G.54/9–1162, 770G.00/9–1262, and 770G.5/9–1362, respectively)

3 A contingent of Congolese troops had been placed under the U.N. Command in the Congo in late August and sent to the U.N.-controlled base at Kamina. A U.N. press release of September 3 stated that Adoula and Bunche had agreed months earlier that the troops would be provided to the U.N. Command and stationed at Kamina but the troops had not been available until August. (Telegram 654 from USUN, September 3; ibid., 770G.00/9–362)

4 Reference is to a press statement of September 5; for text, see Public Papers of the Secretaries-General, vol. VI, pp. 166–167.

5 In July, the Congolese Government had created several additional provinces, including North Katanga.

6 Telegram 594 from Léopoldville, September 8, reported that Albert Kalonji, self-styled "emperor" of South Kasai, had been released from prison by Léopoldville provincial authorities under mysterious circumstances and had departed for Bakwanga. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–862)

7 Tshombe had charged that U.N. forces had killed two Katangan gendarmes in a September 12 incident, reported in telegram 435 from Elisabethville on that date. (Ibid., 770G.00/9–1262)

291. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 291. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, September 14, 1962, 6:56 p.m.

446. From the Secretary. During conference yesterday with UNSYG, report of which under preparation,2 Under Secretary referred to necessity of effective and adequate consultation on constitution between UN and Katangan experts and/or competent officials prior to presentation of constitutional draft to Adoula for presentation to Parliament. I believe this to be of paramount importance and desire that USUN and Gullion bear this point in mind in their discussions with UNNY and Gardiner.

Would also appreciate Léopoldville reporting soonest on current status of draft constitution, consultations held to date and anticipated developments.3

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.03/9–1462. Confidential. Drafted by Godley; cleared by Williams, Wallner, Andrews, and McGhee; and approved by Ball. Also sent to USUN and repeated to Brussels, London, and Elisabethville.

2 The conversation, which covered a number of subjects, is recorded in a memorandum of conversation by Sisco. Concerning the Congo, Thant said he was thinking in terms of a period of about 30 days to put the reconciliation plan into effect. (Ibid., 884.411/9–1362)

3 Gullion reported in telegram 706, September 20, that he had been trying to get Adoula to find a formula that would at least prevent Tshombe from claiming he had been prevented from presenting his views on a constitution, but that he had thus far been unsuccessful. He reported that, on the one hand, Adoula was convinced Tshombe would use discussion of the constitution as an excuse to procrastinate on other steps but that, on the other hand, his opponents were charging him with planning to break up the Congo through a federal constitution and a pact with Tshombe. (Ibid., 770G.00/9–2062)

292. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 292. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, September 23, 1962, 7:48 p.m.

488. Eyes only Ambassador. President and Secretary have decided send Under Secretary McGhee to Congo to review situation with you and get firsthand impression prospects Katanga negotiations through discussions local officials.2 Public statement re trip would be along these lines. After visit Léopoldville McGhee will convey to Tshombe US Government determination see through UN Reconciliation Plan as agreed with UK and Belgium. McGhee will seek support Gardiner mediation effort, not usurp or undercut his functions. Exact timing trip not yet decided but should take place as soon as appropriate, possibly next few days. McGhee, together with Stevenson and Secretary, will consult tomorrow with U Thant and Spaak. Your views on timing appreciated. FYI. Decision corresponds to longstanding proposal Senator Dodd3 who will be consulted by McGhee prior to his departure. Utmost secrecy should be maintained trip until announcement made.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.12–McG/9–2362. Secret; Priority. Drafted and approved by McGhee and cleared by Williams, Wallner, and Burdett. Repeated to USUN and Brussels.

2 Senator Dodd urged sending McGhee to the Congo in a September 18 letter to Kennedy. (Filed with a September 20 note from Dodd to Rusk; ibid., 770G.00/9–2062) Kennedy called the letter to Ball's attention on September 21 in a telephone conversation in which he expressed concern about public reaction in case of renewed hostilities. After discussions with Rusk and others, Ball recommended to Kennedy on September 23 that McGhee go to the Congo, ostensibly on a fact-finding mission but with the realization that "if he goes out he will undoubtedly become a kind of mediator, because there is a terrible vacuum right now." (Memoranda of telephone conversations with Kennedy, September 21, 10:15 a.m., and September 23, 11:30 a.m., and with Kaysen, Dungan, and Williams, September 21 and 22; Kennedy Library, Ball Papers)

3 A September 6 memorandum from McGhee to Rusk and Ball describes a meeting that day between McGhee and Dodd at the latter's request. It reads in part as follows:"He proposed that I go to the Congo to mediate between Mr. Adoula and Mr. Tshombe, saying that he had made such a proposal to the President. I demurred at this suggestion and indicated that a US mediator might have the effect of undercutting Gardiner's efforts and should be considered only in the event of an impasse between Adoula and Tshombe." (Washington National Records Center, RG 59, UNP Congo Files: FRC 71 A 5255, Item 69 (Lot 65 D 219), Congo—Congressional)

293. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 293. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, September 24, 1962, 9 p.m.

881. Eyes only for Ambassadors. Stevenson, McGhee and Yost discussed with SYG and Bunche this afternoon2 possibility of early visit by McGhee to Congo.

In reply to query as to latest developments in Congo Thant said he has impression Tshombe believes that UN is unable exercise economic pressure against Katanga and he is therefore simply stalling.

SYG mentioned that he has despatched letter to Adoula urging that latter agree to immediate visit to Elizabethville of 4 UN constitutional experts (Bunche mentioned Nigerian expert has already left Congo). SYG said that if Adoula reply is negative he is prepared to force a showdown as he fully recognizes importance from broad public relations point of view of Tshombe having opportunity at this time to comment further on constitutional provisions.

Thant also mentioned that latest UN intelligence indicates there is substantial build-up of aircraft and mercenaries in Katanga. UN reconnaissance has spotted six Harvard aircraft as well as number of Dorniers, Otters and Doves at Kolwezi and several new air strips. There is also evidence that six new Fouga jets are being uncrated. It is feared these are intended for attack on UN airbase at Kamina. There are moreover reports that 1,500 to 2,000 additional mercenaries have appeared, some of whom may be French from Algeria though bulk are probably Belgians resident in Katanga.

In response further inquiry Bunche said that Gardiner has for some time planned to go to Eville but visit has been delayed by clash at Eville airport and by uncertainty whether Tshombe will receive him. He still intends to go but no date has been fixed.

McGhee outlined reasons which might justify his making early visit to Leoville and Eville, emphasizing visit would be in support of UN and Gardiner, and would be honoring US commitment to do all in its power to persuade Tshombe to accept UN reconciliation plan.

Bunche mentioned importance of being sure Adoula approved trip. Thant agreed but said he was sure Adoula would approve if he were convinced principal purpose of trip was to put pressure on Tshombe to accept plan. On this assumption he felt visit would be most useful and should be undertaken this week. He said next two weeks will be critical in determining whether or not UN operation in Congo can succeed.

Stevenson mentioned that according to Lord Home British and Sir [Roy] Welensky are also sincerely endeavoring convince Tshombe to accept plan. Thant remarked he might suggest to Home possibility of high-ranking Britisher also going to Eville for this purpose. Thant feels it of utmost importance that all pressures from all sources be exerted at this time.

Bunche noted that during first mtg of military commission in Eville Katangans had called for UN evacuation of Eville airport. This is hardly hopeful sign.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2462. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, London, Paris, and Léopoldville.

2 The conversation, which took place at 1 p.m., is recorded in a summary of conversation by Yost. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2153)

294. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 294. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State1

New York, September 24, 1962, 10 p.m.

Secto 3. Eyes only for Ambassadors. Re Congo. In useful conversation with Secretary (in part), Stevenson, McGhee and Yost,2 Spaak endorsed fully and enthusiastically McGhee trip to Congo after latter explained its purpose. Principal points of significance which Spaak made include: A. Believes Adoula has acted badly on Constitution, that he must be convinced to make it available to Tshombe, and to seek latter's views.

B. Agreed carrot and stick approach to Tshombe desirable, but is convinced that only thing which will make impression on Tshombe is if he understands clearly US resolve to take whatever steps necessary in event Tshombe is intransigent. He has made this point to Tshombe frequently and urged McGhee tell Tshombe at appropriate time this is his last chance. Also Spaak says he has told Tshombe US cannot accept situation where UN fails since this would weaken organization. Believes this argument re US resolve is one which convinced Tshombe to accept UN reconciliation plan.

C. While recognizing he would have to convince Cabinet and Belgian people and there are risks that force might become involved, Spaak would be willing, if negotiations failed, have his govt persuade UMHK to close down its plants in Katanga, provided this was in response to an appeal from Adoula, supported by a similar appeal from SYG. Such procedure, according to Spaak, would put him in good legal position to persuade UMHK as a business enterprise to stop activities contrary to wishes and laws of central govt. Spaak felt UMHK could not take initiative in this regard but would respond favorably to such an appeal. Spaak told McGhee he could inform Tshombe that Belgians would find it hard not to respond affirmatively to such an appeal from the central govt and UN.

D. Did not believe there was much hope UK changing its position on Congo matters, but agreed to McGhee's suggestion that Spaak urge Home to put stop to public statements by UK indicating it disagrees with sanctions since such statements strengthen Tshombe's hands.

E. Spaak urged that we hold tight reins on any additional money for Adoula as means making him more cooperative, particularly on Constitution.

F. He confirmed their information indicates many French mercenaries from Algeria ready go to Katanga. This, according to Spaak, based on report from Belgian Consul.

Throughout conversation Spaak appeared quite full of resolve and saw only much more dire consequences if reconciliation failed and Congo matters thrust into Security Council or General Assembly.

McGhee explained his trip to Spaak in context of supplementing UN effort to do what we can to bring about agreement within framework UN reconciliation plan, and to bring to Tshombe thinking of USG at high level, including our strong desire achieve agreement. McGhee said he hoped to tell Tshombe that we want to see him treated fairly and to urge him come to agreement, while keeping in background question of more forceful measures. At same time important Tshombe not believe we had weakened in our resolve. We want also be sure that all possibilities for peaceful settlement are exhausted. Both Stevenson and McGhee stressed that if reconciliation fails, would be most serious for UN and likelihood civil war could ensue.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2462. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels, London, Paris, and Léopoldville.

2 The conversation, which took place at 3:45 p.m., is recorded in a summary of conversation by Sisco. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2153)

295. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 295. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, September 25, 1962, 1 a.m.

884. Eyes only for Ambassador. Stevenson and McGhee saw Lord Home today2 to discuss McGhee's possible trip to Congo. Stevenson pointed out Congo reaching crisis stage, and failure of UN conciliation plan could lead to both bankruptcy of UN and unpoliced civil war in Congo, with central gov't asking help from wherever it can get it. Stressed importance resolving Katanga problem now. We cannot expect Tshombe buy pig in poke, nor expect Adoula stay in office if no solution forthcoming. Need solution now, therefore. If UK, Belgium and we exert influence, we could get Tshombe agree to reconciliation plan on grounds Constitution fair and reasonable, and on grounds if he refused he would face our united opposition. McGhee added Constitution being drafted by UN people, who taking into account views Tshombe and others. We and UK perhaps give impression of being further apart than we are in fact. We have not taken decision yet to enforce sanctions, nor have Belgians. In fact, we are not greatly involved, nor is UK. We already oversupplied with cobalt, major product we import from Katanga. Only country really involved is Belgium, and this not question of sanctions, as normally defined. Proposal would be for SYG, at request Adoula govt, request Belgium have Union Miniere close its mines, which would be operating in violation central Congo Govt laws. This not sanctions, and though Spaak did not give commitment, we convinced he will agree to this.

Home agreed there is now chance of getting solution, but expressed skepticism over Constitution, wondering if it would really be federal, and expressed flat opposition to sanctions. Moreover, he convinced Belgians would not agree; Belgian Govt would not be able call for closing of Union Miniere mines. Thought problem of possible bankruptcy of UN was poor reason for doing something bad in Congo.

Stevenson stressed importance of getting question resolved as soon as possible. Said needed good Constitution, and need make rejection of it by Tshombe dangerous or unpalatable. Therefore, need some step we willing to take at end of road. If we agree on this, convinced Tshombe would accept.

Home said he convinced Tshombe would refuse, and would rely on his ability to run Katanga. Was unconvinced when Stevenson said Belgians would pull out technicians. Stressed that if sanctions applied, next step would be for UN to vote sanctions against UK re Southern Rhodesia.

McGhee explained that if he went out, his purpose would be to express to Tshombe our determination see reconciliation plan through, stress that this is last opportunity for agreement, reassure Tshombe of our friendly intentions, and stress we will see to it anything agreed upon will be carried out. Noted to Home we criticized domestically as not being friendly to Tshombe. Mentioned that Spaak and U Thant said today they thought exercise would be useful. Hoped we could, without naming any sanctions, let Tshombe take negotiations more seriously. At same time, he hoped he could persuade Adoula he has to be more forthcoming with Tshombe on Constitution.

Home repeated British objections to sanctions; said British have had to speak against sanctions because mention of sanctions was in air. When asked if he could agree be silent, and not state opposition, said he could not, since he had already opposed, and could not go back on what British had said. He did point out he had told Welensky that while UK could not support sanctions, it was probable majority of UN would support them, and therefore British advice to Tshombe was to accept reconciliation plan. Welensky said he had reinforced this and told Tshombe he must cooperate. McGhee stressed importance of not letting Tshombe think UK would save him, and Home replied they had told Tshombe exact opposite. He willing ask Welensky make another approach, but did not think now was appropriate time. Perhaps after McGhee trip.3

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2562. Confidential. Received at 3:48 a.m. and repeated to London, Paris, Brussels, and Léopoldville.

2 The conversation, which took place at 7:15 p.m. on September 24, is recorded in a memorandum of conversation by Valdes. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2153)

3 Home made similar comments to Rusk in brief private discussions of the Congo and other subjects, one on September 23 or 24, recorded in a September 24 letter from Davis to Tyler, and the other on September 27, recorded in Secto 32 of that date. In the earlier conversation, Home said he had talked to Welensky and had been encouraged by his attitude: Welensky was afraid of chaos in Katanga and would be satisfied with a federal solution for the Congo. On September 27, Home told Rusk that the British would urge Welensky to put pressure on Tshombe and that they would not "get in the way" of any steps the Belgians might take, including economic sanctions. (Both ibid.)

296. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 296. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, September 25, 1962, 7 p.m.

738. Eyes only Acting Secretary for McGhee. Adoula agrees to McGhee visit.2

I opened interview informing Adoula for first time of scheduled arrival of impact shipment for ANC at which he greatly pleased.

I expressed apologies on behalf Under Secretary for shortness of notice of his trip saying he suddenly found after passage of bond issue that he might have time before GA got well into action for visit he had long wished to make to Congo. Then proceeded closely on line Department's instructions.

Adoula politely gratified at visit but disturbed when he heard trip to Katanga projected. However he declared he "has confidence in US". Says he hopes "McGhee is tough man otherwise Tshombe will roll him in rug like Cleopatra". Cautions against getting mousetrapped into making statements and impromptu speeches. (Adoula furious at what he considers indiscretions of Ngalula3 who apparently was maneuvered into position of saying or seeming to say that UN must go and commiserating Katanga on casualties suffered at UN hands.)

Adoula's immediate concern as he professes it is with simultaneous outbreak troubles in all provinces and disorders attending creation new ones. Kivu worries him particularly and he kept me waiting over half hour while he dealt with noisy Kivu delegation. He claims many areas do not wish accept integration in new provinces and want Central Government rule and protection. He asked perhaps disingenuously, "could it be that federalism is dying at birth?" He reiterated that he did not believe he could get Parliament to adopt constitution "unless Tshombe reintegrated in Congo. If he continues to make constitution sine qua non of integration, Parliament will not adopt constitution".

Referring to letter from U Thant4 Adoula said "if he showed it to his council there would be a non-recevoir". UN seemed to be trying to prove his adversaries right about his alleged surrender of sovereignty to UN, and readiness to let Tshombe drag out talks indefinitely.

I persisted that he should nevertheless find formula. Perhaps because he has letter from me not too different from UN approach, he did not say flatly that he would not budge. I fear, however, that he will not do so.

Adoula said "everything going very badly" in other provinces and in conversations. Tshombe proposals in military commission and Badre's report most discouraging. (See separate telegram)5 Adoula said he could not understand Governor Williams' optimistic remarks. I answered was necessary to maintain propitious atmosphere for conciliation until proved fruitless.

These worries seemed to keep Adoula from focusing too closely on visit.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.12–McG/9–2562. Confidential; Niact. Received at 3:13 p.m.

2 Telegram 492 to Léopoldville, September 25, informed Gullion that it had been decided that McGhee's visit should take place without delay and that he would arrive in the evening of September 25. (Ibid., 110.12–McG/9–2462)

3 Joseph Ngalula, Congolese Minister of National Education, led the Léopoldville delegation to three mixed commissions, representing the Central Government and Katanga and assisted by U.N. experts, which began meeting in Elisabethville on September 22. The commissions were set up to establish arrangements for implementing the military provisions and the provisions on revenue and foreign exchange in the U.N. plan.

4 Reference is evidently to a September 24 letter from U Thant to Adoula. A draft was given to Gullion by Gardiner and transmitted in telegram 729 from Léopoldville, September 24. The draft urged Adoula to authorize the U.N. constitutional experts in the Congo to consult with Tshombe or his representatives. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9– 2462)

5 Telegram 746 from Léopoldville, September 26, reported that Albert Y.N. Badre, Chief Economist for the U.N. Operation in the Congo and Economic Adviser to Adoula, had concluded after a week in Elisabethville that Katangan policy was one of delay. (Ibid. 770G.00/9–2662)

297. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 297. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, September 25, 1962, midnight.

905. Congo. During Yost call on Bunche this afternoon latter described meeting between Spaak and SYG on Congo at which it agreed that Tshombe unlikely implement reconciliation plan unless he forced to do so. Bunche had suggested and others agreed that only cut-off of UMHK payments to Tshombe could force him to cooperate. As result, Bunche had drafted and sent to Gardiner cable setting forth this view and submitting for Gardiner's comments following proposal: 1. PriMin Adoula would send letter to UMHK notifying it that he expected all UMHK payments be made directly to GOC.

2. PriMin would have Congo Parliament pass legislation requiring that all payments by mining companies be made directly to GOC.

3. PriMin would send letter to Belgian Government asking it to assure UMHK compliance with new law.

4. SYG would send letter to appropriate UN member states eliciting their help in obtaining compliance with law.

5. SYG would go to SC with request for approval his action and asking for specific authority to guard UMHK installations.

Bunche was very pessimistic over Tshombe's attitude. Cited as two recent indications of it the unreasonable line taken by Tshombe's representative in military commission and deliberate mining by Katangese of route traveled by Gurkha patrol. Said Katanga military commission rep had demanded that UN evacuate Elizabethville airfield. Charged that mine which killed Gurkhas had been touched off when they were retracing route they had just successfully traversed.

Bunche said he had asked SYG what he would do if plan failed. SYG had replied he would go to SC and ask for authority to withdraw from Congo. Bunche said he had told SYG he could not obtain votes in SC for passage such resolution.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2562. Confidential. Received on September 26 at 1:10 a.m. and repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, Paris, and London.

298. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 298. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, September 28, 1962, 11 a.m.

761. Department also pass to White House. Eyes only Acting Secretary from McGhee. USUN eyes only for Secretary and Stevenson. Following summary of situation here as I see it after first days talks with Ambassador Gullion and staff, Acting Foreign Minister, Gardiner, Khiari, Belgian, UK, German Ambassadors and Canadian Charge: 1. It is generally agreed that implementation conciliation plan is stalled (see Embtel 755).2 Key members of three commissions in Elisabethville returning to Léopoldville with others remaining as holding action. Tshombe clearly does not recognize Commissions as implementing agencies but only as discussion groups and has injected into their deliberations impossible procedural as well as substantive issues. No important irreversible step has been taken under plan. As Gardiner puts it, it is only question of whether UN admits situation, not as to whether it exists.

2. Although I have not yet seen Adoula, three hour meeting having been scheduled for September 28th, all sources indicate that he is not prepared to give on constitutional consultation issue and that his already weak political position would be greatly endangered if he did. We do not know, however, his reaction to U Thant's letter of September 24 on this subject which he has requested 24 hours to consider. Agreement to consultation will be prime objective of my discussion with Adoula and all possible variants as to how consultation can be arranged will be exhausted.

3. Gardiner states clearly that he has not up to this point considered himself a mediator between Adoula and Tshombe in furtherance of plan, which means that there is no real link now between UN-Adoula and Tshombe. Gardiner's position is that he will not go to Elisabethville until he sees evidence good faith on Tshombe's part which, particularly in light of day's revelations, is not likely unless some new element is injected into situation.

4. I do not see any objection to Adoula proceeding with letters re payments from mining companies agreed to between Spaak and Secretary General outlined Deptel 134.3 This appears to be in line with other steps being taken by Adoula pursuant to plan and should not provide excuse for Tshombe that he cannot proceed with plan under threat. Indeed steps should add useful pressure on Tshombe and in event Belgians succeed in getting UMHK to deposit revenues with Central Government will put onus on Tshombe if any retaliatory move is made.

I have received proposal from Tshombe covering two or three day visit which with some modifications I propose to accept arriving October 1st. If agreeable to Department, Ambassador Gullion and Hoffacker will accompany me to Elisabethville. Ambassador Gullion would participate in initial meeting.

Other discussions with Tshombe will be requested alone.

My immediate strategy, unless Department perceives objection is as follows.

1. Attempt persuade Adoula to some form of compromise on constitutional consultation issue.

2. Attempt persuade Tshombe of necessity following through with plan and to receive Gardiner in a frame of mind which can result in fruitful negotiations on specific issues removal of which would permit resumption work of Commissions and carrying out plan. I will seek avoid mediatory role.

3. Persuade Gardiner, contingent on success efforts with Tshombe, to go to Elisabethville immediately following my return. I would in such case remain in Léopoldville to await outcome after having made it clear to Tshombe that my report to Secretary and President would hinge largely on concrete results of Gardiner meeting that can be put into effect without delay.4

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.12–McG/9–2862. Secret; Priority. Also sent to USUN.

2 Dated September 27. (Ibid., 770G.00/9–2762)

3 Telegram 905 to USUN (Document 297) was repeated as telegram 134 to Léopoldville.

4 Telegram 525 to Léopoldville, September 29, replied that McGhee's three-point strategy appeared sound but questioned the advisability of Gullion accompanying him to Elisabethville, lest Tshombe use this as an excuse for lack of cooperation. (Department of State, Central Files, 110.12–McG/9–2862) Meanwhile, McGhee and Gardiner had agreed that Gardiner's visit to Elisabethville should precede McGhee's; Gullion remained in Léopoldville, pleading prior engagements. (Telegrams 770 and 778–780 from Léopoldville, September 29, and 781, September 30; ibid., 110.12–McG/9–2962 and 110.12–McG/9–3062, respectively)

299. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 299. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, September 28, 1962, 10 p.m.

769. Department also pass information White House. For Acting Secretary from McGhee. USUN for Secretary and Stevenson. Ambassador Gullion, Fredericks and I met four hours today with Adoula, Minister Justice and Minister Education, who has just returned from hearings of Elisabethville commissions.2 Discussion centered entirely on Katanga question, largely status of reunification plan and question of consultation with Tshombe on constitution. Minister Education reported no progress in commissions in which Katangan members, largely Europeans, had injected position completely at variance with plan. Congolese officials have already concluded that, as in previous negotiations with Tshombe, commissions will produce no concrete results.

I put forward to Adoula case for constitutional consultation, drawing heavily on US domestic political considerations emphasized in meeting with President. I also pointed out that whether or not consultations would result in Tshombe's being willing carry out plan, chances would, in absence consultations, be greatly reduced. They were therefore necessary part of any final report with Tshombe through my visit and proposed subsequent visit by Gardiner. They were also needed build necessary political support for any stronger measures which might have to be taken by UN, US, Belgium and other interested countries in event plan failed. Adoula and UN must be in position of having exhausted every reasonable possibility. To many, particularly those who are already skeptical of UN policy in the Congo, it would appear reasonable that Tshombe consulted on constitution before he asked give up half his revenues, control of his army and his present cherished independence.

Adoula, who was meeting immediately thereafter with his Cabinet to present copies of draft constitution, rejected these arguments categorically. Made long opening statement designed to show Tshombe's power grown to present frightening proportions because "West" intervened repeatedly since 1960 to urge new negotiations or settlements, none of which Tshombe carried out. Our present move opened up prospect of further delay which could not be accepted. He emphasized he had carried out every act required him and Tshombe had done nothing.

Adoula brushed aside argument that Katanga, its assets and powers were "facts" to be reckoned with. Katanga was in state of illegality, in rebellion, and had to be dealt with, although this now harder.

If UN could not do it (and he argued UN failing carry out its mandate and preventing him from carrying out his) he would ask UN to withdraw so GOC could assume its responsibilities.

We had argued public opinion considerations in Western countries. He had his own. Here he rehearsed with considerable heat his familiar arguments on juridical and political grounds to effect Tshombe demands specious, his views well known, and often presented, Parliament was the only constituent body, and Tshombe must take his chances in it like other provinces. (Perhaps because ministers present he did not dwell much on political weakness his own government except to say opposition would use constitution to get him out.)

In short, he will not consent to any separate constitutional consultations with Katanga before presentation to Parliament which he said would take place as soon as comments received from Cabinet.

In response to suggestion Gardiner go to Elisabethville immediately after my visit for one last mediatory effort within framework of plan, Adoula responded that this was Gardiner's decision and in fact he wondered why he had not gone before. He also pointed out ruefully additional delay this would cause.

Meeting ended on cordial note with discussion of other outstanding matters being postponed to subsequent sessions.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2862. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Brussels, London, USUN, and Elisabethville.

2 A further report on the meeting was transmitted in telegram 773 from Léopoldville, September 29. (Ibid., 770G.00/9– 2962)

300. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 300. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Lépoldville, September 29, 1962, 8 p.m.

777. Department also pass information White House. Eyes only Acting Secretary from McGhee. Eyes only Ambassador MacArthur. USUN eyes only for Secretary and Stevenson. Following is evaluation situation following further talks UN Force Commander Kebede, Gardiner and Mobutu. These views are of course subject to modification following trip to Elisabethville, yet situation created by lack progress reconciliation plan is moving rapidly to climax and important decisions must be taken shortly.

Consensus is that Tshombe, using usual thinly veiled delaying tactics, will not proceed with plan but will probably not make open break. This is paralleled by continuing buildup of combat planes and mercenaries in apparent anticipation military showdown. He is reported to be convinced Belgium and other Western nations will not take economic measures against him.

I would like to believe that Tshombe could be favorably influenced by an open and sympathetic approach combined with a show of US determination and will during my visit with him give this thorough try. I believe we must be prepared, however, for eventuality that he will not change his present course until presented with an accomplished fact, or convincing evidence of its inevitability, into area affecting his vital interests.

UNNY has approved proposed letters from Adoula to UMHK, Belgian Government and UN re deposit taxes and royalties from mining operations with GOC but have come to view that they should not be revealed publicly until it becomes known as accomplished fact. This is apparently to protect Spaak from political pressures announcement would engender and because of conviction Tshombe is influenced only by action not by prospective action.

Although decision is up to UNNY and Spaak, the opposing view, which I consider stronger, is that fact of letters will become known anyway, that Spaak must have taken this factor into account when he agreed to them with U Thant, and that knowledge their existence combined with show determination our part that they will be carried out might have sufficient effect on Tshombe induce him carry out plan.

Apart from this hope I believe that if plan fails, carrying out of Adoula request will put UN and supporting governments in best possible light for showdown with Tshombe, which will be only alternative to UN withdrawal. There is, I believe, chance that Tshombe, even though he has not been willing to carry out plan, would acquiesce to a real show Western strength and unity symbolized by UMHK payment to Adoula, particularly if his 50 percent were remitted promptly. This could lead either to a resumption of real negotiations along lines of plan or toward a less ambitious modus vivendi.

If Tshombe does react, however, this procedure will put him in position of having to take initiative for any aggressive retaliatory move. This may be made against UMHK personnel and installations, in which case UN could do what it can to assist or, as Gardiner believes, against UN forces in Elisabethville themselves.

UN reaction to either move would then be entirely defensive and fully justified in U.S. and world public opinion. It could assume form of defending UN position when attacked at Elisabethville which according to UN, can be done with only minimum extension of present perimeter to avoid being cut off, surrounded and overwhelmed. This defense would require from us only airlift, which I believe we should be willing assure in view high stakes for ourselves, and fact that would be required as result action we supported. If this defense is successful, as UN believes, we will be no worse off than before.

Principal weak link in this chain and one to which I believe we have not given adequate consideration is uncertainty as to Spaak's ability to act, pointed out by Ambassador MacArthur in his excellent Brussels telegram 518,2 which I believe reflects doubts we have all had despite Spaak's forthcoming position in meeting New York on 24th. No one with whom I have talked in Léopoldville thinks Spaak will be able politically to request UMHK to take action proposed or that UMHK would do it if requested.

I believe time has come for U.S. to face fact that we must offer to back up both UMHK and Spaak if we expect them to follow through. It has perhaps been unrealistic to expect UMHK to stick its head in noose without any assurance of assistance and only slightly less so to ask this of Spaak. Although we can do little to protect UMHK personnel except through UN we can offer to share in some ways consistent with availability U.S. funds UMHK losses in destruction of plant and losses of operating revenue that would result from Tshombe's actions. I realize that it would be difficult find source of funds and justify to Congress. I believe, however, it would be good investment in light of demands on us which might result from alternative courses of action. Perhaps a part could be in form of generous EXIMBANK loan for equipment available in U.S., part as grant for reconstruction and rehabilitation Katangese economy.

We should, in addition, be willing share in providing assistance to tens of thousands UMHK personnel who may be temporarily out of employment in event plants are closed down, and to supply temporarily some of basic needs Katanga economy now met from UMHK payments.

Spaak will also need strong moral support from U.S. and other governments. It should be noted that Lord Home in his meeting with Stevenson and myself in New York on 24th drew line between type of action contemplated and sanctions. Both we and British should strongly support UN and Belgian Government in action re revenue deposits as means of giving Spaak necessary political strength to accomplish it. There is comparatively little we can do directly to apply effective economic pressures against Tshombe. Spaak alone is in position take action short of direct application of force. It is too risky for us to take chance that he might falter.

Request urgent consideration so assurances can be given Spaak before political pressures start building up on him. In event plan fails and no economic measures are forthcoming, Adoula may as reported my conversation with him September 28, request UN to withdraw so he can face Tshombe himself; or as SYG has only recently stated he will himself go to SC and ask for UN withdrawal (USUN 905).3 Consequences of such withdrawal to U.S. interests are too obvious to belabor.

Gullion and Fredericks concur.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.12–McG/9–2962. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Brussels and USUN.

2 In telegram 518, September 27, MacArthur referred to Spaak's September 24 statement to Rusk and McGhee that if negotiations failed, he would have his government persuade Union Miniere to close down its plants in Katanga (see Document 294). MacArthur expressed doubt that Spaak could make this position prevail with the Cabinet, Parliament, and public. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2762)

3 Document 297.

301. Paper Prepared by Acting Secretary of State Ball 301. Paper Prepared by Acting Secretary of State Ball1

Washington, undated.

TALKING POINTS FOR PRESIDENT INLUNCHEON MEETING WITH LORD HOME

I. The prospects for a Congo solution are rapidly deteriorating. At the moment the situation appears as follows: A. Adoula's position is rapidly weakening. He is under great pressure from extreme elements to take rigid anti-Tshombe positions.

B. Gardiner is operating on the principle that he will not start mediating until Tshombe starts cooperating. But the policy of isolating Tshombe is showing no dividends.

C. The draft constitution prepared by the UN-appointed commission is an over-sophisticated and probably unworkable document, calling for much greater centralization than will ever be accepted by the Katanganese; at the same time the extremist opposition in Léopoldville has become so strong that the parliament in Léopoldville would probably not approve any constitution.

D. Tshombe is exploiting his genius for filibustering; he is trumping up grievances, making pious and self-righteous noises, and displaying every intention of frustrating any serious integration. The work of the Financial Commission in Elisabethville charged with devising plan for allocation of revenue is being undercut by Tshombe's legalisms. Meanwhile there is evidence that he is adding to his air capability and building up his forces.2

E. The President has sent McGhee to the Congo in the hope of improving the situation. At the same time President has taken steps to blunt influence of US right-wing support for Tshombe by engaging cooperation of Senator Dodd.

F. With a view to improving economic conditions favorable not only to the Central Government but to the Katanga new economic and financial controls have been proclaimed by the Léopoldville Government after consultations with the UN, Belgium, UK, US.

II. There is a desperate need to get Congo off dead center. A. The Congo is diverting Western energies and weakening solidarity of West at time of increasing Bloc pressures.

B. The fall of Adoula in favor of extremist elements would almost certainly mean civil war against Katanga.

C. While ANC could not conquer south Katanga without substantial outside help—either from UN, the USSR and its African friends or from the West—and the Katanga forces would probably not try to take over the rest of the country, there would be continuous civil war. This would: (1) Endanger all whites in area—provoke massacres, etc.

(2) Bring about the fragmentation of the Congo. Additional provinces would probably secede; the result would be a reversion to tribalism.

(3) Create a power vacuum into which the USSR would almost certainly try to move.

(4) Increase the likelihood of disturbances in the Rhodesias and Angola.

III. If integration is not achieved soon the UN will have to get out of the Congo, inviting total collapse. A. The UN cannot afford to go on spending $10 million a month to keep 17,000 men in the Congo, while its policies are visibly failing. (Quite clearly the US Congress will not permit us to go on picking up the check.)

B. If integration can be achieved within the near future, a reduced UN force can be justified and presumably financed.

C. If the UN leaves under present conditions the extremist elements in Léopoldville will almost certainly force an invitation to the Soviet Union to intervene by itself or through its African friends. This could well mean a confrontation between East and West in the heart of Africa.

D. Withdrawal of the UN will greatly discredit its usefulness and will presumably mean the resignation of U Thant. (He has threatened to resign if integration is not achieved before his term expires.) At the same time the Afro-Asian bloc is likely to be driven to new heights of irresponsibility; they will strike out at the Western powers on the ground they have deserted the UN. This can create great difficulties for Britain in Rhodesia and elsewhere.

IV. We must bring this situation to a resolution within the next few weeks by maximum pressure both on Léopoldville and Elisabethville. The Western powers cannot continue in the ridiculous position of being paralyzed by not being able to bring these two factions together. A. The minimum objective is for the differences between Léopoldville and Elisabethville to be accommodated sufficiently to enable the withdrawal of most of the UN Force while assuring the maintenance of Western influence in the Central Government. Continued political rivalry among the various Congolese factions, and even some minor fighting for years to come, is probable and need not worry us too much.

B. The appearance of disarray and dissension of the Western side is hurting our entire position and giving an impression of impotence.

C. Tshombe's arrogant disregard of the Western powers stems from his belief that the strong financial and economic interests involved prevent effective pressure on him.

D. While no firm decision was ever made by the Western side to impose economic sanctions on Tshombe—since that stage had not been reached under the agreed procedure—public expressions by the British Government of their opposition to sanctions tended to undercut the Western position.3

E. Spaak has gone all out in trying to hold the Belgian Government in line and bring pressure on the UMHK but his position has been weakened by the influence of the City.

Recommended Action A. The British should make a maximum effort through Welensky to persuade Tshombe to cooperate since the whole Rhodesian situation will be endangered if the Congo bursts into flame.

B. The UK Government should try to persuade the City to refrain from giving further encouragement to Tshombe's intransigeance.

C. In the event that McGhee's mission does not radically improve the posture of negotiations in the Congo, the UK should join with the US in encouraging Spaak to persuade the Belgian Government to order the closure of the UMHK mines.

D. We do not believe that the action of the Belgian Government in closing the mines at the request of the UN would be any precedent for UN sanctions against the UK in the Rhodesian situation. However—without getting into a discussion of Rhodesia—the President might suggest that the extent to which we can assist the British in getting through their Rhodesian difficulties both in and out of the UN will be not unrelated to the extent to which they support a viable Congo policy.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Congo Security 1962. Confidential. Filed with a September 29 covering memorandum from Ball to the President, which reads as follows: "All evidence indicates that—barring some new major effort—our plans for the Congo are slowly sinking in the African ooze. I have drafted the attached talking paper with the thought that you will wish to make a strong pitch to Lord Home to enlist active British support." The President was to meet with Lord Home on September 30.

2 Telegram 745 from Léopoldville, September 26, reported that aerial photographs showed 16 aircraft at and around the Kolwezi airport and that this represented a considerable increase in Katangan air capability. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.5622/9–2622) A September 29 memorandum from the CIA Office of Current Intelligence called attention to this report. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo) Further documentation on this subject, including U.S. efforts to prevent the shipment of aircraft, spare parts, and ammunition to Katanga, is in Department of State, Central File 770G.5622.

3 A note in an unidentified handwriting on the source text reads: "We have now determined that Lord Home did not send the letter to Tshombe which McGhee described the other day in your office." Another September 29 memorandum from Ball to Kennedy refers to a report by McGhee that Home had sent a message to Tshombe that the British would oppose the imposition of sanctions. It states that Ball had spoken to Ambassador Ormsby Gore about this. Ormsby Gore had told him later that no such message had been sent to Tshombe and that to the extent the British had indicated they would not impose sanctions, they had made it clear that others would do so and that Tshombe should therefore move quickly toward integration. (Ibid., 770G.00/9–2962)

302.Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 302.Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, September 30, 1962, 8:21 p.m.

527. For McGhee from Acting Secretary. Your 777 and 778.2 Discussion with President and Secretary have produced following conclusions: 1. Agreeable for Gardiner to precede McGhee to Elisabethville.

2. Premature for Gardiner to tell Tshombe about letters to UMHK concerning payments.

3. Premature for Adoula to send letters without full concurrence Belgian Government. We note that Bunche warned Gardiner (New York's 978 repeated Léopoldville 139)3 to make clear to Adoula that proposal to send letters "would not be implemented as long as discussions with Tshombe regarding implementation reconciliation plan were continued."

4. Under these circumstances approach to Spaak and Belgian Government regarding letters will be withheld pending report from McGhee following his discussion with Tshombe. In spite of Leopoldville's 759, repeated USUN 469,4 our impression is that Spaak unprepared to face up to Belgian Government intervention regarding payments issue until all evidence clearly demonstrated other possibilities exhausted. USUN requested to apprise Spaak that letters now approved and Adoula prepared to send them. Indications should be obtained from Spaak as to his views on timing.

5. Impression here from your 7735 and other indications is that Adoula is being overly rigid regarding Tshombe participation in consultation of experts on constitution and that this rigidity is playing into Tshombe's hands in building a record of reasonableness. Constitution appears from description to be over-sophisticated and to call for far greater centralization than Adoula's statement of principles implied. Would appear more feasible to have a relatively simple delegation of powers to the Central Government with an adequate reserved powers clause.

6. From 773 it seems quite evident that Katangese are stalling in Commission discussions.

7. In course of long luncheon meeting with President and Secretary, attended by Lord Home, British Ambassador, Ambassador Bruce and myself,6 Lord Home reported that at British insistence Welensky had sent strong message to Tshombe urging his acceptance reconciliation plan. Home also made clear that while British had publicly expressed their own unwillingness to participate in sanctions they had in all communications to Tshombe through Welensky made clear that Tshombe might expect sanctions from UN through Belgians and US. However Home made emphatically clear that UK would support no policies that might lead to fighting.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.12–McG/9–2962. Secret; Niact. Drafted and approved by Ball and cleared by Cleveland and Williams. Repeated to London, Brussels, and USUN for Rusk.

2 Telegram 777 is printed as Document 300. Regarding telegram 778, see footnote 3, Document 298.

3 Telegram 978 from USUN, September 29, reported that Bunche had showed a USUN officer a series of cables to and from Gardiner concerning the proposal described in telegram 905, Document 297. Bunche had sent the proposal to Gardiner for comment, and Gardiner had on his own initiative discussed it with Adoula. Adoula had given Gardiner draft letters to Union Miniere calling for the end of payments to Katanga and commencement of payments to the Congolese Government, to the Belgian Ambassador enlisting the Belgian Government's support, and to Gardiner requesting U.N. assistance in enforcing the proposal. Bunche stated that no action would be taken on this until it was determined that the reconciliation plan had failed. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2962)

4 Telegram 759 from Léopoldville, September 27, reported a conversation with Gardiner concerning the proposal set forth in telegram 905, Document 297. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–2762)

5 See footnote 1, Document 299.

6 A brief memorandum of conversation by Tyler concerning the discussion of the Congo reads:"Lord Home said that Tshombe must be given a fair chance to participate in a constitutional conference, if there was to be any hope of the reconciliation plan succeeding. The Secretary mentioned the Wachuku proposal for an African participation in a solution in the Congo. It was generally agreed that it would not be desirable to follow up with the idea of telling the UMHK to stop paying dues to Tshombe, since this could not be enforced, and Spaak's own role would be very restricted." (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/9–3062)Wachuku had told Rusk during a September 29 meeting in New York that he thought it was time for the Lagos-Monrovia group to take an active role in the Congo problem. (Secto 52 from USUN, September 29; ibid., 770G.00/9–2962) Ball commented on the meeting with Home in a September 30 telephone conversation with Kaysen. (Memorandum of telephone conversation; Kennedy Library, Ball Papers)

303. Memorandum of Conversation 303. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 2, 1962, 9:43–10:15 a.m.

SUBJECT

Meeting with The President—United Nations Matters

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Ambassador Adlai E. Stevenson, U.S. Representative to the United Nations

Assistant Secretary Harlan Cleveland

[Here follows discussion of unrelated matters.]

7. Congo.

Governor Stevenson said that Foreign Minister Spaak of Belgium is about to go back to Brussels and consider with his government whether they should now move to a decision to consult with Union Miniere that revenues would be paid only to the Central Government and that in the event of Tshombe's resistance to reconciliation, the mines would be shut down. He thought that Spaak might add withdrawal of Belgian technicians to the agenda of possible measures. He commented that Ambassador MacArthur believes that there is only a fifty-fifty chance they could take such measures in the present state of Belgian politics. The consequence of failure in the Congo, Governor Stevenson said, would be extremely serious. Adoula would fall and his successor would be far less satisfactory from our point of view. There would be pressure in the UN, particularly from the Africans, for some kind of military action against Tshombe. If the U.S. refused to go along with such action, it would be like breaking faith with the United Nations action and its own Congo policy. The prospect of U Thant's reelection or indeed his willingness to run for reelection would be dimmed. And on the ground in the Congo, there would be a break-up of the Congo, continuous civil war, and a golden opportunity for the Soviets.

Governor Stevenson mentioned the idea of Wachuku and possibly other African moderates coming in as conciliators, but referred to it as a last resort after the West's and the UN's efforts to bring the situation to a head had seemed doomed to failure.

The President hoped the Belgians would be willing to use as much influence as they have, but did not indicate what the U.S. policy would be in the event of failure of the present efforts toward reconciliation. He indicated he would await a report from Under Secretary McGhee, particularly on his trip to Elisabethville this week.

The President asked Mr. Cleveland to secure from the Defense Department an up-to-date appraisal of the military balances in the Congo, taking into account the latest information available on the apparent build-up of both ground troops and air capability on the part of Katangese forces.2

1 Source: Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. Confidential. Drafted by Cleveland and approved in the White House on October 11. The source text does not indicate the time of the meeting, but an attached memorandum of October 2 from Cleveland to Rusk states that the conversation took place after the signing of the act authorizing the loan of $100 million to the United Nations. (P.L. 87–731; 76 Stat. 695) According to Kennedy's appointment book, the signing ceremony ended at 9:43 a.m. and his next appointment was at 10:15 a.m. (Kennedy Library)

2 An October 17 memorandum from Brubeck to Bundy forwarded a Defense Intelligence Agency report prepared on October 9, and summarized its main conclusions as follows:"1. The ANC is still plagued by serious problems of lack of leadership, training and logistical support as well as untested loyalties.

"2. The Katangan gendarmerie, numbering about 18,000, appears to enjoy good morale, adequate ammunition and improved training. They are judged capable of conducting successful defensive operations against central government forces.

"3. The UN military are not equipped to engage in effective military operations of any magnitude outside Elisabethville." (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

304. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 304. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, October 4, 1962, 7 p.m.

816. On eve of departure for Elisabethville, McGhee, accompanied by Fredericks and Ambassador, talked two hours with Adoula and Bomboko. Following are highlights:

[1.] Trip to Katanga

Although Adoula had given approval to McGhee's trip before his arrival he had in interval developed strong misgivings. He avoided an outright refusal but it was not until after McGhee interview and at 2000 hours October 2 that Adoula indicated his assent (ostensibly after having consulted his advisers).

As he told Ambassador on October 1 and McGhee party on October 2, Adoula believed visit was bound to furnish Tshombe pretext to delay execution of plan pending consideration in Washington of whatever promises Tshombe made to McGhee. Adoula not convinced from our presentation that visit would not lead to further negotiations. Tshombe he said would surely take affirmative line with McGhee and it would be more difficult to determine whether plan was being applied. Adoula's position is that if application of plan should be deferred or plan should fail his government would fall along with it and more radical elements would take his place. Bomboko echoed these objections adding we are giving Tshombe channel bypassing Embassy and UN.

McGhee made politely known to both Adoula and Bomboko that calling off trip out of question. President needed his report to help him maintain his Congo policy. He had come to Congo to make on-spot report and to express US determination see plan through. We were offering no plan but U Thant plan. We agreed Tshombe should not have opportunity for indefinite delay. We were in this together and Adoula and Bomboko must have confidence in US. We were not substituting ourselves for UN. Ambassador said he not bypassed.

If plan failed we were ready to consider severe measures with GOC. These were, however, matters to be discussed later among governments.

Adoula described to McGhee at considerable length opposition to his government as it existed in Parliament and predicted Parliament would oppose U Thant plan, Federal Constitution and "Balkanization of Congo". If against this background U Thant plan was to prove illusory, fate of moderate government or indeed of any central executive power in Congo was sealed.

Adoula said, as he understood plan, if conciliation phase failed sanction phases were then to apply "automatically"; he "sensed" or "smelt" that situation at Elisabethville with respect to plan and the auspices for McGhee's visit were all wrong.

2. Congolese political situation

Adoula explained present weakness of his government at much more length than he had at first meeting, at which other Congolese Ministers were present. He referred to cumulative effect of his government's failure to resolve Katangese problem which made it possible for all sorts of disparate elements in Parliament to combine against him. He faced prospect, aggravated by possible failure of U Thant plan, of seeing Parliament ranged against executive branch government and possible disappearance of central authority in Congo. With creation of new provinces new rivalries were breaking out among them. Selfish interests, including some Belgians, were abetting rivalries.

Parliamentarians were incredibly corrupt; Government had discovered massive new plot to create new secessionist Eastern state composed of parts of Orientale, Kivu and Katanga backed by 70 million francs from Tshombe. Much of this money had gone to Parliamentarians, and among other political figures, to Gbenye. Parliamentarians were so corrupt they expected payment for every vote. He was going to have to proceed against these people (he did not elaborate).

The gist of Adoula's statement was that situation in Parliament and provinces was so bad that further deferral of settlement of Katanga would be last straw.

In his statement Bomboko added that if plan failed GOC would be considered traitor not only to Congo but to Africa. GOC had backed plan to hilt and worked for and acquired Casablanca and UAR support for it. If it should prove to be sellout, both country and continent would call for removal GOC.

Bomboko cited Soviet Bloc Embassies' diplomacy calling for expulsion of UN. Soviet was saying "take our help and we will see Tshombe be arrested in 15 days"; Communists claimed colonialists merely trying to recolonize via UN.

3. Next steps

Both Adoula and Bomboko emphasized that U Thant plan was last effort at solution by negotiation and conciliation. Adoula told Ambassador that Mr. McGhee should be under no apprehension that if plan failed Congo would not attempt to use force.

To McGhee directly he said he was not sure he would pass through phase of economic sanctions. (Embassy has never gone into feasibility of sanctions with Adoula because this not considered compatible Department's instructions.)

Bomboko said in two weeks GOC would have to take action; other secessions were being now prepared; a drowning man would grasp any plan.

GOC supported plan because they believed in it not because of US or UN. Friends should beware, however, of weakening GOC by making it agree to series of plans which only let secession continue.

McGhee made clear to both Adoula and Tshombe that they should not be thinking of force; that all other measures must be tried before-hand and that such measures were subject to prior consideration. Congo must show that it has exhausted every possible effort for peaceful settlement. He pointed out that military capacities of GOC were limited and military solution would be long and outcome uncertain.

Bomboko backtracked on threat of force to extent of saying what he really meant to demonstrate was need to build up ANC and UN force to such a degree that it would not have to be used, and in order to make sanctions in plan believable.

4. US direct military aid (?)

Both Adoula and Bomboko wanted to know what had become of Pentagon studies (Greene team recommendations) on retraining and build-up of Congo Army and asked when they would get report. Both were keenly interested in forthcoming shipment of military goods to ANC. Adoula stressed need to build up ANC and wanted US help in doing it. He dodged question on what country should do training, saying he could make better estimate when he had US report. Referred to his disappointment Italians had not replied to his request to take on Air Force training. Bomboko spoke more directly apparently by arrangement with Adoula. What he wants now is planning for direct military aid by US to Congo. He anticipates plan will fail and that those who take over in Congo will be turning to another source for aid. If we did not know this we were in for "great surprises". He believes US should begin now to supply aid in order to preclude others from doing so. If we do not supply such aid, if U Thant plan fails, and if we let Tshombe get away with secession we will "have planted a Cuba in Central Africa", meantime he sees aid as necessary to build-up effective ANC. He believes Tshombe and other secessionists will forego their plans only when they know that such a Congolese force exists.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–462. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Repeated to USUN, Paris, London, Brussels, Elisabethville, and Brazzaville.

305. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 305. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, October 4, 1962, 8 p.m.

545. Leopoldville for Ambassador. Department for Secretary and Under Secretary from McGhee. During first substantive meeting with Tshombe this morning, after obtaining permission make first exposition, I attempted make explicitly clear purpose my mission to Congo.

My introductory remarks which followed closely talking paper2 prepared in cooperation Ambassador Gullion and others in group here included following argumentation: 1. As evidence strong US interest in resolving this problem, President Kennedy asked me to review situation first hand. Tshombe may be assured there no animosity toward Katanga or him. We do not wish be in conflict with him. We would like help him build stable, prosperous Katanga within Congolese unity. I have no new plan or propositions, am not negotiator or mediator, and arrive with open and sympathetic mind to hear whatever he has to say.

2. US Government impressed by increasing moderation Adoula government and believes all Congolese can benefit from reconciliation between moderate elements represented by GOC and similar elements within Tshombe government. Such rapprochement would have advantages of further reducing opportunities for extremist elements come to power in Congo.

3. US Government deeply concerned at current intrigues to bring down central government and absence of any foreseeable moderate alternative should this come about. Chaos which would probably follow fall Adoula government would invite Communism and other extremism. It would thus be only matter of time before Katanga would face militant, extremist and Communist backed enemy on her northern frontiers.

4. There virtually universal support among free world nations of U Thant plan. There no responsible minority in non-Communist world in opposition to plan itself. This particularly true in US where, e.g., Senator Dodd wholeheartedly supports plan.

5. If plan fails, Tshombe may be able retain present position for short time but his position will inevitably deteriorate. He can expect continued isolation from Western countries on whom he depends economically. Foreign capital and markets will be in doubt. Present routes to world countries lie across African countries whose future is not assured. Would be short-sighted try create bloc with these countries. Moreover GOC cannot let continued independence Katanga go unchallenged. GOC may, if unable obtain adequate help from West, turn to extremist African nations and East with dire consequences to Katanga and rest of Congo.

6. US seeks no special advantages for itself re economic interests in Katanga. Our interests lie in assuring unified Congo which can become strong enough politically to maintain law and order, provide economic opportunities for its people, maintain its independence, and ultimately become economically vital enough obtain nothing from Katanga which vital to us.

7. Tshombe has unique opportunity now to demonstrate to world statesmanlike attitude in carrying out plan which will earn for him widespread admiration and appreciation for making possible creation of unified Congo. He has opportunity to reestablish himself and Katanga within African family of nations and free world community. These associations much more congenial than his present position of isolation.

8. Draft federal constitution reportedly contains provisions which provide for reasonable autonomy and ample judicial and other protection against arbitrary actions. Tshombe's ideas taken into consideration by drafting experts. Tshombe thus need not fear consequences of integration of Katanga and its structures into federation.

9. Only way plan can succeed is for both parties to proceed, step by step, on assumption that entire plan will be carried out in fairness and good faith on both sides. It not possible carry it out by bargaining performance on one aspect against performance on another or to hold up on start until execution of another. We convinced of impartiality of UN in this process. Tshombe must have confidence we mean what we say when we undertook assure plan will be carried out impartially.

10. Important element in Tshombe's decision is timing. His best time is now. Future uncertain but it difficult see how Tshombe could ever achieve better terms than at present. Renewed fighting may bring physical destruction and embittered relations difficult to overcome.

11. US cannot continue tolerate divided Congo and is determined support carrying out of reconciliation plan by every appropriate means. Main question is whether or not Tshombe will make adjustments on issues outstanding in carrying out plan within time available. Actions up until now have not been convincing. If I go back unable convince my government of Tshombe's willingness carry out plan, we will of necessity have to consider alternatives of policy available.

Tshombe expressed pleasure over President's having sent high-ranking official to Katanga. He said US and Katanga pursue same objectives, but he differs with methods of US Government which tend not to support America's real friends. He contended that he better qualified than most other Congolese to judge Communist opportunities in Congo, having learned from American Bishop Booth and others many years ago realities of Communism and having preached anti-Communism at roundtable, in Washington, and elsewhere. He reviewed his and his father's political and commercial experience, which he contrasted with US Government's "superficial knowledge" of Congo situation. He protested he never opposed union of Congo and was federalist as early as two years prior to independence.

Meeting ended as he stated "constitutional problem was at base of all difficulties".

Shall meet with Tshombe later in day at which he will continue.3

Dean

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–462. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, and USUN.

2 A copy was enclosed with airgram A–137 from Léopoldville, October 11, which also enclosed memoranda of McGhee's conversations with Tshombe and his ministers in Elisabethville October 4–6. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–1162)

3 Telegram 547 from Elisabethville, October 5, reported this conversation, in which Tshombe presented the Katangan case. Speaking of the possibility of sanctions (although McGhee pointed out that he had not used the word), Tshombe said that "if economic boycott initiated Africans would return to manioc economy, nothing would be solved, and possibility of another Algeria would arise. He added that UN military initiative would lead also to destruction in process of which all including Adoula and US would lose heavily." (Ibid., 770G.00/10–562) Telegram 559 from Elisabethville, October 8, reported on a dinner given by Tshombe for McGhee on October 4. It concluded: "Tshombe made sharp attack on Ambassador Gullion and Secretary Rusk. I said I could not accept this criticism of these gentlemen whom he misjudged." (Ibid., 770G.00/10–862)

306. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 306. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, October 6, 1962, 4 p.m.

553. For Secretary and Under Secretary from McGhee. Pass to White House. For Ambassadors from McGhee. USUN for Stevenson. Reference: Consulate telegram 547.2 Part one of two. There follows resume of series of virtually continuous conversations with Tshombe at his palace in Elisabethville and farm near Kipushi from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Friday3 and including only Hoffacker and Tshombe's secretary. It is planned that we will have final session 5 p.m. Saturday, when I have asked him give his final views on certain concrete steps which I have suggested and when I hope summarize for him what I require in order be able make favorable report to President and Secretary. I will advise Tshombe that this will to considerable extent be based on Gardiner's evaluation performance on specific points agreed by Tshombe with me when Gardiner meets with Tshombe on October 11 and that I am remaining in Léopoldville to obtain report from Gardiner on these points.

At opening talks Tshombe repeated that he accepted UN plan "with great enthusiasm", particularly since it contained provision for federal constitution which he had always strongly advocated. He under great handicap in not having copy of draft constitution and had, after Gardiner had admitted his inability have Adoula yield on this score, requested SYG to intervene with Adoula in order obtain copy for Katanga Government. He remarked that US and other governments also apparently uninfluential with Adoula in same sense. He wondered if this true how these same governments might in future circumstances be able carry out their assurances to him that plan would be equitably applied. I explained that US Government stood by its assurances but that Tshombe should not expect US or other governments to intervene on every issue between two parties concerned, particularly with respect to clearly internal matters and not involving violation of plan.

Tshombe dwelt at length on theme that contrary to our evaluation as I had presented it Adoula could not be considered moderate. Tshombe said he confident that Adoula would follow Western or non-Communist orientation only as long as he received adequate support from West, but that if he became disappointed with West, he would turn to East. He gave many examples from his own experience with Adoula which he believes demonstrate not only lack of moderation but pure and dangerous opportunism.

Tshombe also accused Adoula of giving only impression wanting reconciliation and not really working for peaceful integration with Katanga. Adoula, according to Tshombe, wants to provoke Katanga into apparent non-cooperation with plan so US and UN will impose on Katanga solution favorable to Adoula. Tshombe charged Adoula with having systematically worked to eliminate all political rivals in Congo because of his own insecurity based on personal limitations and lack of political following. Adoula feared his displacement by Tshombe should latter be given free political rein in framework of new federation. He accused Kasavubu of same insincerity and fear of political competition. Tshombe indicated confidence that he, as most experienced and potentially powerful leader in Congo, could win out in such competition if cards not stacked against him. He referred to warmth of his reception in other provinces and depth of political support for him which he could call into being whenever he chose.

I indicated to Tshombe our own favorable evaluation his political abilities as indicated in Katanga and that we would welcome whatever success he achieved on national level. I rebutted his evaluation of intentions Adoula government and his misjudgment that US would support either government, GOC or GOK, which we did not believe to be sincere in acceptance of plan.

Tshombe expressed resentment over what he regarded as UN partiality in Congo–Katanga affair and over alleged UN conspiracy in build-up and movement of ANC in north. Told him we satisfied that UN continued impartial role in plan implementation, that ANC troop movements had ceased, and that we do not believe that UN has conspired against him. He praised Ethiopian and Tunisian troops but held Indian troops and "Sikhish perhaps—Communist civilians" in UN responsible for incidents and other misunderstandings in Elisabethville area. He credited Ethiopians and Tunisians with having "prevented third round".

Tshombe insisted that there is not as yet any GOC law which can oblige Katanga or Union Miniere pay revenues as yet to Central Government. He claimed Belgian draft law for this purpose never submitted to Parliament. He said Bomboko has acknowledged this lacuna. He said new constitution might contain necessary provision this respect.

Tshombe repeatedly referred to urgency for adequate amnesty. He said his jurists have been working on amnesty draft which may be available early next week. This would help make oath-taking of gendarme officers possible since they fearful of repeating fate of other gendarmes imprisoned Stanleyville, Léopoldville and elsewhere. He did not intend, however, make amnesty precondition to oath-taking. (End part one of two.)

Dean

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–662. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, and USUN.

2 See footnote 2, Document 305.

3 October 5.

307. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 307. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, October 6, 1962, 5 p.m.

554. Department for Secretary and Under Secretary from McGhee. Pass to White House. For Ambassadors from McGhee. For Stevenson from McGhee. Part two of two. In effort to overcome impasse created by constitution issue, I attempted at some length inspire Tshombe's confidence in draft constitution, which he suspects is rewrite Loi Fondamentale. Although I have in fact studied constitution carefully I was handicapped by fact I could give him my impressions only as having been obtained from conversations with UN constitutional experts. He gave no evidence of having as yet obtained copy. Since experts had considered their task to produce constitution acceptable both him and Adoula, his written and known views had been taken fully into account. Experts had done their work for UN and had been no more influenced by Adoula than by him. Assured him he would have adequate opportunity for further expression his views when constitution submitted to Parliament and/or Provincial Assemblies—same chance as Adoula and other provinces.

Advised him that ratification process necessarily long and must be followed by implementing laws and interpretations that would in many respects be of more importance than constitution itself, which would be in rather general terms. It intolerable to expect plan implementation to await perfection of constitution on all points and promulgation before carrying out particular aspects plan which need not be delayed for other reasons. Made case for entering into implementation phase as act of faith, as in marriage, under assumption that all provisions, including constitution itself, would be worked out step by step in fair manner as they became possible. Adoula knew this necessary for any lasting agreement and US and other governments had assured it.

I continued that there appeared to be many steps which would further plan that he could take immediately and which would manifest his good faith without prejudicing his final position. As examples only and not exhaustive, suggested he: (1) agree immediate cease-fire and stand still and appointment tripartite commissions as proposed by Gardiner; (2) facilitate opening of Lubilash Bridge and get commerce moving both directions; (3) despatch shipment of copper via that route to Matadi; (4) pay 50 per cent of revenues on these shipments; (5) release UN goods held at Sakania and Dilolo terminals; (6) reestablish telecommunications with Léopoldville; (7) arrange oath-taking next week by senior gendarmerie officers, perhaps five as suggested by Gardiner; (8) assure commissions complete their work by next week.

I stressed that this in no way new proposal or intended supersede five questions, which I read to him, on which I understood Gardiner expecting definitive answer next Thursday. He claimed that he had not so understood Gardiner who had been specific only with respect to desire to discuss transport and other arrangements for implementing cease-fire and cessation of troop movements in north. Tshombe did indicate, however, his willingness cooperate wholeheartedly with tripartite observation group in key places (which now also approved GOC). He expressed particular interest aerial observation. He said commissions were normal places for discussion of other points on which we understood Gardiner expecting answers, i.e., plan for integration of gendarmerie, oath of senior officers, figures on revenue, et cetera. I stressed that above suggested concrete steps were illustrative and that Tshombe probably could think of others which could equally well demonstrate his good faith.

Tshombe's preliminary replies to these proposals, on which he promised to elaborate in final meeting on Saturday, were: (1) He has always cooperated on rebuilding of Lubilash Bridge but in absence of detente it is not possible overcome gendarme fears of ANC, which augmented by 1,200 additional troops in nearby Bakwanga. Detente possible if cease-fire and cessation of troop movements effected by tripartite commissions. Tshombe prepared discuss Lubilash matter with Gardiner, particularly need for security for trains moving along line through Kasai. (2) He protested that it was Adoula, not he, who stood in way of reopening of telecommunications with Léopoldville. (3) He had to give thought to fact that blocked UN shipments contained perhaps 60 million liters of jet fuel, which could hardly be regarded as non-military. ANC troops at Kamina and hostile attitude of UN troops Elisabethville also complicated this matter. In event of detente he willing unblock all supplies except aviation gas.

I told Tshombe we were encouraged by his acceptance Kitona agreement but were disappointed by lack forward movement following it. We were also encouraged by his acceptance UN plan but again there is no forward movement. Impression has been created that Tshombe hesitates to come to final solution. I am here to try to judge whether Tshombe is willing follow through with plan. Am I to assume that since Tshombe has no confidence in Adoula's sincerity to follow through that he, Tshombe, will use this as excuse to stall?

Tshombe protested that he earnestly wants national reconciliation. He gave at great length his version Kitona conference and political events which followed in attempt absolve himself from any blame that it was not carried out. He said plan not active because of promise of Federal Constitution. Other aspects, however, must also be negotiated, e.g., there cannot be agreement on even temporary division of revenues until experts take into consideration Katanga financial commitments and suggested [percentage?] that Katanga can spare. He promised abide by experts judgment. I repeated Dorr insistence that plan was not invitation to negotiate or basis for discussion but rather schedule to be carried out promptly with minor adjustments.

Told him we wished assure him of our particular concern for security himself and his associates under plan. We would use our best efforts assure amnesty and provincial police powers, inter alia, would provide adequate protection. He disclaimed any desire for protection not shared by all.

Tshombe had nothing but criticism for Ngalula, GOC Minister of Education and Head of Delegation, whom he described as propagandist and reflection of Adoula's unwillingness to take plan seriously. Tshombe said he had invited Ngalula to come and discuss differences in form over a drink but Ngalula had not accepted invitation.

Tshombe, finally, was brought around to say that constitution can be discussed as separate problem and that he will not demand its acceptance or promulgation as a precondition for settlement of other issues, which can be dealt with simultaneously in separate commissions. He alluded to what he called malicious propaganda against him originating in Léopoldville and Elisabethville and said that if doubts re his integrity arose in Washington he hoped I would raise them directly with him. Tshombe said he wanted to convey to President Kennedy his gratitude for his friendly interest in sending me here. He wanted me also to report Tshombe's desire to be regarded as honorable man. He did not want to embarrass me by going back on his word. He suggested that I, e.g., return in say two months to see for myself how things were progressing. Alternatively he prepared go anywhere anytime to meet with me. I made no comment. Our meeting was terminated, on a cordial note, to be resumed in final session Saturday.

Dean

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–662. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, USUN.

308. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 308. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, October 7, 1962, noon.

556. For Secretary and Under Secretary from McGhee. Pass to White House for Ambassadors from McGhee. For Stevenson from McGhee. Had final three hour conversation this evening (October 6) with Tshombe, to whom I put nine specific suggestions (which follow) whereby he could give prompt evidence seriousness his intention implement UN plan. These suggestions include those previously raised by Gardiner plus all others which UN officials here and UK and Belgian Consuls consider it realistic to expect at this juncture. In making these suggestions, I stressed over-riding importance his taking indicated action in accordance with agreed schedule so Gardiner will when he returns on 11th be able to report accomplishments on specific points, which include Gardiner expectations as well. I said that Gardiner's estimate would serve as basis for my report to President Kennedy on Tshombe's willingness apply plan. Left with Tshombe informal memorandum listing suggestions in order leave no doubt as to expectations on our part.

Memorandum follows: (1) Step-by-step carrying out of plan without waiting for promulgation constitution;

(2) Immediate cease fire and standfast and creation tripartite observation groups;

(3) Carrying out loyalty oath within week after completion of (2);

(4) Opening Lubilash Bridge within three days after completion of (2); security to be guaranteed by tripartite group. Immediate shipment of copper to Matadi with revenues to be paid there; return shipments (Comment: Meaning Kasai to Katanga);

(5) Immediate release non-military UN goods at Sakania and Dilolo and subsequent free movement;

(6) Immediate furnishing full Katangan foreign exchange and revenue information to Commissions;

(7) Commissions to work every day all day to finish work by October 11. Objective of Commissions is to assure action pursuant to plan;

(8) Immediate deposit of sizeable sum against payment of revenues and foreign exchange earnings;

(9) Immediate opening of telecommunications with Léopoldville.

Tshombe comments were as follows: 1. As he agreed yesterday, various features of plan will be pushed simultaneously and will be carried out step by step as quickly as they can without attaching any conditions re performance on constitution or other features of plan.

2. Agreed to meet with Mathu as soon as he desires, tonight if possible, to work out text of cease fire agreement. I promised contact Mathu who has agreed submit draft text for signature latest tomorrow. Unable as yet reach Mathu and GOC representative who has already agreed to execution cease fire.

3. He agreed that after cease fire form of oath and plan could easily be worked out within time schedule.

4. Tshombe agreed to inaugurate himself opening of Lubilash Bridge in specified time following implementation of cease fire.

5. He has appointment to discuss UN shipments with Mathu on Monday. Indicated no problem following cease fire.

6. Tshombe showed his October 3 letter to Gardiner, indicating he prepared make such documents available as are requested in Commissions. Appeared believe this to his advantage in order justify larger split. To date only "ultimata" not request for documentation presented to GOK delegates. I said Consul Dean would speak with Ngalula and Mathu to seek meeting with Tshombe Monday arrange this matter and more compatible working relationship in Commissions. I urged that he take direct personal interest on his side.

7. Tshombe said if Ngalula wants to see him on deadline Work Commissions he prepared receive him and Commissioners and see whether deadline practical for termination of work of Commissions so soon. He unable to judge whether deadline was realistic. I agreed get Ngalula to take this up with him Monday.

8. He said that as result of my visit, he had already asked "National" Bank President Van Roey to prepare in next few days give him figures re what might be shared with Central Government. I made suggestion that deposit covering 50% months revenue and foreign exchange earnings be made, in accordance with plan, without prejudice to final settlement. Gardiner has given him impression, not yet taken up with GOC who will oppose bitterly, that Commissions may on basis evaluation full information recommend split more favorable to him. Although this will obviously be result any impartial evaluation I avoided getting into issue. British Consul who has been pressing two-month 50% split has subsequent to meeting advised that Van Roey prepared advise Tshombe make recommended payment if he can get Frasca back to Elisabethville. I will arrange this on my return Léopoldville tomorrow. Tshombe agreed with me yesterday make payments regularly on basis of independent determination by Commissions of his real ability to pay.

9. He continues to insist that his instructions have already been carried out to prepare this end of Elisabethville-Léopoldville telephone line and that text revealed that Léopoldville authorities had not permitted traffic. Letter in April to Adoula confirmed Katanga desire to reopen line. I promised take this up with Adoula.

Tshombe complained that it difficult to believe Léopoldville Government serious about plan in light of: (1) Radio Léopoldville (ACP Item) in recent days saying Tshombe had no right ask for amnesty, had no right see text of constitution and had to capitulate rather than negotiate.

(2) Monitoring service recently picked up message containing order to ANC take Kongolo October 15. I said I would look into these matters but hastened to counsel him not to let this deter him from planned action and that cease fire accord and observer group could deal effectively with such matters.

Told Tshombe that his responses to above suggestions were encouraging but that burden of proof was on him to show concrete actions in each respect in order convince President Kennedy and others who were concerned about lack of progress on his part. Said best evidence would be pictures in newspapers next week showing inter alia signing of cease fire accord and inauguration of Lubilash Bridge. He said he had given me his word of honor on above points and that if I had any doubts about his carrying out his side of bargain I should query him. He will reply promptly and directly. Assured him that Consul Dean here for this purpose and would address such messages for me. I ended with expression our determination see Congo unity through and our hope that this could be achieved in agreement with him.

I will tomorrow analyze for Department what I consider his agreement means.

Tshombe's stated undertakings are on their face value as forthcoming as can be expected. I am by no means convinced, however, that his full compliance is assured. The real test, as I have told him, lies in his performance and our best hope appears to be through keeping constant pressure on him to make difficult decisions required taking advantage of his evident desire to please President Kennedy to whom he has sent choice collection of Katangan minerals.

Dean

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–762. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, and USUN.

309. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 309. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, October 8, 1962, 3 p.m.

837. For Secretary and Under Secretary from McGhee. For Ambassador from McGhee. For Stevenson from McGhee. Following are developments since despatch Elisbethville's 457.2 Pursuant to understanding reached my last meeting with Tshombe, Mathu and Ngalula, GOC representative in Elisabethville, met with Tshombe 11 a.m. October 7 with draft proposed stand-fast agreement repeated Elisabethville 458.3 Although I was not fully advised as to results of meeting since our plane had to leave Elisabethville immediately after hearing preliminary reports, Tshombe presumably requested deferral until 10:30 a.m. today in order consult his experts, and indicated he had additional point which he might raise. This, of course, concern that he may inject some new element, such as removal UN road-blocks, which would not be acceptable. He had raised no such conditions with me; indeed, he had repudiated as not his several impossible conditions previously raised by his representatives in Military Commission.

After return Léopoldville Ambassador, Fredericks and I spent evening with Adoula, dining at Ambassador's residence and inspecting first shipment of impact military supplies which had just arrived.

When shown list of action items which I had discussed with Tshombe as contained in reference telegram he appeared quite happy and commented they seemed practical. He considers action on first point as the key; that is, step-by-step action toward integration before constitution is promulgated. I went over items one by one and explained degree of understanding I considered I had reached with Tshombe on each. Although I indicated that immediate payment I had recommended to Tshombe under point 8 was one month at 50 percent revenue and foreign exchange, I did describe strong feeling expressed by Tshombe and shared by others in Elisabethville that this was not perhaps realistic basis for permanent division. This, as has been reported,4 is a matter on which Gardiner also has misgivings but has not yet taken up with Adoula in frank way. However, Adoula did not react strongly nor appear greatly surprised.

Ambassador and I raised with him again the question of the constitution, urging him to send copies to the Provincial Presidents and to publish it. He agreed to publish it within a week, but remained adamant on sending it beforehand to the Presidents. This was not provided for in the fundamental law. We replied this was not a matter of law but courtesy and would greatly help us and others with our public opinion. It would not affect his plans vis-a-vis Parliament since there was little that the Presidents could do about it in the short time involved. Although he indicated desire to help President Kennedy with his internal political problems, he remained firm on this point, as he had when Gullion raised it before.

Adoula indicated that draft constitution would not be changed before presentation to Parliament. Comments his own Ministers would merely be for benefit of government in handling matter before Parliament.

On departing from us, Adoula drafted new instruction to Ngalula which have presumably resulted in a new draft stand-still agreement to be presented to Tshombe at 10:30 today.

Adoula's suggested changes, which are given in separate telegram (Embtel 838)5 need not, it is believed, raise in themselves insurmountable problems.

In meeting this morning with Gardiner, I went over conversations with Tshombe in detail, giving him copies of nine action points and explaining degree of understanding reached with Tshombe about each. Gardiner thought all helpful. He indicated that Bunche would probably be concerned that only non-military UN supplies were specified for UN blocking. I made clear that in view Tshombe's strong resistance to aviation gas, I had considered this as much as could be achieved in a first step, that we should perhaps take aviation gas as a next step.

Gardiner advised that he had now urged Adoula not make constitution public until after his forthcoming visit to Elisabethville on October 11 since Tshombe reaction might make more difficult work Commissions. In all probability this would not, however, interfere with Adoula promise of publication within a week. Other matters discussed with Gardiner will be reported in a separate telegram.

Gardiner plans go Elisabethville on October 11 for meeting with Tshombe, returning October 12, which will give me opportunity obtain his evaluation Tshombe's compliance with promised actions.

I plan go Stanleyville tomorrow, returning Thursday noon and, depending on developments and results Gardiner visit may return Washington as early as October 14, unless Department has other views.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–862. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to USUN and Brussels.

2 Telegram 556 from Elisabethville (Document 308) was repeated to Léopoldville as telegram 457.

3 Sent to the Department as telegram 557 from Elisabethville, October 7. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–762)

4 McGhee mentioned this in telegram 549 from Elisabethville, October 5, which reported a conversation with representatives of Union Miniere and the National Bank of Katanga on the problems involved in the division of foreign exchange. (Ibid., 870G.131/10–562)

5 Dated October 8. (Ibid., 770G.00/10– 862)

310. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 310. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, October 8, 1962, 9 p.m.

845. Pass to White House. For Secretary and Under Secretary from McGhee. For Ambassador from McGhee. For Stevenson from McGhee. For Dean from McGhee. Following is preliminary evaluation promised in Elisabethville's 4572 of what Tshombe's agreement to take certain actions pursuant to the reconciliation plan really means. In past it has been consensus that Tshombe could not be relied upon—that he has usually either defaulted on his undertaking or slid out through some trick of interpretation. Often he has used as an excuse some extraneous, irrelevant factor such as a presumed threat or warlike move. On other hand he claims he is a "man of honor" and his principal complaint against outside world involves what he contends are false accusations against his honesty and good faith. Indeed, he seems to wish to regularize himself with the outside, especially with President Kennedy and USG.

The relationship between his promise and fulfillment is therefore probably not so much question of intent or good faith as whether he has the courage to fulfill undertakings in light of countervailing pressures upon him. His position in Katanga is to considerable extent result of his skill as a consummate politician in promising all things to all people. Almost any decision he takes in fulfillment of plan runs counter to strong forces on whom he must rely.

To understand these forces one must visualize his prosperous non-racial kingdom, the real workings of which are controlled by 15,000 or so Belgians who were once his colonial masters and who as a result of his successful secession are enjoying an unparalleled prosperity. Leaders of this group, the directors of some 30–50 companies most of which are associated with Societe Generale, represent powerful European economic interests with ability to exercise strong influence on Belgian and other European governments concerned. As individuals this group is interested only in making a killing while they can. If the end comes they will depart for Europe. They appear to attach little significance to any long-range prospects in Katanga. Moreover, as they see it, they stand only to lose from Katanga's association with the Congo—by diversion of revenue and foreign exchange earnings, restriction in their ability remit foreign exchange, higher taxes, loss of freedom and erosion of government administrative efficiency.

Tshombe also is subject to pressures of his own people who have undergone a national transformation as result their conflict with outside world. To them he is a personal hero who is responsible for their economic and social gains under independence. They do not wish to be submerged in Congo with whom they share traditional rivalries and suspicions. He is also leader of group of young Katangan officers and administrators who represent an elite who need him and on whom he depends to carry out their relatively efficient administration of Katanga.

Although Tshombe's dependence on these different elements limits his independence of action, he at the same time supplies the balance to these forces and is perhaps their one most indispensable element—the one who can hold it all together. There can be no question of his popular support, both among Katangans and Belgians. As I saw him cheered along the road, they were equally wholehearted. He has sufficient power for considerable independence of action if he has the courage to exercise it.

I believe he wants or will accept union with the Congo along the extremely loose federal lines he has always advocated. Perhaps this is in part to satisfy his own ambitions, in part because he sees it as being inevitable in the face of geography and the powerful forces in its favor. Each step he takes toward integration along lines of the plan, however, involves immediate or potential sacrifices for some element in the Katangan complex who will oppose it sharply.

His promise to take certain actions concerning which he has been dilatory stems at the moment largely I believe from a desire to make a good impression on President Kennedy and USG. Whether this is end in itself or only to conceal his delaying tactics, it is not possible to say. Perhaps he sees it essentially as a way to buy time. Perhaps it is not a strong compulsion. He has not asked us for anything specific in return. In any event it is quite clear that he will not take the hard decisions he has promised unless the alternatives are even more distasteful.

We must therefore, having provided the incentive and set the standards for his judgment, hold him to his undertakings at every turn, pointing out that the consequence is loss of faith in him personally and in the plan in which his compliance is a necessary part. Otherwise, he will find some circuitous line of reasoning for not doing what he has agreed to do. We will have an opportunity within the next few days to make some judgment as to whether or not we can count on his performance. I will send him a few messages to spur him on.

Our current tack does not involve a close balancing of the rights and wrongs as between Tshombe and Adoula. This is as impossible as it is perhaps irrelevant. We support the GOC because our purpose is to integrate the Congo. We expect Adoula to cooperate in making tolerable adjustments which may be required to enable Tshombe to cooperate, assuming he wants to. If Tshombe proves himself unwilling or unable because of his situation or personal characteristics to carry out the plan, we must face the reality that our present tactic has failed and move on to stronger measures—such as a fait accompli on the revenue payment plan—which will strike more directly at his vital interests.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–862. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Brussels, USUN, and Elisabethville.

2 Telegram 556 from Elisabethville (Document 308) was repeated to Léopoldville as telegram 457.

311. Memorandum of Conversation 311. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 9, 1962, 4 p.m.

SUBJECT

Congo

PARTICIPANTS

US The President

The Secretary of State

Ambassador Bohlen

Mr. Tyler

France Couve de Murville, Foreign Minister

Ambassador Alphand

The President asked for the Foreign Minister's views and said it was now obvious that the United Nations had not been successful, and would probably have to withdraw. The Foreign Minister said that France's position was already known, and that the French Government had been in agreement with the aims of the US Government. He said it was obvious that the secession of Katanga was essentially a question of money. He thought that the relation between the UMHK and Tshombe was a very difficult one.

The President asked if the Foreign Minister thought there was anything further we could do. He replied that he didn't see what could be done further. The Secretary commented there were a good many Frenchmen down in the Congo. The Foreign Minister observed that they were not under French control or they would be in jail. The French element there consisted of people like those who had tried to assassinate General de Gaulle.

The President referred to the financing of UN operations and asked what the French position was. The Foreign Minister pointed out that France had never thought that putting the UN in the Congo would work out. The President asked if he thought that things would be better now if the United Nations were not in the Congo. The Foreign Minister said he wished to say "bluntly" that he thought the original reason for going into the Congo in the first place had been to prevent the Soviet Union from moving in there. At the time the United States had overestimated the Soviet military risk (he was not speaking of subversion which was a constant danger but of the military operations by the USSR). He thought that the military risk now was nonexistent. The UN had been in the Congo two years and if it had trained, say, 15,000 Congolese troops during this time, the situation might be different today.

The Secretary observed that several French-speaking African countries would vote in favor of the decision of the ICJ. The President asked the Foreign Minister what France was going to do. The Foreign Minister replied his government would not go along for reasons of principle. It was not in favor of ascribing to the General Assembly the authority to commit member countries to the support of military operations.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–962. Secret. Drafted by Tyler and approved in S on October 12 and in the White House on October 24. The source text is labeled "Part 2 of 4 Parts"; three other memoranda of conversation record discussion of different topics.

312. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 312. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, October 11, 1962, 8 p.m.

881. Pass to White House. For Secretary and Under Secretary from McGhee. For Ambassador from McGhee. For Stevenson from McGhee. Following are principal Katanga-GOC developments as I see them upon my return to Léopoldville this noon from visits Stanleyville and Bukavu.

Since my return to Léopoldville from Elisabethville on October 7, I have sent Tshombe two messages: (1) Léopoldville's 391 to Elisabethville repeated 846 to Department2 was sent as result information received from Dean and through UN that Tshombe continued demand inclusion UN forces in standstill and tripartite observation arrangements contrary to what I consider Tshombe's commitment to me in final meeting October 6. I pointed out to Tshombe basic inconsistency his proposals and provisions of plan providing for freedom movement UN forces. Although I have not yet received reply from Tshombe, information Elisabethville's 475 repeated Department 5723 indicates he understands issue and will reply. All reports indicate lack of progress up to this point in Military Commission where standfast arrangement has been referred; however, Elisabethville's 488 repeated Department 5864 indicates Tshombe has now agreed with Dean separate relations ANC and UN which should remove barriers to agreement covering former.

(2) Léopoldville's 399 to Elisabethville repeated Department 858.5 This message was calculated to impress Tshombe importance progress to be made before and during Gardiner's visit, particularly insofar as it related to report I must make to President, and to make clear negotiations must remain in UN channels.

In meantime comment has been received from Tshombe on nine points embodied in memorandum I presented him during our discussion October 6, as reported in his letter to me in Elisabethville's 578 to Department repeated Léopoldville 476.6 Following observations are offered: I. (1) Tshombe's comments on constitution not inconsistent with our discussion. Importance of constitution in plan cannot be denied and Adoula cannot expect Tshombe wholeheartedly carry out steps he has undertaken if in the end constitution promulgated is completely unacceptable.

(2) Tshombe does not appear to raise issues specified here as conditions to carrying out of plan, but suggests actions be taken as evidence good will by GOC and UN. Provisions with respect removal UN roadblocks in Elisabethville and withdrawal of ANC battalion at Kamina not acceptable to GOC–UN. Other provisions should however pose no problem. Adoula will tomorrow invite Provincial Presidents including Tshombe to Léopoldville October 15 at which time copies Federal Constitution will be presented. There is no assurance, however, that Tshombe will come.

II. Again, inclusion UN troops in standstill agreement unacceptable.

III. Taking of amnesty oath "within framework of Federal Army organized Federally on basis of a constitutional regime instituting the Federation" indicates oath would be conditional on subsequent acceptability of constitution. On the face of it, this is contrary to Tshombe's undertaking not make actions pursuant to plan contingent on promulgation constitution.

IV. Tshombe appears to telescope payment export duties at Matadi with deposit to budget of Federal Government. As indicated below, he has today announced that latter has been done.

V. Tshombe avoids issue of deadline for completion of commissions. His statement of objective of commissions not helpful—quite vague.

VI. His observation that he would deposit a "sizeable sum as soon as commissions have ended their work" has now been superseded by today's announcement as indicated below.

Taken as whole Tshombe's comment, while it represents some back tracking, must be taken in conjunction with statement to Consuls given Elisabethville's 585 [586] to Department which announces reopening Lubilash Bridge, irrevocable payment $2 million in foreign exchange and equivalent in Congolese francs, reopening of telecommunications, acceleration work of commissions and furnishing of necessary foreign exchange and revenue figures. Only inclusion UN forces in standstill agreement completely unacceptable; however, there are weak spots which can later be expanded into loopholes. Significant no reference in statement to standstill arrangements. Real test will come, however, in agreement on plan integration forces in Military Commission and in final financial arrangements. Concessions offered are those which could be calculated provide maximum effect toward buying time and regaining psychological initiative at minimum cost.

More complete evaluation will follow.

Ambassador Gullion will this evening give Adoula copy Tshombe's statement to Consuls, urging him keep open mind re Tshombe's proposals and not make statements prejudicial to their being carried out until he gets full report from Gardiner.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–1162. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Brussels and USUN.

2 Telegram 391 from Léopoldville to Elisabethville, October 9, transmitted the text of a message from McGhee to Tshombe which expressed concern over the lack of progress in reaching agreement on a cease-fire and urged Tshombe to move to resolve the impasse. (Ibid., 770G.5/10–962)

3 Telegram 475 from Elisabethville to Léopoldville, October 9, reported that Dean had delivered the message. (Ibid.)

4 Telegram 488 from Elisabethville to Léopoldville, October 11, reported that Tshombe had announced to the U.S., Belgian, and U.K. Consuls a number of concrete actions that he would take. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–1162)

5 Telegram 399 from Léopoldville to Elisabethville, October 10, transmitted the text of a message from McGhee to Tshombe expressing disappointment that agreement had not yet been reached on the matters they had discussed and noting that McGhee's report to President Kennedy would be affected by whether or not Gardiner was able to report progress upon his return from Elisabethville. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–1062)

6 Telegram 578 from Elisabethville, October 10, transmitted the text of a letter of that date from Tshombe to McGhee. (Ibid.)

313. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 313. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, October 12, 1962, 4:39 p.m.

Re: USUN's 1208 Oct. 11.2 For Stevenson from Secretary.

1. As of today Tshombe has taken certain initial steps before even being consulted about Constitution or seeing a copy of draft Constitution. Case can plausibly be made that Tshombe's performance on Reconciliation Plan now slightly ahead of Adoula's, since Adoula has not surfaced a constitution.

2. There is therefore no basis for invoking the tougher measures in "Course of Action" paper. Situation might change again rapidly, and we await McGhee's evaluation latest Gardiner talks with Tshombe. But CAC meets in New York today, and we must operate on how it looks today.

3. Disruptive or inflammatory statements coming out of Congo Advisory Committee meeting this afternoon, just before Constitution is to be considered by Adoula and provincial Presidents in Léopoldville next week, might seriously jeopardize honest attempts pursue negotiated solution along lines U Thant Reconciliation Plan.

4. Request you strongly discourage SYG from presenting course of action paper and Reconciliation Plan to CAC, which we understand from telecon he contemplating. Leave to your discretion which arguments may be most convincing, but following points may prove useful: (a) Publication course of action undesirable since pressures described in phase two were related to failure Tshombe reply within 10 days to UN upon presentation plan. At time presentation to Tshombe pressures were not outlined in such stark terms as phrased in paper. UN proposal also envisaged Adoula presenting draft constitution to parliament by Sept. 30. Moreover, Tshombe acceptance of plan in principle and Oct 11 promises (E'ville 587)3 have already changed frame of reference for application pressures. Positions of states supporting pressures or measures outlined by SYG August 20 in that context now not clear. This particularly true for Belgium, whose backing is crucial for success economic sanctions. Should note Spaak's willingness invoke economic measures, or press UMHK, conditioned on satisfactory constitutional negotiations and GOC fiscal legislation, which are still far from complete.

(b) Publication course of action without consultations powers most involved in application likely freeze SYG's position and prejudice his ability obtain support for economic measures or for other forms of economic measures such as plan divert UMHK tax payments to GOC, that not contained in course of action paper.

You might suggest that while appreciating pressures on him, we believe presentation to CAC should be oral. However, if he feels he must table any document, it should be reconciliation plan but no course action.

5. We fear that, coming on heels of SYG report re Katangan buildup,4 pressures for radical action in CAC will develop unless Thant damps them down. Believe you should tell Thant U.S. considers no purpose served by depreciating limited Tshombe response to date; on contrary important to exploit actions and promises by Tshombe in effort to induce more relevant steps. Tshombe's agreement to partial implementation of UN plan prior to constitutional discussion appears sufficient permit SYG describe it as limited program in right direction. In addition, Adoula willingness to submit draft constitution to provincial presidents next week and invite their comments means progress being made on that side.

6. Thus, we strongly hope Thant, who is key to avoiding unacceptable moves by radicals in CAC or in SC, will use these developments to buy time and forestall pressures for action which could undo what has been accomplished thus far.5

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–1162. Confidential; Priority. Drafted and approved by Cleveland and cleared by Williams and Burdett. Pouched to USUN and repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, Paris, and Elisabethville. Telegram 1243 from USUN, October 12, refers to this as a "draft telegram dictated from Cleveland's office." (Ibid., 770G.00/10–1262)

2 Telegram 1208 reported a conversation that afternoon between Yost and Bunche. (Ibid.)

3 Reference should be to telegram 586; see footnote 3, Document 312.

4 Reference is to an October 8 report from Gardiner to Thant. (U.N. doc. S/5053/Add.12)

5 Telegram 1243 from USUN (see the source note above) reported that Stevenson had covered the points in the message with Bunche, who promised to report the U.S. comments to Thant but did not hold out hope that the latter would withhold the Plan and Course of Action. Thant did release them to the Advisory Committee on the Congo when he met with it that afternoon.

314. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 314. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, October 15, 1962, noon.

916. Department also pass information White House. For Secretary and Under Secretary from McGhee. For Ambassador from McGhee. For Stevenson from McGhee. I have been increasingly concerned with possibility Adoula would appear to be falling behind Tshombe in carrying out of plan. If Tshombe actually agrees to standstill, oath taking, token payment, opening of Lubilash Bridge and telecommunications, some response from Adoula would appear necessary to create atmosphere which would facilitate agreement on remainder of plan, most of which still lies ahead. Forward movement Adoula's part also necessary create favorable world opinion, particularly in US, Belgium and in UN, which will make it possible obtain necessary support for Adoula if plan fails and stronger measures must be considered.

Following up meeting with President Kasavubu reported Embtel 8932 and in anticipation agreement on cease-fire between GOC and GOK representatives in Elisabethville as advised Elisabethville's 619 to Department,3 paper prepared to give to Adoula as suggested statement he might make if and when standstill and oathtaking agreed. This document sent separately (Embtel 915).4

Adoula opened conversation by expressing skepticism UN's intentions. UN appears want to withdraw from responsibility for carrying out plan and leave it to him to negotiate with Tshombe which he has said he would never do again. Apparently not well informed about events in Elisabethville, Adoula expressed strong reservation proposed standstill agreement, if location applicable only to north Katanga he would not sign agreement which would give Tshombe freedom of movement while pinning him down. He also insisted it be made clear that UN had freedom of movement to carry out mandate in area. He indicated that proposal had been drafted by Consuls which was improper. It should be UN document.

Adoula summarized for us what his instructions had been to his delegation with respect to cease-fire: 1. Cease-fire (arret du mouvement) should apply to whole of Katanga, north and south. 2. There should be stipulated freedom of movement for UN whole of Katanga. UN had no problem in north Katanga controlled by ANC; it was not free to move in south Katanga. 3. UN resolutions are to be strictly applied. He singled out half of purchases of arms and munitions abroad as well as recruitment mercenaries. At present, he claimed, GOC practically prevented from buying arms. He was prepared see UN resolutions applied to all of Congo. 4. Both sides would agree to give every facility to UN in its movements and in applying resolutions.

I attempted persuade Adoula that carrying out plan through voluntary action by both sides necessarily involved some negotiations between GOC and GOK on details implementation. UN could not do it all for him. I attempted minimize importance standstill agreement pointing out that military commission would in theory be coming up within short time with plan for total integration of forces, importance of which was so great it would overrun provisions of standstill agreement. Perhaps we had all allowed ourselves be so diverted by negotiations for standstill that we had allowed it impede progress toward integration in military commission which was much more important. Consuls had not attempted interpose their judgment into standstill negotiations but had only, on request, assisted in formulation views expressed by GOC and GOK. Adoula expressed skepticism about Tshombe's agreeing to any integration of forces and said he did not in meantime intend to be trapped.

We raised with Adoula question of amnesty pointing out that, on face of it, this was one of the things which central government had in plan promised do and there appeared to be no particular reason why it should not have been done. GOC delay played into hands of Tshombe who had already made his suggestions re amnesty. If GOC delayed or appeared to link issuance of amnesty with other aspects of plan this would justify similar tactics on Tshombe's part.

Adoula responded that Cabinet was meeting tomorrow with President in connection his name day celebration and hoped President would be able issue amnesty at end of meeting. It was simple matter. Draft had already been formulated. However, it would not, as Tshombe had suggested, apply to common crimes and would be applicable only to Katanga. They had arrested no one for political crimes in Léopoldville, for example. I urged him consult with Gardiner before final formulation amnesty so Tshombe's views could be taken into account to maximum extent possible. Tshombe had demanded it be agreed with him.

In discussing preparations to be made in connection opening Lubilash Bridge, Adoula said this was matter for central government and not Tshombe; however he wished cooperate and Minister of Transport and Communications would be present at ceremony. He indicated preparations would be made for receiving copper shipment and for return shipments. I asked Adoula if he would personally invite Tshombe be present at meeting of provincial presidents to consider Constitution scheduled October 16. He said he planned telephone him tomorrow (now that telecommunications are open) and, at our suggestion, agreed to make fact public.

I raised with Adoula point made by Department in Deptel 5825 as to position his government would take with respect to substance of Constitution, point out desirability attributing it to UN experts. Dissociation his government would permit Constitution be freely considered and changed by normal means in Parliament. He said this was precisely what government proposed to do. Constitution had been drafted by UN experts and everyone should be free criticize it including government.

When we gave Adoula proposed declaration he appeared distressed at idea saying not enough progress had been made to justify such a statement, that he had been induced to do so in the past only to his embarrassment when nothing materialized, that he did not at this stage want get into business of exchanging written broadsides with Tshombe which could only result in transferring discussion to these texts and starting new series of false hares.

He reacted to reference to north Katanga, rather than to all of Katanga. He did not like reference to fact that commissions were going to decide Tshombe's ability to pay, although I indicated this had already been discussed in commission and provision in plan with regard foreign exchange payments referred only to minimum of 50 percent which could be raised. He strongly rejected inference (not intended by us) that until new constitution adopted Loi Fondamentale did not apply. He did, in the end, indicate he would consider idea of such a communique if and when matters it referred to had been agreed.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–1562. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Brussels and USUN.

2 Telegram 893 from Léopoldville, October 12, reported that, in his meeting that day with Kasavubu, McGhee had emphasized the need to meet Tshombe half way whenever he gave concrete evidence of willingness to cooperate. He urged the Congolese Government to promulgate an amnesty law, reopen air communications and telecommunications with Elisabethville, see that the Congolese negotiators on the commissions at Elisabethville expedite the commissions' work in every way possible, give serious consideration to Tshombe's proposal to make deposits in London and Léopoldville against foreign exchange earnings and tax receipts, and consider the draft constitution as subject to change in Parliament. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–1262)

3 Dated October 14. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–1462)

4 Dated October 15. (Ibid., 770G.5/10–1562)

5 Telegram 582 to Léopoldville, October 11, expressed concern about the draft constitution, which the Department thought was too complex and inflexible to meet the conflicting needs of the Katanga situation, where some autonomy was essential, and Adoula's political needs and the needs of the other provinces. It recommended persuading Adoula not to identify himself with the current draft but to present it to provincial presidents strictly as a draft prepared by U.N. expert. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–1162)

315. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 315. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, October 16, 1962, 10 p.m.

931. Pass to White House. For Secretary and Under Secretary from McGhee. For Ambassador from McGhee. For Stevenson from McGhee. Evaluation of developments as of close October 16.

Last 24 hours has been a period of waiting to see how developments en train, which have been previously described, would unfold. Eville's 638 to Dept2 announced signing of cease-fire today. There is still some risk this will backfire here since Gardiner himself sent telegram authorizing GOC rep Ngalula to sign and Adoula is extremely dubious about agreement because of its limitation to north Katanga. Tshombe's letter to Gardiner agreeing to oath taking (Eville's 626 to Dept)3 is, moreover, linked to question of amnesty.

Since, on the face of it, opposing positions on amnesty are irreconcilable—Tshombe demanding amnesty for the whole of Congo and Adoula intent on limiting it to Katanga—Gardiner is attempting to formulate a UN proposal which Tshombe has, in letter referred to, agreed to accept. This poses great dilemma for Gardiner since limitation to Katanga he considers contrary to real concept of national reconciliation and will be criticized by many as discriminating in favor of Tshombe and his secessionist Katangese without any relief for host of others all over country who might have been included. On other hand Gardiner convinced complete amnesty, which would necessarily include Gizenga, Kalonji and Gbenye, would cause Adoula's downfall.

Formula Gardiner will probably come up with, which his lawyers are now working on, involves preamble explaining amnesty in Katanga is only first step which will later be applicable other provinces. There is evidence that Adoula may again acquiesce on this point and let Gardiner call the tune, although this may also buy trouble for future in the form of a possible later disavowal or basis for special claims by Adoula.

Since Adoula launched Constitution this morning before presidents of provinces, releasing it simultaneously to press, we are now waiting time bomb of Tshombe's reaction. I had in my last communication to Tshombe urged him to come to today's meeting. He not only did not come but did not send a representative, possibly because he might have been forced to answer rollcall of south Katanga. Adoula did not call him on phone to invite him yesterday as he had promised; he said he forgot in morning and could not reach him in afternoon.

In meantime plans for opening Lubilash Bridge tomorrow go forward. Gardiner will go but central govt will be represented only through appropriate Minister in south Kasai govt. Hopefully GOC will tomorrow send 28 military representatives to Eville to represent them on tripartite observation teams. Hopefully, also, two GOC men for customs and two for immigration, accompanied by 4–6 experts, will go to Eville to provide for opening of airport to direct flights. Former Katangese staff will also return to airport to do actual work.

Work of foreign exchange and revenue commissions has proceeded to point of agreement on principles and arrangements for handling various transactions involved. I do not believe, however, that Adoula really understands the implications in his agreement that needs of Katanga are to be covered as a matter of priority providing how much foreign exchange goes to central govt. This would appear to be an even more dangerous admission than a straight deal on what the cut will be. In any event, stage seems to have been set for deal on cut both in revenue and foreign exchange. Katangese have made firm offer of 25 percent gross in foreign exchange to complement previous offer of 25 percent revenue.

I am tonight sending Tshombe another letter acknowledging progress made but pointing out problems to be faced in future and what we will expect. Text is being sent separately (Embtel 930).4 In this letter I have emphasized two major remaining obstacles: I have attempted persuade him: (1) take his chances along with other provinces in getting Constitution changed more to his liking; (2) facilitate work of military commission which has up to now made almost no progress.

On GOC front principal current problem is in obtaining forthcoming declaration on developments from Adoula. We are working with his public relations counsel to this end, but prospects for a statement are not good. He has promised a press conference for Thursday.

During meeting with him today, Gardiner said he has made no report to UN since that from Eville. Although he is currently giving thought to what he might say, he did not indicate whether or not or when he might make a final report to SYG.

Summary and preliminary evaluation: Although there has been some demonstrable progress in carrying out specific steps in plan, structure built so far is fragile: only the standstill is final; the oath taking hinges on the amnesty. In revenue and foreign exchange commissions certain principles and arrangements have been agreed upon and stage is set for a compromise on amounts. However, Adoula has not yet openly acknowledged that he is willing negotiate on this point. Constitution has been launched but it remains to be seen whether Adoula dares take it to Parliament and whether it or he can weather the expected assaults. Tshombe could, if he so elected, use either the issue of the amnesty, the Constitution or the recent continued ANC attacks around Kongolo (even though probably provoked by Katangese) to kick the whole thing over.

It has been one of my principal objectives in discussions with officials on both sides to push forward other forms of cooperation and integration outside the framework of the plan, to give the whole process of mutual involvement and reconciliation a forward momentum. In this field considerable progress had been made.

The opening of the Lubilash Bridge brings together officials at the ceremony and necessitates joint arrangements for onward shipment of copper and payment of export duties at Matadi. The opening of telecommunications has made it possible resume normal traffic between Leo and Eville and resulted in conversation between Adoula and Tshombe themselves. Necessity for making joint technical arrangements required cooperation which has speeded up the involvement process. Similarly, opening of Eville airport, if it does occur, with mingling of Congolese and Katangese officials, will further accelerate their being able work together. A spirit of cooperation, even fraternity, has been reported in some of the meetings of the commissions in Eville. Unexpected breakthroughs in agreements on complex arrangements have occurred in foreign exchange commission.

There are also other inducements to continued forward movement. Gardiner has held out enticing prospects to Tshombe: Eventual turning over of Eville air base and camp in Eville area now held by UN, supplying by UN of beleaguered Katangese forces in north Katanga, and relaxation of restrictions on Katangan train movements. This should serve to establish a greater feeling of confidence between Katangese and UN.

Adoula himself, in letter just received which being transmitted separately5 says in part "Following my recent conversations . . . I wish to bring to your attention that in view of the assurances which you have given me, I have accepted to believe one more time in the word given me by M. Moise Tshombe . . ."6

On the whole it is believed that there is sufficient possibility that the forward momentum of cooperation created will carry along with it agreement on the difficult issues remaining under the plan, to justify continued support of the plan as a basis for our policy in the Congo. Every effort must be made by unremitting pressure on both sides to assure that this momentum is not lost, indeed, that it continues to build up strength through further mutual involvements. This is particularly important because if forward momentum is ever arrested, I do not believe the forces at play or the tempers of the principals involved would make it possible to get momentum started again.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10-1662. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to USUN and Brussels.

2 Dated October 16. (Ibid.)

3 Dated October 15. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–1562)

4 Dated October 16. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–1662)

5 In telegram 936, October 17. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–1762)

6 Ellipses in the source text. In telegram 936, the sentence reads as follows: "Following different conversations which I recently was pleased to have with you in course of your current visit to Congo, I wish to bring to your attention that I have accepted, because of assurances which you have given me, to believe one more time in word given me by M. Moise Tshombe, Provincial President of South Katanga."

316. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 316. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, October 18, 1962, 5 p.m.

955. For Secretary and Under Secretary from McGhee. Pass to White House. For Ambassador from McGhee. For Stevenson from McGhee. At meeting this morning with Adoula, Bomboko and Minister of Agriculture Tshiala Muana, who is newcomer and extremist element in political Cabinet, Ambassador Gullion, Fredericks and I were treated to repeat, although slightly more moderate, performance of that reported by Ambassador yesterday in Embtel 950.2 Efforts yesterday of Ambassador, Gardiner and through my letter to Adoula (Embtel 944)3 did not dissuade Adoula from making radio speech last night reported Embtel 946.4 These efforts may, however, have helped blunt its content and prevent an open break with UN or plan.

In meeting Prime Minister reviewed complaints against UN for non-delivery of messages, pressures on GOK–GOC negotiator Ngalula, and intervention of Consuls. Ceasefire and foreign exchange documents initialed were not in accordance with GOC instructions and deviated from plan. He claimed to have received no report on negotiations and no indication of why his amendments had been rejected if indeed they had been delivered. In particular last minute minor changes suggested by Prime Minister in standstill (Embtel 916)5 were not reflected final draft.

At this meeting, strangely, no reference was made to restriction agreement to North Katanga, but emphasis was placed on fact it contained no provision for effective time and date. In commenting on provisional foreign exchange agreement initialed, Bomboko admitted that Katanga might of necessity have to be given more than 50 percent of foreign exchange earnings so as to preserve industry in Katanga. However amount was not principal point at issue but rather assurance that receipts would accrue initially to Central Government.

I attempted in my discussion separate the various issues which were troubling the Central Government. They were, of course, entitled to prompt and efficient communications with their representative in Elisabethville and every effort must be made to assure this in future. We did not consider that any breakdown in communications could be attributed to bad faith on part of UN officials, but to stress [apparent omission] imposed by recent events and limitations in communications frailties.

If GOC had not in fact agreed to documents but considered them as being initialed only ad referendum, they were free to seek any changes they wished in future negotiations. We hoped that they would in these negotiations concentrate on essential elements and be prepared to give and take in spirit of conciliation. Plan was not self-activating and negotiations were required in order give them practical effect. Only an agreement freely accepted by both sides would be a lasting one.

First task was to get standstill agreement signed. It was not in itself essential element but should be put into effect without delay so tripartite observation teams for which GOC has already sent personnel to Elisabethville could proceed to areas of reported fighting and assure cessation. Foreign exchange document initialed was merely preliminary step in work of Revenue and Foreign Exchange Commissions, which as Foreign Minister had indicated may result in adjustments in division. Agreement on number of points satisfactory to both sides had already been achieved.

I asked Prime Minister if I could assume negotiations would continue, on basis of whatever new instructions he chooses to give, and that I could report to President he still supporting plan and was prepared to make every effort to carry it out through negotiation and agreement.6

Prime Minister showed us his instructions to Ngalula which asked him to return (time unspecified) for consultation and said negotiator would be appointed to continue in his absence and discussions would continue. It was a question not of rupture but of a suspension. Prime Minister told us that while members of Financial and Monetary Commissions returned for consultation, Military Commission would remain. Moreover, he had sent yesterday to Katanga a number of officers to Staff Observer Missions as well as some potential Immigration officials. Adoula insisted that consideration be given to suggestions he had made.

He stated, moreover, that GOC must be put in strong position if negotiations are to be successful and that ANC must be strengthened. In this connection he would make new request to USG. I mentioned study conducted by Greene Mission which was already under consideration by our government.7

I urged effort be made in any future public statements by GOC to correct misimpression which might be given to the many countries which are supporting him and plan, that his declarations might constitute disavowal or lack intent carry out plan. In order inject more positive public note, I suggested to Prime Minister desirability brief communique covering our visit which would enable me give precise interpretation of his attitude in event I was queried by press. Communique finally agreed which he indicated he would probably read at his press conference scheduled 3 p.m. (Embtel 952)8

In this communique he expresses full support GOC for plan, states "the bridges are not cut". Despite the difficulties which have been encountered in the Commission meetings in Elisabethville, the personnel of the delegation for the Central Government remain in Elisabethville (sur place).

Telegram has been sent Elisabethville requesting Dean convey orally message to Tshombe urging moderation his response to above actions.9

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–1862. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to USUN and Brussels.

2 The reference should be to telegram 940, October 17, which reported that a dispute over U.N. initiatives to obtain a cease-fire agreement had "set aboil Congolese dissatisfaction" and that Adoula was "beset by rabid counsels in Cabinet (which Ambassador unintentionally witnessed)" for an immediate declaration repudiating the agreement, attacking the United Nations, or inviting its departure. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–1762) Telegram 950, October 18, concerned P.L. 480 assistance to the Congo. (Ibid., 411.70G41/10–1862)

3 Telegram 944, October 18, transmitted the text of a letter of that date from McGhee to Adoula. The letter urged patience and warned that if there were "premature, ill-considered reactions or declarations by either side, the momentum which has been so painfully created would be lost and a good prospect for integration would vanish." (Ibid., 110.12–McG/10–1862)

4 Telegram 946, October 18, transmitted an informal translation of the speech, in which Adoula declared that the Congolese Government could not accept the cease-fire agreement signed on October 16 in Elisabethville. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–1862)

5 Document 314.

6 McGhee and Fredericks left Léopoldville on October 18. McGhee recommended in telegram 935 from Léopoldville, October 17, that he return to Washington, stating that his mandate had "rather run out" and his continued presence was "somewhat ambiguous." He continued: "Having made impact at particular juncture which has helped set in motion various actions of indeterminate outcome, it would seem preferable await emergence of new set of issues before entering fray again which could be done most effectively directly out of Washington under fresh instructions from Sec. and Pres." (Department of State, Central Files, 110.12–McG/10–1762) Rusk approved his return in telegram 616 to Léopoldville, October 17. (Ibid.)

7 Gullion reported in telegram 966 from Léopoldville, October 19, that at the close of the meeting, after the other Congolese participants had left, Adoula assured McGhee that he would "never" turn to the Soviet bloc for aid, but that "if U.S. let GOC drop, successors would apply to USSR." (Ibid., 770G.00/10–1962)

8 Telegram 952, October 18, transmitted the text of the communique. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–1862) Telegram 961 from Léopoldville, October 18, reported on the press conference, at which Adoula said the Congolese Government had endeavored to carry out the U.N. plan and called for its "strict application" without delay. (Ibid.)

9 The message was transmitted in telegram 442 to Elisabethville, repeated to the Department as telegram 949, October 18. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–1862) Dean reported in telegram 660, October 18, that he had delivered the message, as well as McGhee's October 16 letter (see Document 315 and footnote 3 thereto) to Kimba, since Tshombe was out of town. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–1862)

317. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (McGhee) to President Kennedy 317. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (McGhee) to President Kennedy1

Washington, October 22, 1962.

SUBJECT

Mission to the Congo

September 25–October 19, 1962

Accompanied by Mr. Wayne Fredericks

Purpose:

To support United States policy in the Congo: achievement of the unity of the Congo under a moderate, stable Central Government through support of the United Nations Mission there. In particular, to further the Secretary General's Reconciliation Plan as the most likely way of achieving reintegration of Katanga into the Congo.

Immediate Objectives:

With Tshombe.

(1) To convince Tshombe, through direct representation from you and the Secretary in a friendly and conciliatory way, of the firmness of United States support of the Plan and of our determination to see the Plan through, without directly threatening him with forceful measures.

(2) To obtain assurances from him that he accepts the Plan and is willing to carry it out without delay and without the injection of contingencies or procedural blocks.

(3) To secure his agreement to certain specific steps, both under the Plan and in support of it, which could be undertaken immediately.

(4) To convince him that we will in our policy toward him be guided only by his actions—not his promises, and that we have set his performance in following through on certain specific undertakings as a standard for judging his willingness and ability to carry out the Plan.

With Adoula.

(1) To assure Adoula of United States support in the carrying out of the Plan and, without being any more specific than necessary, that in the event the Plan fails after he has made every possible effort to carry it out, that we will back him with stronger measures.

(2) To persuade him to consult with Tshombe with respect to the Constitution to the end of securing Tshombe's agreement or, failing this, to remove the Constitution as an issue in the carrying out of the Plan.

(3) To persuade him to be as forthcoming as possible in negotiations with Tshombe, and in meeting Tshombe halfway in whatever gestures the latter makes, to the end that maximum forward movement is made with respect to the Plan.

Strategy:

An essential element in the strategy pursued was not only to further specific steps under the Plan which are now ready for agreement and execution, but to initiate such parallel actions which would contribute to the forward movement sought. Hopefully this would have the effect of involving Katanga and the Central Government in cooperative actions which would further the integration and conciliation process, and provide a momentum which would facilitate resolution of the difficult issues to be faced under the Plan.

Progress Achieved:

With respect to the Plan.

(1) Tshombe agreed that he would not, as he had hitherto done, set the promulgation of a Constitution favorable to himself as a prior condition to carrying out other aspects of the Plan.

(2) Tshombe agreed that he would facilitate the work of the Commissions and recognize that their purpose is to assure action under the Plan.

(3) Agreement was initialled by both sides covering a standstill and Tripartite Observation Teams. Tshombe agreed to oath-taking by his gendarmerie contingent on a suitable amnesty by Adoula. Action was, however, halted by Adoula's disavowal based on his internal political difficulties but ostensibly on the basis that the agreements were not fully responsive to his position which had not been properly communicated to his representatives by the United Nations.

(4) Tshombe agreed that he would make a token payment of two million dollars foreign exchange and two million dollars revenue, which was deprecated but not spurned by Adoula. Considerable progress was made on procedural arrangements both in the Revenue and Foreign Exchange Commissions.

(5) Adoula revealed the Constitution drafted by United Nations experts to a meeting of all Provincial Presidents, except Tshombe who declined to be present, but indicated that he did not back the Constitution in its entirety and that it could be changed during its consideration in the Parliament.

Outside the Plan.

(1) Tshombe agreed to and in fact did on October 27 open the Lubilash Bridge and send two carloads of copper to Matadi with the understanding that taxes would be paid to the Central Government on export in the usual way. Agreement was indicated that if this shipment was satisfactory the traditional percentage of Katanga copper would be shipped by this route.

(2) Tshombe agreed to the opening of telecommunications between Elisabethville and Léopoldville, which was in fact done on October 15 and is still in effect.

(3) Adoula agreed to the opening of the Elisabethville Airport to direct flights and although this has not yet been accomplished, immigration and customs officials have been sent to Elisabethville by the Central Government for this purpose and the necessary Katanga personnel have been recruited.

Immediate Obstacles: (1) Adoula has, as a result of strong political opposition, denounced the standstill agreement and suspended further negotiations. In his final statement to me, however, he promised to resume negotiations.

(2) Fighting between the ANC and Gendarme continues in North Katanga, reportedly accompanied by bombing by the Katanga Air Force and irregular fighting instituted by Munongo, Katanga Minister. Both sides blame the other for the continued fighting.

(3) The Military Commission, having been diverted by the standstill negotiations, has not yet faced the many issues which it must resolve before integration of forces can be achieved.

(4) The Revenue and Foreign Exchange Commissions have not yet faced the difficult question of the division as between the two parties. Firm offers have been made by Katangese of twenty-five percent Revenue and Foreign Exchange and there is admission on the part of the Central Government that some compromise below the fifty percent provision in the Plan will be required.

Over-all Evaluation: (1) The major task in carrying out the Plan lies ahead. There is no firm basis for assurance that it can be accomplished. The parties are deeply divided, not only on specific issues but by traditional rivalries and suspicions. There is no basis for confidence between them.

(2) Some forward movement has, however, been accomplished with respect to the Plan and particularly through initiation of parallel activities outside the Plan which involve cooperation between the two parties. Hopefully, if these activities can be carried forward, sufficient momentum may be attained to resolve the more difficult issues remaining under the Plan.

(3) In view of the above, and the risks involved in application of stronger measures of coercion against Tshombe, it is believed that we should for the time being continue our present policy of attempting to carry out the Plan by agreement between the parties.

(4) In the course of carrying out the Plan, it may become apparent that even though it cannot be accomplished in its entirety, that sufficient progress can be made to achieve a modus vivendi politically acceptable to Adoula and which may offer sufficient promise for the future to be acceptable to the United Nations and ourselves.

(5) If there is not progress under the Plan shortly, Adoula may be forced by the dissident elements in his own Cabinet to seek a more drastic solution to the Katanga problem, or his government may be overthrown by more radical political elements in the Congo. Before this occurs our present plan must be reevaluated and a suitable alternative found.

Recommended Actions: (1) Attempt to persuade both Adoula and Tshombe to accept the Secretary General's appeal for a standstill without negotiating a formal agreement and put into immediate effect Tripartite Observation Teams to ensure an end to the fighting in North Katanga.

(2) Encourage both sides to assure that their delegates in the Military, Revenue and Foreign Exchange Commissions negotiate flexibly so the remaining problems facing these commissions can be worked out as expeditiously as possible.

(3) Keep pressure on both parties to continue to carry out the cooperative arrangements taken outside the Plan and to put into effect additional similar projects.

(4) Move to improve United Nations operations in the Congo by: (a) Stepping up the UN contribution to the overall import program to assure a minimum level of $100,000,000 of imports in the next six months, by inducing other nations to match contributions by the United States;

(b) Improving UN administration by putting in UN budget control at the Provincial level and UN specialists in executive positions within the Provincial Governments.

(5) Support Adoula politically to the maximum extent possible in addition to actions under (4), revealing to him recommendations of the Greene report for the strengthening of the ANC and, in cooperation with the United Nations, assist in carrying out the recommendations of this report.

(6) Prepare a contingency plan involving stronger measures in support of Adoula to be applied in the event we are forced to conclude that Adoula and Tshombe cannot work out their differences by agreement and carry out the Plan.

George C. McGhee

1 Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Congo Security 1962. Secret. Apparently drafted by McGhee, although the source text does not so indicate. He sent a copy to Rusk with an October 23 memorandum stating that it was going forward to the President that day. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–2362)

318. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 318. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, October 25, 1962, 8:34 p.m.

645. Immediately following telegrams contain instructions on launching proposal for ANC training program under aegis UN.2 First step is presentation of program to UN and Bunche.3 Program would also involve GOC contract with civilian air carriers to provide GOC with airlift capability.

This proposal is part of larger program which we feel must be vigorously pursued to strengthen position Adoula and his government so he will have sufficient incentive and freedom of action to deal with Katanga issue with flexibility required to reach agreement with Tshombe on carrying out of Plan. ANC training would supplement program for $50 million fund import grants and credits which, as described circular 693,4 we hope can be underwritten through increased contribution other interested governments. We are also considering other steps and would welcome any Emb suggestions.

Department particularly concerned over current lapse in negotiations for reintegration of Katanga—also over possibility reported by CAS that Adoula government may be overthrown if no progress is made on Katanga by November 5. Dept believes all action possible should be taken bolster GOC before Congo Parliament reconvenes on this date.

Embassy requested recommend means by which these various proposals can best be presented to GOC and made public in order achieve maximum effect.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–2562. Confidential. Drafted by Whitehouse and McGhee; cleared in draft by Fredericks, Acting Deputy Director of the Office of Western European Affairs Galen L. Stone, and by the Office of United Nations Political Affairs; and approved by McGhee. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, Oslo, Ottawa, Paris, Stockholm, Rome, and Tel Aviv.

2 Telegrams 1099, 1100, and 1101 to USUN, all October 25. Telegram 1099 summarized the U.S proposal that the Congolese Government should request the United Nations to institute a program of modernization and training, to be implemented by participating governments with U.N. coordination and supervision. It stated that a "Proposal for Modernization and Training of the ANC" outlining the structure of a desirable modernization and training program, based on the Greene team report, was being sent by pouch. Telegram 1100 set forth U.S. views on various aspects of the proposed program. Telegram 1101 transmitted the text of a proposal on "Implementation of the Proposal for Modernization and Training of ANC." (All ibid., 770G.5/10–2562)

3 Telegram 1008 from Léopoldville, October 26, reported that Gullion had discussed the proposals with Bunche, who thought the plan would be very useful. (Ibid., 770G.5/10–2662)

4 Circular telegram 693, October 19, sent to Brussels for action and repeated to Léopoldville, USUN, Bonn, London, Paris, Elisabethville, Rome, and Tokyo, instructed MacArthur to stress with Spaak the importance of maximizing economic aid in order to strengthen Adoula's position and enable him to continue cooperating with the United Nations. It proposed the creation of a $50-million fund in impact grants and credits to the Congolese Government during the next 6 months, of which the United States was prepared to provide $25 million in tied grant aid, in addition to U.S. food shipments. Belgium would provide $15 million and take the lead in approaching other governments for aid. (Ibid., 870G.10/10–1962)

319. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate in Elisabethville 319. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate in Elisabethville1

Washington, October 27, 1962, 9:23 p.m.

391. From McGhee. Deliver following reply to Tshombe:

"I have received your letter of October 24.2 As we discussed fully during my visit to Elisabethville, the United States Government has no interest in the Congo except those of the Congolese people themselves, including Katanga, and we feel that those can best be served by continuing and steady progress toward the implementation of the SYG's Reconciliation Plan. We support all elements in the Congo who support the Plan. Under present circumstances I can only urge you to pursue this important goal with determination and greatest dispatch and to continue demonstrating your sincerity by tangible action so that the objective we all seek can be obtained through peaceful agreement and without delay.

There is one aspect of your letter to which I must take exception. The references which you make to alleged effects of reasons of internal politics on my Government's approach to the Congo issue are so wide of the mark that I am astonished that you should have been persuaded to give them credence."3

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.70G/10–2762. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Eisenberg and McGhee and approved by Williams and McGhee.

2 A translation was transmitted in a message from Dean received at the Department of State through CIA communications channels on October 26 and sent to the White House with a covering memorandum of October 29 from Hilsman to Bundy. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo) It was also pouched to the Department in an unnumbered telegram of October 25 from Elisabethville. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.70G/10–2562)

3 The references in the message read as follows: "We know how desirous President Kennedy has been to avoid that a military action might again be undertaken against Katanga during the period of the American elections and how much it matters that our position contribute to avoid any precipitous meeting of the Security Council and to avoidance a most difficult political situation. We are pleased that the policy we have followed as a consequence of your visit to Elisabethville may serve the cause of the President of the U.S.A. and consequently that of a great country, guarantor of the liberty of the peoples."

320. Memorandum of Conversation 320. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 31, 1962, 4–4:50 p.m.

SUBJECT

Congo

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Mr. Kaysen

Under Secretary McGhee

Mr. Cleveland

Governor Williams

Mr. Fredericks

Mr.Hamilton, AID2

Mr. Hutchinson, AID

Mr. Sloan, Defense

Col. Greene, Defense

Mr. Godley

The President reviewed Under Secretary McGhee's report of October 22 on his mission to the Congo.3 He also went over the Under Secretary's supplemental memorandum of October 314 which indicated the developments in the Congo since his report. Mr. McGhee indicated that, although he was not satisfied with the progress made, there definitely had been a move in the proper direction. In reply to an inquiry from the President, he indicated that the slowness of progress could be attributed to both the Léopoldville and Katangese authorities. While Prime Minister Adoula was not as forthcoming as might have been hoped, Mr. Tshombe has not taken many of the steps that are called for in the UN Plan. The President inquired as to Prime Minister Adoula's present political situation, and Mr. McGhee pointed out that, with Parliament scheduled to reconvene on November 5, the Department believed it essential to take some steps to bolster the Prime Minister's internal political position at this time. He is currently in a weak political position and is faced with a revolt within his cabinet.

The President indicated that, with the recent developments in Cuba and India and the current political difficulties of Mr. Spaak, which Mr. McGhee has described, there could not be any consideration at this time of military action in the Congo on the part of the United Nations forces. The President said Mr. Adoula should be made aware of this situation.

Mr. McGhee outlined the steps being proposed to bolster Prime Minister Adoula. These included a $25 million contribution to the Congolese import program, a discussion with the Congolese of the "Greene Report" which sets forth certain recommendations and a program for the training and reorganization of the ANC, further PL 480 assistance of $2.7 million and, finally, our assisting the GOC in financing a contract with Panama which would provide an internal airlift capability for the GOC. The President indicated his approval of these steps. Mr. Hamilton said that there were funds available in the Congo program to provide for the Panama Airways contract.

With regard to the implementation of the Greene Report, the President approved its being discussed with the GOC, but indicated the commitment of funds should be subject to the GOC's reaction to this report and the undertaking of some reasonable steps to facilitate the reintegration of Katanga.

In the general discussion Mr. McGhee reported to the President on his conversation with Senator Dodd concerning Mr. Struelens and his hope that the Senator would assist in arranging that Mr. Struelens discontinue his activities in this country.5

The possibility of the President's corresponding with Prime Minister Adoula and with Mr. Tshombe was also considered, and the President indicated a willingness to write both of them in rather strong terms and request that both get on with the UN Plan for National Reconciliation. This thought was, however, discarded after Mr. Kaysen invited the President's attention to Tshombe's most recent communication to the President (Elisabethville's telegram 697 of October 31) which was couched in offensive terms and which cast aspersions as to the loyalty of certain senior American officials.6 The President agreed that this matter should be dropped and that, if the Katangese were to inquire what had happened to the letter, they be informed that the Department would not transmit such a communication to the President.

The President also indicated that he might ask the Under Secretary to return to the Congo. Mr. McGhee said he would be pleased to do so whenever the President wished, but no specific times were indicated, nor under what circumstances such a trip might be desired.7

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–3162. Confidential. Drafted by Godley and approved in M on November 2 and in the White House on November 5. The time of the meeting is taken from Kennedy's appointment book. (Kennedy Library) The meeting is also recorded in a memorandum by Kaysen, November 1. (Ibid., National Security Files, Congo)

2 Fowler Hamilton, AID Administrator.

3 Document 317.

4 Not printed. (Filed with a covering memorandum from Kaysen to the President; Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Congo Security 1962)

5 No record of the conversation has been found. McGhee's October 31 memorandum to Kennedy cited in footnote 3 above states that Dodd had written to Tshombe urging him to carry out the plan and that Dodd was going to urge both Tshombe and Struelens to discontinue the latter's activities in the United States.

6 Tshombe's message to the President declared that Kennedy had "put a stop to the Cuban enterprise of world subversion," which, it charged, had been facilitated by errors by "certain senior American officials" and their "intimate and secret connections with the Communist world." It continued as follows: "There is a risk that the same consequences may be produced in our country if the same policy continues in Africa where in the idea of avoiding Communism, certain high American functionaries, in order to satisfy certain powers, support men like Adoula who are responsive to all Soviet pressures against the best friends of the West." (Telegram 697 from Elisabethville; Department of State, Central Files, 770G.11/10–3162)

7 Kaysen's memorandum, cited in the source note above, reads in part as follows:"The President indicated that Mr. McGhee should be prepared to go back to the Congo as soon as it appeared useful to him. In going back, he had a double task: to make it clear to Adoula that the UN does not have the force to impose the results that Adoula desired on Tshombe, and the time, far from favoring Adoula, was running out quickly; to Tshombe, unless he moved more rapidly in accepting integration, that the ultimate prospect for him was forcible overthrow by a more radical Léopoldville Government, aided by the Bloc."It concluded: "The President repeated his view that it was now Adoula's move and that our first aim must be to get Adoula to move."

321. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 321. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, October 31, 1962, 11:27 p.m.

669. Bomboko called briefly on the Secretary this afternoon2 and outlined Adoula's political problems and bespoke necessity of obtaining transport aircraft.

Departmental officers subsequently obtained White House concurrence to informing Bomboko later this afternoon3 that USG willing offer GOC following as contribution toward strengthening govt and unifying Congo: 1. Over next six months will contribute $25 million toward UN import program and take initiative in strongly urging other interested govts contribute like amount.

2. IMF at our urging sending team to Congo help bring about integration of currency.

3. After coordination with UN we will support plan for training and modernizing ANC with UN and other nations who can contribute.

4. As quickly as it can be assimilated in modernization process we will furnish substantial items military equipment needed by ANC.

5. We will offer GOC today agreement involving another $2.7 million PL 480 assistance.

6. We will supply ocean transport for 1,800 Indonesians replacing other UN forces leaving Congo.

7. We will provide funds to carry out contract with Panama Airways providing for immediate delivery of number of transport aircraft in addition to those now in Congo for use by GOC and ANC.

McGhee continued: 1. USG strongly supports GOC in its efforts unify Congo. It supports, as best means achieving this objective, UN reconciliation plan and backs GOC in its efforts carry out plan. It has made known to Tshombe its determination see plan carried out.

2. Carrying out plan not automatic process and USG looks to GOC make every possible effort directly with Katangese obtain agreement on steps necessary implement plan. These are matters which can best be decided by the parties themselves.

3. Hope GOC will take into account certain recent events. India, which supplies approximately one-third UNOC forces, in midst life and death struggle. Cuban crisis reflects general heightening of tension which increases necessity of avoiding open hostilities Congo. Spaak's current political weakness makes it more difficult for him back strong measures.

In light foregoing we must look to GOC assume more of responsibility with our support, for successful execution plan.

McGhee followed with certain specific items on which we would like Bomboko's assurance that GOC will: 1. take initiative working out plan directly with Katangese. Little evidence that they have taken such initiative last three days.

2. faithfully observe cease-fire and stand-fast appeal of UNSYG.

3. immediately endeavor work out with Katangese means putting tripartite observation teams into field in North Katanga and elsewhere to assure cessation hostilities.

4. issue forthwith amnesty in suitable form in consultation with UN.

5. thereafter facilitate by every means execution oath.

6. through representatives on military commission come to grips with and develop realistic plan for carrying out integration.

7. in foreign exchange and currency commissions adopt realistic and flexible attitude toward problems posed by Katangese.

8. facilitate by every means possible cooperative arrangements with Katangese outside plan re telecommunications, opening Elisabethville airport, shipments both ways over Lubilash bridge, customs and immigration facilities and passport issuance.

9. in public statement make every effort give feeling of confidence re execution plan and ultimate peaceful integration of Katanga.

10. cooperate fully with other free world nations executing broad program of modernization and training ANC.

11. GOC will facilitate in Parliament consideration new constitution.

In lengthy rejoinder4 Bomboko analyzed each point in plan where GOC called upon to act and maintained GOC has carried out its obligations under plan and stressed Tshombe lack of good faith. Expressed appreciation action taken by USG, but stated that only by supplying three or so combat aircraft could USG give GOC capability exert pressure on Tshombe. Emphasized that only military pressure would inspire truly conciliatory action by Tshombe. McGhee replied that only UN fighter aircraft could furnish pressure. Bomboko said UN would not attack Katangese and that UN aircraft had not stopped Katangese aircraft bombing ANC North Katanga. Bomboko, returning New York this evening, stated he preparing for CAC meeting Nov. 2.

Leopoldville should inform Adoula soonest of McGhee's presentation5 (this also pursuant Bomboko's request). London, Brussels and Paris inform FonOffs.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–3162. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Godley, cleared in substance by Buffum and Burdett, and approved by Williams. Repeated to Paris, London, Brussels, USUN, and Elisabethville.

2 No record of the conversation has been found.

3 McGhee met with Bomboko after the meeting recorded in Document 320. A memorandum of the conversation by Carlucci is in Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/10–3162.

4 Bomboko's comments are set forth in more detail in telegram 673 to Léopoldville, November 1. (Ibid., 770G.00/11–162)

5 Gullion reported in telegram 1040, November 2, that he had informed Adoula the previous evening of the measures the United States proposed to take and that Adoula's reaction was so positive that Gullion read to him all the points McGhee had made to Bomboko. Adoula's reaction to these points was also generally favorable. (Ibid., 770G.00/11–262)

322. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to Secretary of State Rusk 322. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, November 1, 1962.

Yesterday the President reviewed the Congo situation with Under Secretary McGhee, Governor Williams, AID Director Hamilton and others. In the course of the review the President concluded that it will be useful for Mr. McGhee to return to the Congo shortly. This conclusion, in turn reflected the President's judgment that we are near or at a decisive point in the Congo situation. If the Congolese leaders, and especially those in Léopoldville, do not show more movement and flexibility in dealing with the re-integration of Katanga, our further interference and support appears useless.

After the meeting, the President indicated that he would like an early review with you and those others you think appropriate of possible alternative courses of action, including, if necessary, paths of withdrawal from the Congo.

He would like this review before Mr. McGhee sets off. The timing depends on your convenience. Could you let me know when it appears possible for you to be brought up to date on the Congo situation, and have a meeting with the President on it.2

C.K.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–162. Secret.

2 Swank sent this memorandum to McGhee with a covering note stating that he thought the timing of any meetings on the Congo would depend on McGhee's readiness to present a course of action for discussion. (Ibid.) McGhee responded in a November 1 memorandum stating that he did not believe the President intended that he return to the Congo at any particular time but was leaving the timing to McGhee, who did not think the time for him to return had arrived. He offered to brief Rusk before the latter discussed the Congo with the President. (Ibid.)

323. Memorandum of Conversation 323. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, November 5, 1962, 4 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary, Mr. Ball,

Mr. McGhee, Mr. Williams,

Mr. Cleveland, Mr. Burdett, Mr. Godley,

Mr. Fredericks, Mr. Ford, Mr. Beaudry,

Mr. Rutter, Mr. Hughes2

SUBJECT

Congo

Mr. McGhee reviewed quickly his October 31 talk with Bomboko (Deptel 669 to Leo).3 He then went on to say that he proposed as the first next step a presidential letter to Adoula and another from him to Tshombe again urging implementation of the Plan but containing no threat of sanctions. We should thus make another attempt to bring about the Plan by voluntary action; if unsuccessful, we should impose a solution. After reviewing the letters4 the Secretary said that he did not understand how we could proceed to ratify the constitution in the GOC Parliament until there had been agreement between the parties. He did not think the presence of Katangan deputies in the Parliament, as Mr. McGhee suggested, would serve this purpose. Mr. Ball and Mr. Burdett pointed out Belgian objections to the draft constitution. Accordingly, Mr. McGhee undertook to change the wording in the letter.5

Mr. McGhee went on to say that Tshombe would not lose by making 50% payments of his foreign exchange to the Monetary Fund because the account can be balanced in terms of Katangan requirements over a period of months. Mr. Ball interjected that it was unrealistic to ask Tshombe to give up 35% as the letter indicated, but Mr. Fredericks pointed out the importance of establishing the principle of payments to the Monetary Fund.

Re the paper on the Congo Contingency Plan, which Mr. McGhee distributed at the meeting,6 Mr. Ball suggested we should mobilize the Africans to urge Tshombe to move. Mr. McGhee agreed we might try this tactic, but emphasized his belief that if the Plan failed there was no difference who caused the failure; we would have no alternative except sanctions against Tshombe. The Secretary said that it makes some difference to us if we are called upon to take such measures. Why not throw more responsibility on the Monrovia powers? Mr. McGhee replied perhaps, but they are not at the "cutting edge" of the issue as are the Belgians. Mr. Burdett commented that the Belgians would not agree to sanctions unless it were shown that Tshombe was clearly at fault.

The Secretary asked, "What's at the end of the trail?" Mr. Ball and Mr. Cleveland said—"fighting".

Following Governor Williams' justification for Adoula's stance, the Secretary asked if he has done "anything". Mr. McGhee stated that discussion of the relative blame of the parties was unprofitable. On the other hand, said the Secretary, the Plan is a reconciliation plan, and Mr. Cleveland added "and they are not reconciling". The Secretary pointed out that the two principals have not been brought into the Plan. Governor Williams interjected that it was not Adoula's fault if the UN produced an inoperable plan.

Mr. Cleveland stated that he had much difficulty with the contingency plan which would involve action only against Tshombe. Are we really prepared to impose settlement by a third party in the form of the UN? In his opinion, this was possible physically, but not politically. Mr. McGhee pointed out that the contingency plan does not call for the use of force.

Mr. Ball commented that the "marriage contract" (Reconciliation Plan) was "not very sensible". The draft constitution was not "more propitious" than the Loi Fondamentale. Mr. Fredericks interjected that it was the UN experts who believed a detailed constitution was necessary. Mr. Bell said it was clear to him that the constitution had been drawn up by civil lawyers. At any rate, said Mr. Cleveland, the constitution was not a viable formula; it was not the kind of document, containing provisions for reserved powers, which Adoula had endorsed some time ago.

Mr. Cleveland expressed the view that there had been retrogression recently on both the constitutional and political aspects of the Reconciliation Plan. Adoula manifestly lacks confidence. By saying that only he will do as Prime Minister, isn't there a possibility that we are tying ourselves to a regime which will in time become Communist because of radical pressures? Mr. Godley stated that Adoula has never been given an opportunity to change the constitution. There was no reply to the Secretary's question whether anyone thought we can ask Tshombe to accept the present draft constitution.

Governor Williams advocated two U.S. courses: (1) Don't keep on trying to arrange a happy marriage, but get on with a tolerable reintegration.

(2) Tshombe will come around when he is sure the U.S. means business (i.e. that we are ready to use force).

Mr. Cleveland concurred but pointed out this had been the situation for over a year. To create a credible deterrent, we would have to start with a large build-up of UNOC. The Secretary asked Governor Williams what he would do if we decided against the use of force in the Congo in favor of a substantial reduction in UN expenditures there. Governor Williams replied, "I would return to Michigan".

The Secretary asked why we should not let the "locals" settle the dispute as we had done in the cases of Algeria and West Irian. The Monrovia powers, perhaps together with Ethiopia and the Sudan could do this. Mr. Godley pointed out that these countries were not in a position to use force because they had no air lift; furthermore they had no influence with Tshombe because they all despised him. Governor Williams added that in reality we are serving long-time Belgian interests by trying for a solution because this would preserve their investments. Mr. Ball raised the possibility of sealing off the Congo from Soviet air support. Then a solution would be reached which he admitted might be on the basis of a de facto partition. Our efforts to impose a solution can only result in chronic instability.

The Secretary asked why there had been no effective training of the ANC. Governor Williams and Mr. McGhee replied that the UN does not recognize this as its mission.

The Secretary concluded that the immediate steps proposed (the letters and further efforts to proceed with the Plan) were approved, but he emphasized that he wished nothing done which appeared to mean that we were clearing the decks for armed action.

Governor Williams said that he interpreted the President's view as meaning that we should disengage in Africa unless we can follow through. It was important to get Struelens out of New York. Mr. Godley felt that the best solution was to face Tshombe with the threat of force. The Secretary stated that at the moment he does not see an issue on which he would feel justified in taking measures which would risk the life of an American.

Mr. Cleveland said that Adoula was operating on the assumption that we would pull his chestnuts out of the fire. Williams and Mr. Fredericks disagreed; they thought Adoula had performed decently—it was the UN which was in "arrears". The Secretary argued that Adoula would be nowhere without US assistance. Mr. Fredericks expounded on Adoula's enormous progress since he assumed office.

The Secretary approved the letters to Adoula and Tshombe. He also requested that the Belgians be brought into this problem and that Tshombe should be brought into the constitutional discussions. On the latter point he did not think Gullion can deal with Tshombe without undermining his position with Adoula. Perhaps Dean Griswold of Harvard7 might be a good constitutional mediator. Mr. Godley suggested Stavropoulos, the Secretary-General's legal adviser. Mr. Ball said we needed an Ellsworth Bunker for this situation. Mr. Godley explained the stubborness of the Congolese leaders which made them unamenable to normal negotiating procedures. The Secretary took the position that if they were going to be obstinate, "We are not with them".

Mr. Fredericks wished to point out the weakness of the UN staff in Elisabethville, especially Mathu for whom a replacement was needed. The Secretary stated that the contingency paper was satisfactory as a basis for discussion at the White House on November 7. There should be further exploration of enlisting the aid of the Monrovia powers in the Congo and negotiations on the constitution should be pressed. Mr. McGhee asked Mr. Cleveland's assistance in recruiting constitutional advisers to assist Gardiner. Mr. Ball desired an approach to Professor Clements on the constitutional issue. Governor Williams demurred on the grounds that Clements was a "totally unreasonable man".

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–562. Confidential. Drafted by Officer in Charge of U.N. Political Affairs Peter Rutter. The meeting was held in the Secretary's office.

2 Thomas L. Hughes, Deputy Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research.

3  Document 321.

4 The drafts are not attached to the source text; the messages were subsequently revised. The message from Kennedy to Adoula, transmitted in telegram 699 to Léopoldville, November 7, urged "even greater initiative" by the Congolese Government in working out the implementation of the U.N. plan. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–762) The message from McGhee to Tshombe, transmitted in telegram 414 to Elisabethville, November 6, urged Tshombe to take a number of steps, including releasing non-military U.N. supplies, instituting provisional payments of foreign exchange and revenues on a regular monthly basis, oathtaking by Katangan military leaders, and closing the Katangan Foreign Ministry and its overseas offices. (Ibid., 770G.00/11–662)

5 The message to Adoula reads in part:"The progress you have made on the constitution is encouraging and I am sure you appreciate the need now to facilitate its orderly consideration by representatives of all the provinces so a final solution can be arrived at which will provide a widely accepted basis for national unity. It is important, not only for a lasting solution in the Congo but for the posture of the government of the Congo in the eyes of the world, that adequate opportunity be granted to Katanga officials to participate in this process."

6 Not attached to the source text. McGhee subsequently revised the "Proposed Contingency Plan for the Congo;" it was sent to Bundy on November 6 with a covering memorandum from Brubeck. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Series, Congo)

7 Erwin N. Griswold, Dean of the Harvard Law School.

324. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy 324. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy1

Washington, November 7, 1962.

Mr. President: 1. The attached paper from the Department of State2 gives their estimate of the Congo situation and proposals for a U.S. course of action.3 It has been reviewed by the Secretary; he has approved its transmission to you, but it does not necessarily represent his own final view of what should be done.

2. In brief, the paper argues that the present stationary situation will soon dissolve in a way highly unfavorable to the U.S. unless we take positive action now. If we fail to take action, the results will at best be a serious loss of U.S. and Western position throughout Africa and in the UN, the replacement of Adoula by a radical, irresponsible and probably Soviet-influenced government in Léopoldville, and at least sporadic fighting in Katanga and other parts of the Congo. At worst, there might be a full-scale war in which the other African states will join in with the Central Congo Government, while the Central Africa Federation, South Africa and the Portuguese will join in support of the Katanga: something like White –Black war in Africa. The recommended course of action contains three elements: (a) Strengthening Adoula along the lines previously discussed. (b) Strengthening the UN in the Congo, especially increasing its military capacity by additional transport and combat aircraft and perhaps by additional troops. (c) Putting pressure on Tshombe by diplomatic means, but holding in reserve and making known to Tshombe a definite decision to impose economic sanctions after a firm deadline of one month. State estimates that this course of action would succeed, although it might conceivably involve some fighting between UN troops and Katanga gendarmerie.

3. As I see it, there are two major problems in the paper. First, what confidence can we have in State's assessment of the urgency of the situation? The view expressed in the paper is very strongly held by Governor Williams and the whole Bureau, as well as by Ed Gullion in Léopoldville. If it is not correct, it is obvious that we have more time to continue the more cautious policy represented by McGhee's efforts to promote some conciliatory steps by both Tshombe and Adoula. Second, the means of enforcing sanctions lie mainly in Belgian, and, to some extent, in British hands. So far we have no indication that the Belgians will in fact agree to commit themselves now to imposing sanctions on a specified deadline. At a minimum, we must get them to share our view of the urgency of the situation, before they are at all likely to consider this step. So far, they do not seem to share this view.

As I indicated to you this morning, Governor Williams and all his staff feel very strongly that decision to go ahead along the lines proposed is absolutely necessary to the maintenance of an effective U.S. and Western presence in Africa. I think Williams would like to go a little further than the plan in the paper, by moving to expel Struelens now, and by a high-level U.S. statement indicating that we were determined to move ahead on a settlement of the Katanga issue within a specified time.

4. Yesterday at the Congo Advisory Committee meeting, U Thant expressed his view that time was running out in the Congo. He gave November 15 as a deadline for satisfactory replies to the Gardiner letters to Adoula and Tshombe.4 These had urged them to get on with their respective moves under the UN plan. If no satisfactory replies were received, U Thant said he would consider the reconciliation plan scrapped and adopt an as yet unspecified alternative policy. The Indian representative of the Advisory Committee said that they had no intention of withdrawing their troops from the Congo.

C.K.5

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Series, Congo. Confidential.

2 The attachment is a copy of the "Proposed Contingency Plan for the Congo;" see footnote 5, Document 323.

3 A November 5 memorandum from Kennedy to Rusk, signed but never sent, reads as follows:"I wish you and George Ball would take a long look as to where we are in the Congo."If the UN effort is going to collapse we should work out some alternatives. We should at least be laying our ground work."A handwritten note on a copy of the memorandum states that it was not sent because a meeting had already been arranged for the following day; see Document 325. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Country Series, Congo)

4 Gardiner wrote to both Adoula and Tshombe on November 1 urging them to take the steps necessary for the implementation of the U.N. Plan. (U.N. doc. S/5053/Add.13, Annex XVII; also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 896–897)

5 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

325. Memorandum for the Record 325. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, November 8, 1962.

SUBJECT

Meeting with the President on The Congo, Wednesday, November 7, 1962, at 4:00 P.M., Cabinet Room2

PRESENT

Secretary of State Rusk, Under Secretary Ball, Under Secretary McGhee, Mr. G. Mennen Williams, Mr. Harlan Cleveland, Mr. Wayne Fredericks

The Secretary of State gave the President the proposed contingency plan for the Congo (attached).3 He opened the meeting by asking Mr. Williams to review recent military moves. Mr. Williams said that Kongolo had been besieged for several days and had now probably surrendered to the ANC. This was the climax of activity which went back for a long period in the past. In response to the President's question, Mr. Williams said he thought it meant that Adoula was now a little stronger. The reaction of Tshombe might be twofold. He certainly would be angry, but it might have the effect also of forcing him to recognize Adoula's strength. Mr. Cleveland then reported on his conversation with Bunche at the UN in New York this morning.4 Bunche's assessment of the situation was more sanguine than that presented in the Department memorandum. Bunche emphasized Adoula's increased strength in the Congo at large. By contrast, Tshombe had really not gained strength in Katanga. He also stood well with his Parliament in Bunche's judgment. In his view, the major block to forward movement in the UN re-integration plan was now the amnesty, rather than the constitution. In response to the President's question, Mr. Cleveland and Mr. Williams indicated that the problem was how to hold the amnesty in such a way as to cover Tshombe's concerns, but not result in the release of Gizenga and Gbenye. Mr. McGhee indicated that the UN felt it was inappropriate to limit the amnesty to Kantanga. There was some discussion of the possibilities of staging, in time and geographically, and perhaps using Senator Dodd to approach Tshombe. Mr. Cleveland went on to talk about U Thant's letters to Adoula and Tshombe, which did not contain a fixed deadline. It was Bunche's present thought that after November 15 the noose on Tshombe would be tightened gradually, starting with what Adoula himself could do; then, such UN actions as the closing of the railway in Elisabethville which did not depend on the consent of Belgium and the United Kingdom. At the same time, the UN would get the consent of the U.S., Belgium and the United Kingdom for the further sanctions envisioned. Bunche promised to consult the U.S. fully throughout this process. Further, Bunche thinks all this could be done without a great risk that force would be involved. He mentioned that the UN is now negotiating with Tshombe on the stationing of observers in Kolwezi, Jadotville, Kipushi. In addition to the observers, the UN might also station detachments of guard troops with them. The UN has asked the Greeks and Filipinos for fighters; the Paks have already turned them down. The Secretary indicated that he thought the Italians were a better source. Mr. Cleveland raised the desirability of countries with F–86's, and it was agreed that efforts should be concentrated on the Greeks and Italians. Mr. Cleveland then talked about providing aircraft for the UN which could move its troops and vehicles. In response to the President's question, he indicated that the problem was to maintain a position of self-defense and make its military power appear more effective. In Cleveland's view the UN's ideas were realistic, and the fears raised by Bunche's visit to Léopoldville5 were unfounded. In response to the President's question as to how far all of them went in putting meaningful pressure on Tshombe, Mr. McGhee and Mr. Cleveland talked about loss of control of North Katanga, what the fall of Kongolo meant, and the further steps proposed in the plan.

The President asked whether his impression of last week that Tshombe had made some ostensible steps toward cooperation while Adoula had been holding back wasn't correct. Mr. McGhee indicated that he was correct, and it was clear that Adoula's holding back was deliberate and related to the attack on Kongolo. The President repeated the necessity for putting pressure on Adoula, as well as on Tshombe. He asked whether we hadn't indicated to Tshombe and Adoula that the assistance we promised last week was in fact given with the expectation that they would move.

The Secretary observed that the attack was not necessarily all bad. It might be a useful reminder to Tshombe as to what would happen if he were not cooperative. It could also form the basis for an appeal to both sides.

The President asked what we would do after the points for action by Adoula stated on page 5 were taken up. The Secretary responded that in the next two weeks we would push to strengthen the UN as prescribed, and we had to consult with the Belgians and get them to agree on the measures proposed.

The President again repeated that he did not think that the measures of strengthening the UN would in themselves exert sufficient pressure on Tshombe to cause him to move further. He urged that we make it clear to Adoula that our assistance to him and to the UN was conditional on his action.

The President asked when we should talk to the Belgians. Mr. Cleveland responded that we must now decide what to do at the end of next week, and he thinks that we should consult with the Belgians now. In response to the President's question, the Secretary and Mr. Cleveland agreed that we must make it clear to the Belgians and to Adoula that our joint effort to squeeze Tshombe would be conditional on Adoula's movement along the lines indicated. Mr. Williams emphasized the need to show Tshombe the firmness of our intention. He said that the effect on Adoula of an increase in his and UN strength should be highly beneficial. This in turn would do much to make clear to Tshombe what our intentions were. The President was dubious of this. He referred to the problem of the Indian contingent and to the UN problems, and concluded that we cannot depend on UN troops to apply the kind of force or threat of force to Tshombe that would lead them to make a major step. The Secretary thought the UN could hold its own at least. Mr. McGhee thought that they could do better and might be able to get to Jadotville and Kolwezi. The Secretary stated the problem is how we build up pressures without involving the ultimate military threat that we are not prepared to support a UN war. Mr. McGhee thought we should move now on both tracks; in the Congo, of pressing Adoula again; and Tshombe, with the Belgians on sanctions. Mr. McGhee raised the question of the constitution issue and the use of Gardiner as an emissary between Adoula and Tshombe. Mr. Cleveland indicated that Bunche opposed this. The Secretary expressed his view that they had to surmount the UN's objections in one way or another, and that discussion between Tshombe and Adoula on the constitution was necessary and inevitable. Gardiner was the natural channel for doing it, and we should see that it got done either that way or another way.

The question of Senator Keating's trip arose. Keating has already left the country, and the Secretary undertook to call him and write him a letter.6 It was agreed that Mr. McGhee and Mr. Williams would look into the question of other trips, and that perhaps Humphrey could be induced to go with Senator Dodd.

The President summed up by saying that the issue was the relative staying power of Adoula and Tshombe, and their relative virtue. We must strengthen Adoula at the same time that we make it clear to him that movement on his part was a necessary condition of a successful re-integration program.

Mr. Cleveland raised the question of Struelens. He and Mr. Williams indicated what the symbolism will be of a move against Struelens to both the Belgians and the Africans. The President asked Mr. Kaysen to review the problem of taking action against Struelens.7

The President then approved going ahead with the program. In so doing, he emphasized that we must make it clear the inter-connection between our negotiations with the Belgians on sanctions and our pressure on Adoula before moving. He also emphasized the importance of doing something on the constitution problem. He requested Mr. McGhee to go to Brussels for discussions with Spaak as soon as feasible. Mr. Williams indicated that he was ready to go to talk to Adoula whenever this was required.8

Carl Kaysen9

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Series, Congo. Secret. Drafted by Kaysen.

2 Another memorandum of the conversation by Fredericks, together with some additions by Kaysen, is in Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–762.

3 Not attached to the source text. See footnote 5, Document 323, and Document 324.

4 The conversation is recorded in telegram 1672 from USUN, November 7. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–762)

5 Bunche visited the Congo in late October.

6 Senator Kenneth Keating of New York was planning to visit both Léopoldville and Elisabethville after attending a meeting in Lagos, Nigeria. Rusk telephoned him in Lagos on November 9 and urged him to see Gullion for a briefing as soon as he arrived in Léopoldville. Documentation concerning Keating's visit to the Congo is in Department of State, Central File 033.1100–KE.

7 A November 14 memorandum from Department of State Legal Adviser Abram Chayes on the possible deportation of Struelens was sent to Bundy under cover of a November 16 memorandum from Brubeck. (Ibid., 711.0155/11 –1662)

8 A November 7 memorandum from Kaysen to Brubeck summarized the decisions at the meeting. It stated that the President approved the plan of action in the "Proposed Contingency Plan for the Congo" and directed that McGhee go to Brussels as soon as possible to discuss the question of sanctions, requested that Rusk and McGhee brief all Senators going to the Congo on U.S. policy and try to see that those who went were a well-balanced group, and directed an examination of the problem of moving to expel Struelens. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Series, Congo)

9 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

326. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 326. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, November 9, 1962, 9 p.m.

1724. Congo. Reference: Deptel 1237.2 McGhee, Yost and Fredericks had forty-five minute conversation with SYG and Bunche on Congo today.

McGhee opened conversation by asking SYG what he had in mind after November 15 date he set at CAC meeting for receipt replies Gardiner's letters. When SYG parried question by asking McGhee about his trip to Congo, Bunche stated date had no significance other than deadline for replies. If replies unsatisfactory UN would discuss with US, UK and Belgium "abandonment of plan and adoption of new courses of action." SYG then said Tshombe's reply would no doubt be affirmative. Tshombe has been saying all along he will comply with plan. SYG had presented plan, knowing he had US approval and to a degree that of UK and even France.

However, Tshombe's acceptance had been in principle only. Seven weeks had gone by since without any results. SYG had from beginning made plan non-negotiable. Also had thought he had US and, to degree, UK support on this. He had not thought through what should be done next if replies to letters not satisfactory. Said he had obtained agreement from Indians not withdraw their troops for time being. They had also agreed defer decision on withdrawal of aircraft for four weeks. Filipinos had responded to request for F–86s with question concerning reimbursement, so were apparently giving consideration to request.

When McGhee remarked that means of implementing reconciliation plan not yet exhausted, Bunche reviewed his assessment of progress, stressing fact that Adoula had placed Constitution before Parliament. He added that Gardiner had taken copy of draft Constitution to Elisabethville with him "for possible use" with Tshombe.

When McGhee stressed necessity Constitution meeting minimum demands of Tshombe, Bunche replied that Tshombe would never be satisfied except with Tananarive type confederal arrangement. Stressed that Stavropoulos (UN legal adviser) and Embassy Leo thought draft met requirements of plan, which was essential thing. McGhee then explained Department's position as outlined in reftel. He proposed acceleration of pressure combined with continued effort implement plan.

SYG then said that Tshombe had been stalling, spending large sums of money in Léopoldville in effort bring down Adoula. He asked what would happen if Adoula lost vote of confidence and Tshombe became PM. Said latter would not last six months. Tshombe was running against winds of change in Africa. Something would have to be done very soon.

McGhee assured SYG US fully supported plan and shared SYG's sense of urgency. There were certain things US could do, he said. For example it could provide UN with airlift in Congo. Bunche said this badly needed and would be glad provide details. Said "we are not in or out of plan." Added that Tshombe was already feeling pressure. General Prem Chand had recently visited Kolwezi with Tshombe and had discussed matter of/stationing UN forces there. However, even if UN forces could be put in Kolwezi and Jadotville, they would need bridging equipment in order keep road open and avoid situation similar to that when Irish troops isolated.

McGhee said we wanted to help; that we had in mind economic measures. He was going to Brussels where he would see Spaak on November 13 in order to see what Spaak would be able to do to help. However, it was important for Spaak that Adoula make right kind of progress on Constitution. He hoped conversations with Spaak would produce means by which US and Belgium could help UN put further pressure on Tshombe, but at the same time reconciliation efforts should be continued. One thing he hoped work out with Spaak was how to arrange for UMHK make payments direct to GOC. Adoula, however, must do his part, make concessions where necessary. SYG again said he believed Tshombe was stalling. In fact Adoula and everyone else thought this. Seven weeks had gone by. If Tshombe reply to letter should be unsatisfactory he promised consult with us on "new ideas I have." Problem was urgent; February was his time limit. Said he hoped talk with McGhee after his return from Belgium.

McGhee agreed to do this. Said however US would be unable to support unprovoked military action by UN. Moreover this was not only his position but that of President Kennedy. Both SYG and Bunche immediately disclaimed any intention of taking such action. McGhee said we had heard rumors from Congo, nevertheless, that such action might be contemplated. Bunche said that Struelens was behind such rumors. UN had thought that after bond issue was settled US would put Struelens out of business. McGhee replied that we certainly wanted do this and would do so as soon as such action were possible without doing more harm than good.

Meeting ended with agreement that SYG and McGhee would consult again as soon as latter returned from Brussels.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–962. Confidential. Repeated to Léopoldville, Elisabethville, Brussels, and London.

2 Telegram 1237 to USUN, November 8, stated that, despite Bunche's reluctance to have U.N. involvement in a mediatory effort between Adoula and Tshombe, especially with regard to the constitution, the Department continued to believe that such an effort should be undertaken as soon as possible. (Ibid., 770G.00/11–862)

327. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (McGhee) to the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) 327. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (McGhee) to the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen)1

Washington, November 10, 1962.

SUBJECT

Rumors of a United Nations Plan to Use Force in the Congo

Following is a report on rumors circulating to the effect the United Nations intends to resort to force to achieve a solution to the Congo problem, and a summary of discussions of this question with United Nations officials.

Rumors of possible use of force by the United Nations appear to have emanated from several sources: impressions of people talking to Bunche after his recent Congo trip as to what he had in mind; misleading press reports concerning U Thant's remarks at the November 6 meeting of the Congo Advisory Committee; erroneous speculation on reasons for the UN efforts to obtain fighter aircraft, transport planes and troops to make up for the withdrawal of the Ethiopian F–86's and the impending withdrawal of Malayan and Tunisian units; and inferences drawn by Elisabethville sources from bits and pieces of circumstantial evidence.

Our concern that these rumors might have some basis led to our instructing our Mission in New York to make clear to the United Nations our opposition to resort to the use of force.2 Ambassador Yost expressed this view to Mr. Bunche on November 2.3 The latter expressed surprise that we should have any concern in this respect and denied that the United Nations was contemplating any plans involving the application of force. Moreover, as Mr. Harlan Cleveland explained to the President at the November 7 meeting on the Congo. Mr. Bunche's explanation to him of the Secretary-General's thinking about future steps did not involve aggressive measures. Bunche also promised to consult with us on any measures the United Nations planned to take in the Congo. In meeting with the Secretary-General and Dr. Bunche on November 9, after making it clear that we accepted their assurances that it was not their intention to use force but referring to the many current rumors to this effect both in New York and the Congo, I advised them that the United States would not support an unprovoked aggressive action by the UN. Both U Thant and Bunche reiterated that they had no such intention and that they would advise us before taking any stronger action, whether or not involving the use of force.

Our conclusion is that these rumors reflect a determination on the part of the Secretary-General and Bunche to bring to a head the issue of Katangan reintegration as soon as possible, at least before the end of the year. To this end they undoubtedly wish to put pressure on all concerned in Léopoldville, Elisabethville, Washington, London and Brussels to face up to the difficult steps that must be taken. In this regard they very possibly have drawn lessons from our present confrontation with the USSR as to the advantage of commingling power and diplomacy. It is, therefore, possible that the Secretary-General is prepared to act in such a way as to force us and the other principal parties interested in the Plan to support him in the application of stronger non-military measures, which he quite honestly feels will not lead to large-scale hostilities. We do not believe, however, that he will rely on the use of force as a primary instrument for this purpose, since he can effectively apply the resources available to him only with United Nations consent.

George C. McGhee

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Files, Congo. Secret. The source text does not indicate the drafter, but a copy indicates that it was drafted by Rutter and revised by McGhee. (Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/11–962)

2 Telegrams 1168, 1169, and 1170 to USUN, all November 2, contained instructions to this effect. (Ibid., 770G.00/10–3162 and 770G.00/11–262)

3 The conversation was reported in telegram 1620 from USUN, November 2. (Ibid.)

328. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State 328. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State1

London, November 14, 1962, 11 a.m.

1853. For Secretary and Under Secretary from McGhee. Held discussions yesterday Brussels with top reps Belgian companies in Congo and later at dinner and into evening with Spaak and other members GOB FonOff. Spaak accepted proposal embodied in talking paper which you approved and undertook to convince companies today. Although I attempted condition companies for ultimate acceptance I did not, as indicated in talking paper for them which you also saw,2 put to them specific proposal which felt should come from GOB. Chances for immediate and unqualified acceptance by companies not considered too good.

Will hold general discussion Congo here today with Lord Home and later with other members FonOff, but will not go into all of specifics of proposal to Spaak. Plan return to Brussels in the morning for final meeting with Spaak at which time will learn response he obtained from companies. Also hope to finalize joint plan of action which Fredericks working on with FonOff today. Since any further efforts my part in Congo should, I believe, await not only final decision of companies which may not be available tomorrow but further consultations with U Thant and Bunche and some prior notification Adoula, do not consider it advisable to proceed Congo directly.3 Unless you advise to contrary I plan, therefore, return Washington late tomorrow.

Bruce

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 855.05170G/11–1462. Confidential; Niact; Limit Distribution.

2 The talking papers have not been found.

3 A November 8 memorandum from Kennedy to Rusk reads as follows:"After George McGhee goes to Brussels, should he not continue on to Léopoldville and Elisabethville? "If so, should he be accompanied by Governor Williams to Léopoldville?" (Ibid.)

329. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State 329. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State1

London, November 15, 1962, 2 p.m.

1869. Under Secretary McGhee met yesterday with Lord Home and subsequently with Foreign Office group headed by Sir Roger Stevens.2 Presentation was general one, along lines described Embassy telegram 1853,3 with concentration upon (1) role of Belgian companies (2) need to get both sides in negotiation re Constitution and (3) U.S. desire see negotiations under Plan continue and resort to force avoided.

Home expressed agreement with U.S. immediate objectives as described by McGhee (as did Roger Stevens). With regard to point (2) above, Home emphasized importance HMG attaches to settlement constitutional question. He further expressed view that a political figure of some stature might be more successful in bringing Adoula and Tshombe together on this issue than either Gardiner or a straight constitutional adviser. During this phase of discussion three names were mentioned by Home: Abubakar4 and Wachuku of Nigeria and Senghor of Senegal. Thought was expressed Senghor probably best man for mission although his present political difficulties would most likely rule him out and some question of his acceptability to both sides. Wachuku's effectiveness usually diluted by emotional verbosity. Home concluded that Abubakar probably best all around candidate. Home indicated HMG would sound out U Thant re approach Abubakar or someone like him. McGhee agreed similarly approach SYG.

Bruce

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–1562. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Received at 12:03 p.m. and repeated to Brussels and USUN.

2 Memoranda of the conversations (one of which is erroneously dated October 14) are filed as enclosures to a November 20 letter from First Secretary of Embassy Joseph J. Wagner to McGhee. (Ibid., 770G.00/11–2062)

3 Document 328.

4 Reference is to Nigerian Prime Minister Balewa.

330. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 330. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, November 15, 1962, 7 p.m.

775. Deptels 414, 430; Contel 758; Léopoldville telegram 534.2 Delivered McGhee message to Tshombe 1730 tonight. Following Léopoldville's telegram 534, changed unnumbered paragraph 5 to drop reference to stand-fast and to read "You indicated to me that you would release non-military UN supplies blocked by your military. I hope the necessary instruction can be given to your people as soon as possible in this matter".

Tshombe was more subdued than I have yet seen him. Stated he depressed, pessimistic about future, asked my opinion on press story from New York concerning possibility sanctions. Complained, without rhetoric, that this time he had done things to implement plan and Adoula was blocking it. What did people expect Katanga to do? I replied that although in recent weeks his actions appeared more cooperative than Adoula, in my opinion he guilty of serious tactical error of waiting too long; world events appeared about to overtake him. Stated as indicated by McGhee letter, US still had some hope plan might be implemented, urged him give immediate attention to steps suggested in letter, take concrete action in next few days, strip away smaller issues, reduce question plan fulfillment to one or two final, fundamental issues such as division of powers in constitution. Tshombe said he would give most serious consideration to letter. Stated he would call US, UK, Belgian Consuls together tomorrow or next day to ask for their help and advice since he at end his resources.

On strength USUN 1788 to Department,3 asked Tshombe whether UN had requested freedom of movement to Jadotville and Kipushi and what his reaction. He replied Mathu had not raised this subject with him November 13 but Gardiner had sent him letter on subject yesterday. He stated his intention was to reply that willing to discuss freedom of movement all of Katanga immediately when tripartite teams activated in north. Stated he could not give UN freedom of movement in Jadotville-Kolwezi while fighting going on in north; Katangan population would be totally incapable understanding such action.

We believe Tshombe much softened by recent pressures, can be pressed for considerable advances toward plan implementation. Points 1–3 of UN requirements of Tshombe (USUN 1788) parallel McGhee letter and Tshombe could give some satisfaction on them forthwith.

Points 4 and 5 of UN program on free movement for all UN forces in all of Katanga including Jadotville and Kolwezi and removal mercenaries from gendarmerie are if seriously meant equivalent in current situation to demand for full and complete capitulation from Tshombe. Inclusion these points may well be for sake completeness and to placate Adoula and UN might be satisfied to negotiate them if progress made on previous ones. However, seems possible on basis recent Bunche remarks that this is key question for UN, may be considered grounds for action against Tshombe if his reply considered unsatisfactory. If this is so and rests on deliberate decision, it is one thing; it would then represent a bluff which has slight chance success. If it rests on misjudgment of Tshombe's willingness to fight as may be reflected in Bunche's ambiguous references to Tshombe's lack of will to resist, consequences could be negative, possibly tragic.

For Leopoldville: Suggest Embassy may desire UK Consul to return Elisabethville sooner than Sunday as planned.

Dean

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–1562. Confidential; Priority. Received at 1:44 p.m. and repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, USUN, and London.

2 Telegram 414 (see footnote 3, Document 323) transmitted a message from McGhee to Tshombe. Telegram 430 to Elisabethville, November 10, transmitted revisions. Telegram 758 from Elisabethville, November 13, asked whether a statement in the message that Adoula had agreed to a standfast was still accurate. Telegram 534 from Léopoldville to Elisabethville, sent to the Department as telegram 1128, November 14, replied that the situation was unclear and suggested deleting the sentence. (Ibid., 770G.00/11-1062, 770G.00/11-1362, and 770G.00/11-1462, respectively)

3 Telegram 1788 from USUN, November 14, reported a conversation that day between Yost and Bunche. Bunche showed Yost a cable to Gardiner listing five specific actions that Gardiner should request of Tshombe: 1) send gendarmerie officers to Léopoldville to take an oath of loyalty without delay, 2) announce immediate steps to implement the revenue, financial, and currency provisions of the U.N. plan, 3) permit Congolese customs and immigration officials in Elisabethville to begin operations, 4) allow full movement in Katanga for all U.N. personnel, and 5) cooperate with the U.N. forces in elimination of mercenaries from the gendarmerie. (Ibid.)

331. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State 331. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State1

Brussels, November 16, 1962, 8 p.m.

699. Policy. Eyes only Under Secretary McGhee. Eyes only Ambassador Bruce. Following is draft agreed minute approved in substance by McGhee prior his departure Brussels but modified by Foreign Office in subsequent discussions.2

Begin text.

At meeting on November 15, 1962, Foreign Minister Spaak and Under Secretary of State McGhee discussed following alternative suggestions.

First suggestion.

McGhee would go back to Congo accompanied by high official of Belgian Government and representative from Union Miniere to approach Tshombe.

Tshombe would be told of danger of present situation. He would be urged to accept deposit by Union Miniere to Monetary Council of foreign exchange provided by their exports and payment to same of their taxes and duties.

It would be indicated to Tshombe that this decision would be contingent upon Adoula agreeing to a satisfactory Constitution and amnesty and giving assurances regarding repayment of a fair share of revenues and foreign exchange to Katanga.

Belgian Government and Union Miniere representatives accompanying McGhee would emphasize to Tshombe their complete agreement with this proposal and their conviction that from economic point of view this arrangement would protect vital interests of Union Miniere and of Katanga.

Second suggestion.

A. McGhee would approach U Thant to ascertain whether payment by Union Miniere to Monetary Council of its foreign exchange, taxes and duties would be considered by him significant enough to allow pursuance of the present negotiation; assurances should be asked from Secretary General that no action would be undertaken by UN during these proceedings.

B. If U Thant gives these assurances, Adoula will be immediately asked whether he also considers implementation of above proposal of enough importance to justify calling a conference of provincial Presidents to study Constitutional amendments, to issue amnesty and to give following financial assurances: 1) IMF will propose a division of revenues between the GOC and the GOK.

These divisions will take into account needs of UMHK in and outside Congo and needs of GOK.

2) GOC will accept these findings and instruct Monetary Council accordingly. For necessary discussions Adoula, McGhee would go to Léopoldville accompanied by a high official of GOB and representative of UMHK.

C. If U Thant and Adoula agree, Spaak would submit question to GOB and seek to persuade it to urge UMHK to go along with this proposal.3

Should GOB agree, UMHK would be informed that Belgian Government would assume responsibility of implementation of these measures even if Tshombe does not agree to them.

D. When all agreements necessary to completion of above proposed steps have been obtained, McGhee accompanied by a high official of GOB and representative of UMHK would proceed to Elisabethville for necessary discussions with Tshombe. Plan could be outlined to him in detail, using all arguments and persuasions which could be brought to bear, both political and economic, by GOB and UMHK representatives, along with McGhee. By this means Tshombe could be assured that all aspects of his position have been given full consideration and have been taken as a basis for Plan. If at end of these conversations Tshombe should continue to prove recalcitrant, he could be informed that it is intention of UMHK, under any circumstance, to make its payments to GOC in Léopoldville.

Third Suggestion.

Secretary-General will convoke at UN Headquarters in New York Adoula, Tshombe, and high-ranking representatives of Belgian, British and American Governments (preferably Lord Home, Mr. Rusk, and Mr. Spaak).

U Thant would tell Adoula and Tshombe that with help of all interested powers, they should reach agreement on an effective solution of Katangan problem within a short given period of time.

Mr. Spaak feels that this could be most effective way of keeping initiative and solving problem.

Remarks.

A) During discussions held in Léopoldville and Elisabethville representatives of U.S. Government, of Belgian Government and of Union Miniere will work behind scenes with Gardiner appearing as official mediator.

B) Steps outlined in third suggestion could be proposed again in case sufficient progress not reached by means of implementation of second suggestion.

C) U.S. reiterated its will to help share losses Union Miniere might suffer in retaliation for its cooperation.

D) Spaak will outline to Lord Home three above-mentioned suggestions. No mention shall be made at present to UK of possibility of a unilateral action in case Tshombe's acceptance could not be obtained.4

E) It is imperative that all of foregoing be held in strictest secrecy. For this reason discussions on subject between Belgian and American Governments will be centered in Brussels; and within UN only Secretary-General and Bunche will be approached. Our Embassies in Léopoldville and our Consulates in Elisabethville will not be informed for time-being of lines along which two governments are thinking.

End text.

Spaak will inform Lord Home of above as appropriate (probably through British Embassy here) and will let us know terms in which foregoing presented to him which we will cable to the Department upon receipt.

MacArthur

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 870G.25/11–1662. Secret; Niact. Repeated to London.

2 Telegram 703 from Brussels, November 17, reported that the Foreign Office had given the Embassy a revised text in English and French of the agreed minute and a copy in French of a memorandum for transmission to Lord Home that was largely identical to the agreed minute. The telegram reported the revisions in the agreed minute and the discrepancies in the memorandum. (Ibid., 870G.25/11–1762)

3 According to telegram 703, this sentence in the revised agreed minute and in the memorandum read: "If U Thant and Adoula agree, Spaak would submit question to GOB, which will officially seek to persuade UMHK to go along with this proposal."

4 According to telegram 703, the Foreign Office asked that this sentence in the agreed minute be revised to read: "Mr. Spaak will outline to Lord Home the three above mentioned suggestions, without insisting on the fact that the measures mentioned in the second suggestion would be taken even without Tshombe's acceptance."

332. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 332. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, November 19, 1962, 8 p.m.

1864. Eyes only Secretary and McGhee. Eyes only Ambassadors. Reference: Brussels 669 [699] to Department (Misun 18);2 USUN 1839.3 Congo. During meeting this afternoon SYG and Bunche commented further to Yost and Stevenson on Congo proposal presented by McGhee November 16.

They were sympathetic to what they described as "new plan" but suggested it should be presented to Adoula by US and Belgium rather than by Gardiner. They were skeptical of its being sold to Adoula, particularly because of what they understood to be allocation by GOC back to Union Miniere of 40 percent foreign exchange received from Union Miniere. They also doubted that, since Constitution already before Parliament, Adoula would be willing to discuss any modification with Tshombe outside Parliamentary framework.

We explained (1) the proposal is not "new plan" but refinement of reconciliation plan, (2) that it therefore seemed appropriate for Gardiner to introduce it with US, Belgium and UMHK following up, and (3) that allocation foreign exchange would be made as [by] IMF and 40 percent was merely illustrative figure.

SYG finally said that Gardiner might submit proposal to Adoula as US suggestion and might support it. We had impression that, if Gardiner himself thinks well of idea, SYG might authorize him to go somewhat further. Thant also suggested he might sound out Bomboko who is en route to New York but we discouraged this idea, pointing out that Bomboko might prejudice Adoula against proposal before it was adequately explained to him by those fully acquainted with it.

SYG noted that he did not expect to call CAC meeting at this time but would speak to important members separately. However if there had not been agreement by Adoula and Tshombe with new proposal within two weeks, he would feel obliged to call SC meeting for first week in December in order lay impasse before it. He would submit to SC at that time his recommendations for next steps, which he would previously have submitted in writing to US, UK and Belgium after consultation with Gardiner. Some of these steps might of course be taken in conjunction with McGhee proposal if that should be accepted. He referred to some of these next steps as including (1) GOC refuse all commercial firms and banks doing business in Katanga permission to operate elsewhere in Congo, (2) sanctions by GOC against shipping companies carrying Katangese copper ore from Luwanda, (3) activation of GOC Customs and Immigration officials at points in Katanga where they can be protected by UN. Bunche pointed out this was going back to original US customs collection scheme. GOC Customs officials might be stationed not only in Elisabethville but eventually (perhaps when Kaunda takes over power in Northern Rhodesia) at Kipushi and at exit point from Katanga into Angola.

It was greed there should be further consultations between us as soon as views of Gardiner and Gullion concerning new proposal have been received.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–1962. Top Secret. Repeated to London and Brussels.

2 Document 331.

3 Telegram 1839 from USUN, November 16, reported a conversation in which McGhee told Thant and Bunche about his discussions in Brussels and London and presented the second suggestion in telegram 699, Document 331. Thant reacted favorably but suggested meeting early the following week with Gardiner to discuss the proposal in more detail. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–1662) At the November 16 meeting, Thant also gave McGhee a new list of requests for U.S. logistic support, including the airlift of a number of vehicles to Elisabethville. In a November 28 memorandum to McGhee, Cleveland reported on the status of these requests and requested authorization to resume the internal airlift. According to a handwritten note on the memorandum, McGhee showed it to the President, who approved the course of action. (Washington National Records Center, RG 59, UNP Congo Files: FRC 71 A 5255, Item 69 (Lot 65 D 219), Congo– Congressional)

333. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 333. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, November 20, 1962, 8:21 p.m.

773. Eyes only Ambassadors. Talking points for approach to Adoula and U Thant.2

1. The UN, USG, and GOB have agreed that the next step in giving effect to the U Thant Plan should be to reestablish control by the GOC of the receipt and distribution of foreign exchange and tax revenues from all the Congo and thus deprive Katanga of the means of maintaining secession. This should be effective in making it impossible for Tshombe to secure arms and mercenaries for use against the GOC.

2. This approach should not be considered as in any way altering the Plan nor reducing the urgency of carrying out the Plan in its entirety.

3. The UN, USG and GOB have taken account of the arrangements made by the GOC in re-acquiring control of the distribution of the revenues and foreign exchange receipts of South Kasai and have taken note of the agreements reached between the GOC and the diamond companies in this connection.

4. Accordingly the GOB is prepared to recommend to (or preferably urge) the UMHK in the Katanga that they deposit in the Monetary Council the total of foreign exchange proceeds and to pay to the Central Government all customs duties, export-import taxes and royalties. The GOC would, for its part, undertake to transfer back to UMHK and other companies sufficient foreign exchange to satisfy its essential needs as determined by the IMF and would also return a just share of foreign exchange, tax and royalty proceeds to Katanga in accordance with IMF recommendations. Subject to findings of IMF, the amount of foreign exchange that will accrue to the Central Government from Katanga may be in the neighborhood of $3 million monthly.

5. The GOC would at the same time accelerate the process of reintegration under the Plan by: a) Immediate promulgation of an amnesty applying to prosecution of political crimes and actions in connection with Katanga secession;

b) Convening a conference of provincial presidents to consider amendments to the draft constitution, which could be given effect by action in the Parliament.

6. Adoula would also carry out certain additional steps which he has already indicated willingness to do: a) Renewing an offer to the GOK for the inclusion of Katanga ministers in the GOC;

b) Early arrangements for the restoration of communications and travel between the Katanga and all parts of the Congo.

7. The UN, USG and GOB will at the same time urge Tshombe to proceed to carry out all of his obligations under the Plan in the military, monetary and foreign affairs fields and to cooperate with the UN. Priority will be given the following: a) Approval of the payment of foreign exchange proceeds to the Monetary Council and customs duties and royalties to the GOC as specified above;

b) Since Adoula has already given assurances of safe conduct to gendarmerie officers who desire to go to Léopoldville to take the oath, Tshombe should send them;

c) The GOC customs and immigration officials now in Elisabethville should be permitted to function immediately and should be assisted in this task.

8. Both sides will forthwith: a) Faithfully carry out the SYG's appeal for a standstill;

b) Cooperate in putting into the field Tripartite Observation Teams to observe the standstill and accord such teams full freedom of movement;

c) Afford the Military Commission full cooperation in its task of accomplishing as a matter of urgency full integration of military forces.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2062. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to London and USUN.

2 Telegram 772 to Brussels, November 20, instructed MacArthur to discuss with Spaak the advisability of presenting the new initiative to Thant and Adoula in the broader framework given in telegram 773. According to telegram 772, the Department of State thought that Gardiner should make the initial approach to Adoula and that if Adoula agreed in principle, Belgian, Union Miniere, and U.S. representatives should go to the Congo to discuss modalities. The Department thought it was essential to relate the initiative to the U.N. plan in order to maximize U.N. support, facilitate Adoula's acceptance, and avoid giving Tshombe the impression that the initiative was intended to replace the U.N. plan. (Ibid., 770G.00/11–1962)

334. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 334. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, November 22, 1962, 2:58 p.m.

779. Eyes only MacArthur from McGhee. Part I of Two. Our two-hour meeting yesterday with Bunche and Gardiner and subsequent hour meeting with U Thant fully reported USUN 1901 to Dept.2 Since this followed long meeting with SYG and Bunche on November 19,3 there has now been ample opportunity for very complete exchange and mutual understanding of the issues and points of view involved in new GOB–USG initiative in Congo. The following summarizes our views with respect to results of meetings and indicated course for the future.

I initiated meeting by presenting almost verbatim agreed talking paper given Deptel 773,4 as modified in accordance with Brussels 718.5 Gardiner, who had been previously reported by Bunche as cool to new initiative, remained so throughout discussions. It was in the end agreed, however, that an initiative along lines indicated would be worth trying and, if successful, would be much preferred alternative to plan of economic pressures which UN has been developing for use as a last resort. Gardiner's views on tactics differed widely, however, from those in USG–GOB proposal, along following lines and for following reasons: 1. Gardiner believes strongly that commercial aspects of UMHK–GOC relations must be disassociated from their political aspects. UMHK, ostensibly in response to Adoula's recent letter to them requesting that they pay revenues to GOC, could send a high level representative to Leo for purpose of discussing how this might be brought about. They would seek obtain those assurances they feel they need of purely commercial nature to permit them to comply with Adoula's request. Precedent would appear to exist for such action in recent GOC agreement with South Kasai diamond industry which had come directly to Adoula when faced with end of South Kasai secession and made very favorable deal with him. Indeed, Adoula's inclination would probably be to be generous with UMHK if approached directly and forthrightly, since he has every incentive obtain their cooperation in ending Katanga secession and in providing immediate additional revenues and foreign exchange to GOC.

2. In connection with assurances of a purely commercial nature, Gardiner doubted Adoula would be willing allow IMF, towards which he has particular antipathy because of their refusal to grant Congo membership, or perhaps any other outside body, make determination as to foreign exchange or revenue allocations for UMHK and Katanga. He pointed out that other companies had been receiving fair treatment and difficult to make UMHK special case—also, difficulty in permitting outside group to determine GOC financial arrangements with one province.

3. Gardiner felt strongly that UMHK reps should come first, without GOB political rep, since in his judgment it would be fatal to mix political and commercial considerations. It would be unlikely that Adoula would be willing make concessions on constitution or amnesty in return for commercial considerations. He pointed to well known difficulties in dealing with constitutional problem, i.e., neither Tshombe nor GOB have made specific suggestions that can be dealt with, and there is no assurance that new meeting of Provincial Presidents would be more successful than the last. Correct procedure for dealing with Constitution, as described by Loi Fondamentale, is through action of parliament and ratification by Provincial Assemblies. UMHK reps, if they were able reach satisfactory agreement with Adoula on commercial matters, could then state that they must return to Brussels for final decision.

4. Gardiner agreed he could as follow-up to visit by UMHK rep attempt to achieve such political objectives as GOB desire as are consistent with the Plan. He should not, however, appear to be acting in support of UMHK negotiations. Perhaps at this juncture it might be desirable for Belgian political reps come to Leo but visit should not be related to UMHK negotiations.

5. Gardiner felt strongly USG should not associate itself openly with commercial aspect this effort. Although he did not say so, there is background of feeling that UN is somewhat embarrassed by appearance of US pressures in the Congo. My visit to Katanga drew down some of our credit with GOC in that it appeared to represent a "Be Kind to Tshombe Movement" and to prolong the negotiating phase of the execution of the Plan. Our open association with a Belgian commercial interest, particularly with background of UMHK, together with efforts on our part to link political concessions with commercial considerations would be embarrassing not just to us but to the UN. In any event, any action on our part whether by Gullion or myself should follow UMHK negotiations so as not to appear to be related to them.

As indicated USUN's summary, SYG felt there was little time for testing whether or not such an approach would be profitable. UN feeling pressure of CAC, tremendous drain on resources, deteriorating situation of the Congo must move soon toward more effective pressures. He outlined some 16 measures ranging in severity from minor economic actions to stopping of trains in Eville which he could take in context present UN resolutions. In essence, however, many amount to actions damaging Belgian interests in the Congo which also do business with Katanga or are associated with companies who do.

In discussion question inevitably arose as to what would happen if UMHK reached agreement with Adoula to which Tshombe did not agree. To this I could but reply, in light of our understanding with GOB, that with full support of UN, GOB and UMHK, I felt we had adequate means to assure Tshombe's acceptance or acquiescence. In any event, further action by the companies at this point would be a matter for Spaak.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 870G.25/11–2262. Secret; Niact. Drafted by McGhee, cleared by Wallner and Davis, and approved by Williams.

2 Telegram 1901, November 21, reported that McGhee, Williams, Yost, Gullion, and Wallner had met that day with Bunche and Gardiner and subsequently with Thant. McGhee had reviewed the proposal set forth in telegram 773, Document 333, but Gardiner had taken the position that the United Nations could not participate; he thought Union Miniere should go directly to the Congolese Government without U.N. involvement. Thant said the United Nations could not continue in the Congo beyond March. If the present proposal was unsuccessful, and if, as he expected, the General Assembly refused to provide further financial support for the Congo operation, he would have to take the problem to the Security Council in December. (Ibid., 770G.00/11–2162)

3 See Document 332.

4  Document 333.

5 Telegram 718, November 21, reported that MacArthur had given Rothschild the talking points in telegram 773. Rothschild had agreed to the substitution of "urge" for "recommend" in paragraph 4 but thought the specific reference to "3 million monthly" should be omitted. (Department of State, Central Files, 870G.25/11–2162) Telegram 722 from Brussels, November 21, reported that Spaak had approved the changes. (Ibid.)

335. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 335. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, November 22, 1962, 3 p.m.

780. Eyes only for MacArthur from McGhee. Part II of Two. During discussions I attempted at all times explain Spaak's position and obtain agreement line of action he had indicated to me was the most he could do. I was, however, forced to conclude their tactical suggestions, on the whole, were sound and that our only hope at this late hour lies in direct approach by the UMHK based on a clear decision on their part, which can only come about as a result of strong action by GOB, that they must now do business with Adoula. I believe they should now make this decision, and Robiliart, together with considerable technical staff, should come to Léopoldville. He could say to Adoula,"You have written a letter asking us to pay revenue and foreign exchange to you. We want to do this; we have come to discuss with you how we can make the necessary arrangements." In the process, various types of assurances the UMHK feel they require can be discussed, including role of IMF. Perhaps the UMHK reps will derive same confidence from Adoula as other business concerns operating in Congo have. They could make the best arrangement they can and retire, stating matter must be referred to Brussels.

If GOB felt that political concessions were needed which not at that time been accomplished they could through Gardiner backed up by Rothschild's visit and, if it was agreed to be desirable, by Gullion or myself attempt to achieve them. I gather, however, that both Gardiner and UN are skeptical that concessions on the constitution can be obtained by the GOB, particularly in relation to UMHK negotiations.

We shall, nevertheless, continue at all times to press to the utmost for positive movement on both constitution-making process and upon an amnesty. In the event that Gardiner should be wrong and it should appear advantageous or possible to make a link between commercial and political considerations, we shall not hesitate to make the attempt.

It is my honest appraisal that Belgians must now face their hour of truth. Airing of whole issue in SC or GA (in connection financing) seems inevitable before December 20 unless some striking sign of progress toward reintegration is evident in next two or three weeks. SYG was crisply positive about this. We believe it important for Belgians to confirm this urgency independently in contact with UN either through Loridan or, in view of its importance, by means of direct contact between Spaak and SYG which we understand Spaak is considering.

If UMHK is not willing make forthright decision to take initiative in attempting to reach accord with Adoula, no forward movement of consequence can be expected in next two weeks, and, since we do not at present have new proposals to make ourselves, we will not be in a position to deter UN from proceeding with their program of economic pressures. This could produce a rift and showdown between Adoula and Belgian companies which without some early overture by the latter could we fear result in a great reduction in their position or even their elimination from the Congo. If the UMHK does not take the initiative now, there could easily result the eventual closing down of UMHK operations in the Katanga and the transfer of much of the banking and other Belgian business to firms of other nationalities or new firms that might be created. Old antagonisms between the Congolese and the Belgians would be revived and chances for participation by Belgians in the future of the Congo would be prejudiced.

Under such circumstances US would not, of course, be willing to assume any responsibility for losses suffered by UMHK in Katanga. Particularly in the light of the recent refusal of UMHK to respond to direct appeal by their Foreign Minister, there would be little sympathy in American official circles or publicly and little incentive to protect UMHK from consequences of UN and Adoula's economic actions. Tragic aspect is that even these actions may not, in the end, produce desired results but, rather than softening Tshombe up into a better negotiating posture, may drive him and Europeans who run the Katanga into hiding which could result in an economic breakdown in Katanga accompanied by a continued insurrection in the "bush" for an indefinite period.

We have tried very hard to shield the Belgian Government and companies from the full consequences of coming face-to-face with their own responsibilities. I am afraid that we are at the end of this row. It is my honest evaluation that if GOB and UMHK together cannot make decision which appears now to be called for, alternative is grim period of economic and political reprisals against Belgian companies and GOB, with possibility in end for complete economic breakdown and even hostilities in the Katanga.

Realize this is drastic reassessment of situation. Will, therefore, be very interested in Spaak's reaction. Naturally USG will continue to do all it can to assist ally Belgium but overriding facts compel realistic approach.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 870G.25/11-2262. Secret;Niact. Drafted by McGhee, cleared by Wallner and Davis, and approved by Williams.

336. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State 336. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State1

Brussels, November 23, 1962, 9 p.m.

738. Eyes only Secretary and McGhee from MacArthur. Congo. Department telegram 7792 and Embassy telegrams 729 and 730.3 I saw Spaak again this afternoon after Cabinet meeting. He said he had studied memo I gave him (based on Department telegram 779) very carefully and wished to speak with same frankness we had used in proposing that McGhee plan be dropped and UMHK be asked to proceed to Léopoldville alone to tell Adoula that it wished to discuss arrangements for making of payments directly to GOC.

Spaak said Gardiner assertion that proposed UMHK action in making payments to GOC was "commercial matter" was absurd. Spaak assumed we shared this view since McGhee himself had stressed last week to him that change in UMHK payments from GOK to GOC was political act of greatest significance.

He is deeply disturbed by position UN has taken as set forth in Embassy telegram 779. In effect, he said, UN and US appear to have gone back to "unsound" position held many months ago that if only UMHK would stop making payments to Tshombe, Katanga secession would be ended. It was not only unsound but downright dangerous for UN to base its future actions on such concept which was in contradiction with Thant reconciliation plan which had been hammered out by US, Belgium and Britain. Thant plan itself recognized that there had to be a balanced solution and that question of payments to GOC and constitutional aspects were integral part of overall plan which was highly political and not, definitely not, commercial. It seemed evident that in absence of constitutional guarantees Tshombe would fight rather than surrender.

Spaak is convinced that if at this juncture UMHK starts making payments to GOC Tshombe will make strong reprisals. He recalled there are many hundreds Belgian lives at stake and tremendous investment, much of which is held by small shareholders in Belgium. Spaak does not see how anyone can expect Belgian Government to force UMHK to take action which GOB itself believes will probably result in retaliation unless UMHK and GOB knew precisely a) what meaningful guarantee of protection UN would give to UMHK if Tshombe acted against it, b) actual UN capability to protect Belgian lives and property, and c) what guarantee or assurances UN and US would give UMHK in terms of sharing economic losses which would certainly occur if Tshombe retaliated.

Spaak said he is particularly concerned about Tshombe because in last several days Tshombe has become much more confident and all reports seem indicate Tshombe has or is cooking something up (possibly proposal for a Central African federation) with blacks and whites in Africa, including Rhodesia, South Africa, perhaps Angola and one or two other African states. Furthermore British have been very reticent with GOB re Congo in last four days.

Long discussion with Spaak that ensued during which he reiterated grave concern over apparent UN abandonment of balanced solution whereby Tshombe would give up control of company money and his armed forces in return for adequate and reasonable concept of federal constitution which was, Spaak felt, indispensable element in any solution. He insisted that if UMHK refused to make payments to Tshombe, latter would not only take retaliatory action against UMHK but if necessary would take to the bush where he could hold out for months if not indefinitely. In light existing circumstances he continued to think that proposals McGhee had made in Brussels, although complicated and dependent on both UN and Adoula, at least held some hope whereas Thant-Gardiner position held none whatsoever.

I urged Spaak to go to New York and talk directly with Thant and Bunche, saying that only he could explain Belgian position and view authoritatively to Thant. In urging that he go to New York I advanced some of the arguments that I had used earlier with Rothschild (Embassy telegram 730).

After some further talk Spaak said he agreed since war or peace in Africa were in fact at stake that he should go to New York and he would fly there Sunday taking Robiliart or some other high UMHK official with him to discuss guarantees UN could give to UMHK. He would plan to see Thant Monday but since he also felt it imperative to talk with President and Secretary he would fly down to Washington late Monday or Tuesday morning for such talks. In light of discussion with President, Secretary and McGhee it could be decided whether it useful for Spaak and McGhee to return New York for further talk with Thant, Bunche and Gardiner.

He said he would see Robiliart later today and, despite his own misgivings, would follow tactic of being very tough with him in effort to soften UMHK up.

I told Spaak I would telephone McGhee at once informing him of Spaak's plans and his desire to see President.

Following my telephone conversation with McGhee I informed Spaak that McGhee believed his visit most useful and thought his plans were in general very good. While everybody in Washington would be glad to see him, he could not make definite commitment for appointment with President until he had checked President's schedule with White House. Spaak expressed understanding and said his visit should be as short as possible but he recognized several days would be required complete such talks in New York and Washington. As I was leaving he emphasized again he attaches greatest importance to seeing both President and Secretary.

MacArthur

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2362. Confidential; Niact; Noforn.

2 Document 334.

3 Telegram 729, November 23, reported that MacArthur had given Spaak a memorandum based on telegram 779, Document 334. Spaak replied that it was necessary to reassess the situation, since he thought Union Minie re would not send Robiliart to talk to Adoula unless he was accompanied by official Belgian and U.S. representatives. Spaak thought he might go to New York for talks with Thant and Bunche. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2362)Telegram 730, November 23, reported that McGhee had met with Rothschild and told him that unless the Belgian Government could persuade Union Minie re to do what was necessary, it would inevitably be held responsible for any subsequent unfortunate developments in the Congo. (Ibid.)

337. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 337. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, November 26, 1962, 8 p.m.

1204. While Adoula continues to express confidence he will surmount Parliamentary crisis, his opponents and some of supposed supporters do not think he has the votes. (Embtels 1195 and 1187)2

Adoula is maneuvering to prevent no confidence measure from being introduced but thinks it would fail if presented. This is not view of Kamitatu, Mobutu, Nendaka, Bolikango or Ndele.

Adoula has not made final choice of tactics but while saying he will not yield he yields all the same. He has resisted idea of Parliamentary recess but is ready to sacrifice some of his ministers. He tells me he expects individual censure motions against Bomboko, Weregemere, Massa, Dericoyard, Kamitatu, et al. He says he will probably not defend Weregemere, Minister of Justice who made poor show in defending government action in imposing emergency regime in Léopoldville and arresting Parliamentarians for plotting secession. (This measure proved very successful in curbing extraordinary wave of crime in Léopoldville but Parliamentarians claim it aimed at them.) He will stand up for Bomboko and Nendaka but latter's job may be changed. He will no longer be "Military Governor" but hopefully could stay at Surete.

Adoula will also extend some kind of amnesty but by Presidential Proclamation rather than Legislation. He will not apply it to Gizenga but he cannot resist pressure to spring Gbenye.

Last night Adoula had no plans to lift emergency regime imposed on Léopoldville. He may do so, however, explaining it had accomplished its purpose.

Adoula told me he planning call on non-Parliamentarians and provincial figures to fill gaps which might be created in his government.

This in spite of encouragement he claims to have received from Kasavubu to stand firm, Adoula plans meet crisis by series of compromises and personnel changes. Principal danger at this point is that he will let into government dangerous and undesirable figures.

I took occasion to tell Adoula that we wanted him to continue but not as front for people who would work against us, e.g., Gizenga or his nominees. I told him it would be better for him in that case to resist to end and then resign, in order to conserve his influence and integrity.

Adoula received this in good part. Said he had warned US repeatedly that this might happen. I rejoined that he must be aware all support we had given him to prevent its happening and that only just recently we had stepped up our material aid. Adoula acknowledged our support but said that what survival of his policies required was commitment and visible proof that US and UN were going to end Katanga secession or let him do it. Even though it might be too late. If what we were now doing had been done a year ago or if Kitona had not intervened, everything would have succeeded. He was now "used up" physically and influence. [sic]

As for quitting and fighting from the outside, this was all very well but he would probably land in jail instead. I urged him not to abandon his Congolese collaborators. He replied he could not part with his arms and hers. [sic] I said Bomboko was carrying out delicate work for him at critical time. Adoula answered that when "they" attacked Bomboko "they" were attacking him.

Adoula has been giving UN and Western Ambassadors more optimistic picture than foregoing. He said he might call in several and bring them up to date. I urged that he make same pledge to them that he has repeatedly made to prominent Americans: i.e. that whatever his successors might do he would never turn to Casablanca group nor the Soviet bloc. Adoula appeared to give this deep consideration but made no commitment.

I told Adoula that I had heard reports that Parliament might be recessed for 30 days. Speaking without instruction I said Adoula should not assume US support of his government would be affected if such a decision were taken. It might be best thing at this time when irresponsible Parliament had taken the bit in its teeth. Adoula said Parliamentarians themselves had spread this rumor perhaps because they feared such a decree. Kasavubu had not, however, taken any such decision.

Kasavubu had told him to stand firm but Adoula was not sure of firmness of Kasavubu's support.

I said that I planned to see Kasavubu and would welcome Adoula's suggestions. I planned to ask why Kasavubu's Abako party was launching action which threatened not GOC but also Kasavubu's own policies and even his political survival. Adoula urged that I take just this line. He said Abako and Moanda Vital3 were being subverted by Tshombe and some elements of new [apparent omission] were profiting by difficulties of government to revive their own pre-independence separatism. He thought, however, that they were too divided to be consistently effective.

Adoula repeatedly declared that the real issue was Katanga and not "military government" in Léopoldville. No government could survive failure to solve Katanga problem.

I then attempted to tell Adoula that USG still firm in wishing to see secession ended and were taking new steps to help. In the absence of requested instructions I was handicapped by being unable to tell him of any firm new decisions by US Government. Best cards I had to play were Under Secretary McGhee's latest letter to Tshombe4 and information obtained from Godley telecon that delivery of rockets approved in principle.5 Adoula particularly pleased at McGhee letter which he said would have "shock value" since Tshombe would not have "expected it from McGhee". I said I hoped we would be in position to make public some statements expressing the views and recommendations made in letter to Tshombe.

Adoula asked repeatedly about US intentions with respect to U Thant plan and effect upon it of recent consultations in Brussels and New York.

I gave Adoula a positive version of the proposed scheme of payment of taxes and revenues to central government by UMHK (which he knew about from press and radio) omitting for sake of his depressed morale references to its highly conditional aspect and any doubts that it could really cut into Tshombe's combat and secessionist potential. I did tell him that it was in no way a substitute for the plan. He asked whether UMHK had brought him settlement he had made with diamond companies. I affirmed that they had and this played important part. Adoula expressed keen interest in payment scheme but expressed hope that it would not delay application of U Thant plan. He then asked about ability of UN to persevere in Congo. In answer I did not refer to SYG's statements on financial crisis but did allude to well known problem of Indian withdrawals.

Comment: Adoula keeps up bold front but is unconvincing. In a way he is pleased to see matters come to a head even if it means personal reverse.

I must say that settlement he contemplates will be a heavier defeat than he is ready to recognize. If he releases people he has jailed for treason (and with cause), and if character of his new government is strongly influenced by them, it is difficult to see where Adoula can dig in his heels. Not only will his influence in his own government be reduced, but also Parliament having found way to lick him will do so again and again.

If Mobutu and Nendaka still support him they, together with his own perseverance and relatively superior intelligence, may hold things nominally together. But this influence will have been sadly reduced. Failure to solve Katanga will mean the end of an Adoula authority which is already becoming shadowy. Mobutu's authority in Army is already endangered.

Recommendations: (A) If I am able to learn that the composition of any new government (whether headed by Adoula or other) would be Gizengist or Commie-lining [leaning?], I believe US should favor proroguing Parliament for 30 days during which maximum effort would be made to settle Katanga issue. This would be legal measure and would check spread in Parliament which is bad for us and bad for Congo.

Mobutu would back this one although he claims he could not back a coup d'etat. I shall sound Kasavubu on it tomorrow.6 (B) A variant would be to dissolve Parliament definitely [indefinitely?], proceed to consultations on new government and call meanwhile for Constituent Assembly to which members would be named by Assemblies of new provincial Parliaments. This would be still more adaptable to requirement of U Thant plan and would appease Belgian and Western opinion at same time it gives chance to turn back leftists. It does some violence to Loi Fondamentale but there may be merit in recognizing its demise. (C) During next three days U Thant plan should be applied integrally including pressure stages. Any propositions of British or Belgians which tend to delay it should be rejected. Even if 30 days recess is not called, US should press for execution of plan.

It may already be too late for above. As this is written I learned that a decree has been signed releasing Gbenye and the other Parliamentarians imprisoned with him. Pressures will build up for release of Gizenga.

Would welcome Department's views soonest.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2662. Confidential; Niact. Received at 5:30 p.m. and repeated to USUN, Brussels, Elisabethville, London, and New Delhi.

2 Dated November 25 and 24, respectively. (Ibid., 770G.00/11–2562 and 770G.00/ 11–2462)

3 One of the leaders of the Abako (Alliance des Ba-Kongo) Party.

4 The message, transmitted in telegram 445 to Elisabethville, November 24, declared that "additional and decisive steps" were necessary, without delay, to bring about a peaceful solution of the Katanga issue. McGhee referred to recent reported Katangan air operations in north Katanga and stated, "If these air operations continue, they can easily bring retaliation against your aircraft—or resumption of widespread hostilities." He further stated, "There is, I am afraid, little time to make forward movement under the Plan on the basis of voluntary actions and negotiations—before the UN will come under increasing pressure to take more positive measures." (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2462)

5 Telegram 764 to Léopoldville, November 25, confirmed the information that Godley had given Gullion that a "reasonable quantity rockets for Harvards" would be supplied as evidence of U.S. support and that three aircraft capable of lifting vehicles would be made available to the U.N. forces for internal airlift. (Ibid., 332.70G/11–2562) On November 11, Adoula had requested U.S. assistance in procuring rockets for Congolese Harvard aircraft to counter Katangan air attacks in north Katanga. (Telegram 1113 from Léopoldville, November 12; ibid., 770G.5/11–1262)

6 Telegram 1225 from Léopoldville, November 27, which reported Gullion's conversation that day with Kasavubu, reads in part as follows:"I then told Kasavubu, making clear I spoke without instructions, that if government seemed headed for defeat, one way out might be to adjourn the parliament for thirty days or even to call a constituent assembly to replace present parliament. I did not think these measures would affect the attitude of my government toward his. Kasavubu appeared to appreciate this hint. He did, however, say he wished to stick to legality and Loi Fondamentale was considerably better than people claimed. It reposed powers in the Chief of State which enabled him to deal with cabinet crisis." (Ibid., 770G.00/11–2762)

338. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 338. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, November 26, 1962, 7 p.m.

1955. Eyes only Secretary and McGhee. Eyes only Ambassadors. Congo. Spaak, accompanied by Rothschild, Loridan and Davignon, called on Stevenson immediately after seeing U Thant this morning. Also present were Yost and MacArthur.

Spaak said he had been surprised to discover that SYG had not rejected "McGhee plan" as he had understood. Situation was quite different. UN refused to have Gardiner approach Adoula first and would not accept playing any part in plan. However, SYG perfectly agreeable give US and Belgium two weeks to try to execute plan. Would take no action meanwhile.

Spaak said most important aspect of plan was political, not financial. If Tshombe should agree that foreign exchange and revenues from taxes be paid directly to GOC, that would be most important. If Adoula objects to IMF determining how much should be returned to UMHK and Katanga, Spaak would not object to having Monetary Council make determination. If Adoula agreed to do something about Constitution and amnesty, Belgium could go ahead with plan. Belgium could tell UMHK that it must make payments to GOC. Agreement must also be reached with UN as to what it can do protect UMHK. (SYG subsequently told Stevenson and Yost that Spaak had not raised question of UN protection UMHK and Belgian citizens with him this A.M.) There would still be danger that if Tshombe said no and UN took action against him, Tshombe might react by nationalizing UMHK and "mobilizing" Belgians. However, Spaak believed that there was chance that if US and GOB could go together to Eville with concessions from Adoula on amnesty and Constitution it might be possible convince Tshombe to go along.

MacArthur pointed out that if too much dependence placed on constitutional aspect of problem too much time might elapse. Tshombe might be able to hide behind Constitution. There might be better way than trying to bring provincial presidents together again. Yost agreed and suggested that if it were possible to get Adoula to give assurances to Tshombe, latter might accept these. This would avoid prolonged negotiations over Constitution for which there no longer sufficient time. As for amnesty, it appeared that Kasavubu and Adoula were seriously considering proclaiming one shortly.

Spaak said important question was this: Are US, Belgium and UMHK ready to present plan to Adoula without official blessing or backing of UN but with its agreement that we go ahead and that UN would withhold action for two weeks? Spaak said it had been his impression that McGhee had insisted on having UN support. Stevenson and Yost said they thought not. It had only been important that UN not object to our attempting plan.

Spaak said that it was important to find members of US, Belgian and UMHK team who were acceptable both in Leoville and Eville. While McGhee was best US representative to deal with Tshombe, he was not in case Adoula. Yost pointed out reverse true of Gullion. Stevenson wondered whether team could have single GOB and UMHK members but different US representatives for negotiations in Leoville and Eville. He suggested that either Williams or Cleveland might be satisfactory. He wondered whether it essential US have same man approach Adoula and Tshombe. Spaak felt that it was; that US representative should speak with same voice to each man. Rothschild said that if he were Belgian member of team he would like to have same man go with him to see both Adoula and Tshombe. It was necessary that American member know from own knowledge exactly what was said in both Leoville and Eville.

Spaak said that if Adoula should agree to plan, then Tshombe must be made to see that GOB was really serious and that US would be "angry" if Tshombe held back. Tshombe should also know that UN would be likely to impose sanctions.

Yost pointed out that U Thant was in a difficult position. Spaak replied that if he had not realized this he would not now be involved in internal Congo affairs. Spaak said that he was seeing Bomboko this evening and was inclined to test latter's reaction to plan. One reason he wished do this was that Adoula had always refused any Belgian suggestion that GOB talk to Tshombe. Spaak suggested that team might tell Tshombe that payment system could be given "one month trial." If it did not work, UMHK could stop making payments to GOC.

Spaak said that he had to justify his position with Belgian Government and people by explaining if plan not undertaken UN might take action leading to hostilities. It was important however that there be economic guarantees for UMHK in case it should suffer damages because of its cooperation in plan. He indicated that US might be expected help in this respect and that he would take up this aspect of question in Washington.

Stevenson suggested that UK should be invited to support sponsors of plan but not be allowed to veto it. Main immediate problem as he saw it was to find new American member of team. MacArthur said he seeing Secretary this afternoon and would advise him of problem.

Spaak said he would return to New York Wednesday2 morning after seeing President previous afternoon. He thought US and Belgium should then go together to see U Thant, tell him what we propose to do and ask him to withhold action for two weeks. Spaak said he was anxious to confront Tshombe with Robiliart in order convince Tshombe that plan was economically feasible. They would tell Tshombe that if he did not accept, Belgium would support UN and sanctions to limit. Main difference of opinion he had with UN was that it seemed think sanctions would bring Tshombe to his knees within week. Katanga leaders might very well take to bush and create situation requiring UN presence much longer than now imagined.

Meeting adjourned with tentative agreement that, if indicated by Washington conversations, joint US-Belgian approach would be made to U Thant on Wednesday, November 28.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2662. Confidential; Niact. Received at 8:41 p.m. and repeated to London, Brussels, and Léopoldville.

2 November 28.

339. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 339. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, November 26, 1962, 7 p.m.

1954. Eyes only Secretary and McGhee. Eyes only Ambassadors. Re: Congo. Fol is our impression of current situation at UN concerning Congo.

Casablanca powers have for some time believed that UN presence in Congo, rather than serving to bring about unification, has in fact been serving to protect Tshombe, by UN refusing under pressure Western powers to take effective action itself and by denying to GOC means for doing so. As recent demarches from UAM, Nigeria and others indicate, this belief is now more and more widely shared among other Africans who are demanding insistently either that UN, with essential and promised cooperation of Western powers, exercise economic pressure necessary to bring Tshombe to terms, or that UN withdraw and GOC with African assistance take on job of reunification. SYG, under African pressure but also deeply disillusioned by lukewarm support of reconciliation plan by Western powers, likewise harassed by ever-impending UN bankruptcy and withdrawal Indian and other forces, is tending in same direction.2

There remain probably no more than 2 or 3 weeks to convince him and Africans that Belgium and U.S. really mean business, that Tshombe can be brought to heel and Congo reunited by peaceful economic pressures. If genuine Belgian fear of Tshombe's retaliation and genuine U.S. and UK fear of hostilities prevent effective economic pressures from being decided and applied within this time, SYG will himself attempt to apply more risky measures and, if these are blocked by West, will report to SC failure of Congo operation. If latter should be unable to act, as seems probable, UN would probably have no recourse but to withdraw from Congo and leave solution to Africans, with U.S. and Sovs each backing its own horse.

It would not seem that this alternative would serve to avoid chaos in Katanga, to preserve Belgian position throughout Congo or to protect Rhodesia from dangerous infection. Far lesser risk would seem to be to push through UMHK payment of taxes and foreign exchange to GOC or stronger economic measures if necessary, to make absolutely and unanimously clear to Tshombe that these measures will be backed by superior force if he tries to resist them, and to apply this action before mid-December.

It is to be hoped Spaak and Home can be convinced of relative moderation of this course. It would appear that Spaak is already so convinced but he must follow through. Tshombe may or may not resist but if he does there is far better chance that he can be curbed by full power of united UN, than that Congo can be spared from civil war and destruction of all Western interests if UN fails and withdraws. There is no longer any easy innocuous middle course. This is probably last chance for UN solution and we believe choice must be firmly faced and firmly supported.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2662. Confidential; Priority. Received at 8:58 p.m. and repeated to London, Brussels, and Léopoldville.

2 Telegrams 1945 and 1952 from USUN, November 25 and 26, reported comments by Gardiner along these lines. (Ibid., 770G.00/11–2562 and 611.70G/11–2662, respectively)

340. Memorandum of Conversation 340. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, November 27, 1962, 4 p.m.

SUBJECT

The Congo

PARTICIPANTS

Belgium: Paul-Henri Spaak, Belgian Foreign Minister

Robert Rothschild, Chef de Cabinet to Mr. Spaak

Vicomte Etienne Davignon, Private Secretary to Mr. Spaak

Count Jean d'Ursel, Minister, Belgian Embassy

U.S.: The President

George C. McGhee

Amb. Adlai Stevenson

Arthur Schlesinger

Ralph Dungan

Gov. G.M. Williams

Harlan Cleveland

Amb. Douglas MacArthur

William C. Burdett

After welcoming Mr. Spaak, the President said that there were two or three points he wished to discuss, some concerning the Atlantic Community and some concerning the Congo. In the Congo time was running out. The Indian troops would leave shortly, the UN was almost out of money, and the government was unstable. We should see what could be done in concert to be helpful.

The Foreign Minister said that he had already discussed the Congo in the State Department.2 The situation was confused and difficult—the Secretary General's Plan had certainly not met with the full success. Mr. Tshombe did not respond clearly to U Thant's letter by the November 15 deadline.

There are two possibilities at present, Mr. Spaak continued:

The first one is to request the Secretary General to give the Western Powers a delay of ten days to two weeks, during which conversations would take place with the Léopoldville and Elizabethville authorities. High ranking representatives from the US and Belgium, accompanied by representatives of the UMHK, would go to Léopoldville and seek a meeting with Prime Minister Adoula. They would say that the moment has come when the UMHK ought to pay to the Central Government taxes on its income and to place at the Government's disposal its foreign currency reserves. Naturally it would be necessary to obtain agreement from Mr. Adoula to receive such a delegation and his agreement is by no means certain. The delegation would urge that Mr. Adoula show himself less obstinate on the constitutional question and agree to consider amendments suggested by Tshombe. He would be asked to issue the amnesty. If agreement is obtained from Adoula, the Mission would then proceed to Elizabethville and state to Tshombe that the solution arrived at in Léopoldville was reasonable. Tshombe would be told that if he rejects the proposal Belgium would have to reconsider its policy toward Katanga and in particular to order the UMHK strongly to pay its taxes to the Central Government. Furthermore, the US would state its readiness fully to support the UN, including the imposition of sanctions. Of course the chances of such a mission would be increased if the UK were to participate. The question of such participation has not yet been resolved.

The second possibility, Mr. Spaak continued, is to propose to U Thant that he call a meeting in New York. In calling this meeting he would say that the first phase of his plan has not met with success and that he would have to pass on to the second and third phases. Before doing so, however, he wished to make one last effort. Accordingly, he was inviting representatives of countries concerned with the Congo, i.e. the US and Belgium, to meet with Mr. Adoula under his auspices in New York. As a second step, Mr. Tshombe would be called upon to appear before the meeting. Mr. Spaak expressed a preference for the second course of action. The difficulty is that the Secretary General might seem to be merely implementing a Western policy. It is, however, necessary to do something. If no action is taken now, the UN would be obliged to move on to sanctions. This would be dangerous. No one could predict Tshombe's reactions. They could go quite far and lead to military action which could go on for months. We could try out on the Secretary General first the idea of a high-level mission. If that did not work, we could fall back on the second proposal.

The President said that he saw a number of difficulties in having a mission go first to Léopoldville and then to Elizabethville. This might give the impression that the mission is asking for concessions from Prime Minister Adoula, thereby further weakening his position at a time when he may not be strong enough politically to make concessions on the constitution and the amnesty. The President asked what sanctions would be available to make Tshombe decide he must make the necessary arrangements.

The Foreign Minister replied that Mr. Tshombe's tactics are clear: he wishes to gain time. In consequence his answer would probably be neither yes nor no. He knows that the UN would find it exceedingly difficult to carry its operations into next year. He is no longer afraid of the UN. However, a firm US position might be effective. The Foreign Minister said that if Mr. Tshombe is presented at the meeting in New York with the solution described strongly backed by the US, the UK and Belgium, he may say yes. Belgium would tell him that it is ready to reconsider its policy in regard to Katanga, which means, first of all, a cessation of technical aid, and, secondly, pressure on the UMHK to pay its revenues to the Central Government. The US would say that a refusal on Tshombe's part would mean full backing on the part of the US for UN sanctions. The UK would have to say that it is not going to oppose such sanctions. There is, therefore, a possibility of acceptance on Tshombe's part. We must not be naive and we must anticipate that even acceptance may amount only to a device to gain time. An attempt should be made, however; otherwise the UN will pass immediately to sanctions and the consequences are difficult to see. We cannot be sure sanctions will bring Tshombe down quickly. He could hold out for weeks and even months. In fact, sanctions are not a solution. If all the parties concerned speak very firmly to Tshombe, a solution might be obtained. The question now is to choose between the two manners of approach.

The President said that a conference appeared preferable to sending a mission to the Congo. There have been other missions to the Congo but they have produced no results. A conference in New York would bring Adoula, and especially Tshombe, into a new environment; this might be conducive to new ideas. Of course, there are difficulties. The visitors might say that they cannot take any binding decisions without going back to their governments. The President added that it seemed to him that coming to New York would strengthen Adoula, and moving Tshombe out of Elizabethville might bring some realism to him. Tshombe is being assured by his representative in New York, Struelens, that US public opinion is divided.

The Foreign Minister said that he also would prefer a conference. If there is agreement on this point, a joint proposal to this effect might be presented the following morning to U Thant. Both procedures could be mentioned to the Secretary General with the statement that the US and Belgium prefer the second one. It is of course hard to foresee the answer of the Secretary General. There still would be difficulties if U Thant approves. Mr. Bomboko, in his meeting with Spaak the previous day, took a very tough line. Mr. Bomboko said Adoula does not wish to meet with Tshombe on a footing of equality. However, asking Adoula to meet with representatives of the US, the UK and Belgium, and then summoning Mr. Tshombe to appear, should resolve this particular difficulty.

Ambassador Stevenson said he preferred the meeting in New York. Obtaining Adoula's consent depended on convincing him of the unanimity of our determination to apply sanctions. The British were weak on sanctions. He questioned whether they should be included. If U Thant were not prepared to call a meeting, perhaps it could be held in Brussels. This would be less satisfactory.

The President supported the New York meeting and enquired about sending messages to U Thant immediately.

The Foreign Minister suggested calling on the Secretary General the next morning. He pointed out that any appearance of acting outside of the Secretary General's plan should be avoided, as it might bring about unfavorable reactions from members of the Congo Advisory Committee, among others. Even the fact that the two countries—the US and Belgium—are making a proposal to the Secretary General places them in an exposed position. Although everyone knows that the Secretary General's plan was drawn up by the Western powers, there has been no great opposition to it and, in particular, the Soviets have said little. If, however, this policy is openly described as Western, there might be a strong reaction.

The President observed that an invitation on the part of the Secretary General to the Prime Minister of the Congo and the Belgian and US Governments would raise the question of why precisely those parties were invited. Mr. McGhee proposed adding two African members of the CAC.

Governor Williams raised three difficulties: 1) Adoula's position is shaky and he might fear to leave Léopoldville;

2) Adoula's aversion to meeting Tshombe, especially outside the Congo;

3) The conference might appear to be just one more meeting.

Mr. McGhee said that this plan offers the inducement of important sums of money paid to the Central Government and also makes clear that sanctions will be seriously considered in the case of failure.

The Foreign Minister commented that it is true that Prime Minister Adoula's situation is difficult, but he was not sure he would be further weakened if he were to come to New York on the Secretary General's invitation. He would probably come if it were made quite clear that he would not be on a footing of equality with Tshombe.

The President remarked that the problems raised by Governor Williams were severe but would exist even if a mission were sent to the Congo.

Mr. Spaak said that U Thant should be asked tomorrow what he would do if the proposal failed. We should be able to get a list of the sanctions he had in mind.

The President emphasized that the proposal must be put forward as the Secretary General's, to which we would respond. The Secretary General in fact would have no alternative but to accept the proposal, since he cannot carry out his own plan without Belgian and American backing. The President asked when should we get in contact with the UK. Perhaps after we have U Thant's agreement we should say to the UK you are welcome to take part. He noted the need for the UK to go on record and say that it will not oppose sanctions. If U Thant does not agree, we can consider whether to go ahead with a meeting in New York or Brussels.

The Foreign Minister observed that a meeting without the Secretary General would be dangerous since it would create strong opposition within the UN.

Mr. Cleveland explained that after December the Secretary General could not legally pay the approximately $10 million monthly the Congo operation costs without a new resolution of the General Assembly.

The press release was then discussed and agreed upon.3

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Belgium. Secret. Drafted by Burdett and Glenn. Briefing material for the meeting, enclosed with a November 25 memorandum from Brubeck to Bundy, is in Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2562.

2 Spaak met with Rusk and other Department officials at 10:30 that morning and again from noon to 1:20 p.m. Memoranda of the conversations are ibid., 770G.00/11–2762.

3 A joint statement issued that day by Kennedy and Spaak reaffirmed U.S. and Belgian support for the U.N. plan and concluded with the statement that unless there was "substantial progress within a very short period of time," it would be "necessary to execute further phases" under the plan, including "severe economic measures." (American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, p. 909) A draft of the statement and related material is in the Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Belgium Security. Telegram 774 to Léopoldville, November 27, called Gullion's attention to the concluding sentence of the joint statement as a "major step." (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2762)

341. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 341. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, November 28, 1962, 5 p.m.

814. Delivered McGhee letter (Deptel 445 to Elisabethville)2 to Tshombe 1100 this morning. Finance Minister Kibwe also present. Also read and left copy Kennedy-Spaak communique (Deptel 449)3 which Tshombe had not seen.

Tshombe restrained but somber and bitter. Stated could not accept such ultimatums. US and specifically McGhee could no longer be considered friends of Katanga. Their advice amounted to constant one-sided pressure on Katanga and to threats. Americans treated Negroes like dirt in US and same approach evident here, but US should know, would any case learn that threats against Africans only increase their opposition. Americans wished kill Katangans. Let them do so, but they would inherit a desert.

Tshombe said he now realized he fool not to have acted the demagogue and to have refused repeated communist bloc feelers to give him support. He should have acted like Adoula. Americans acted "as though Adoula was a god" whose fall would bring entire world down in ruins; failed to realize they had backed inefficient government from start which could at any time be replaced by other governments which more constructive, would not play footsy with communists or terrorize Americans with loud threats to call in communists. Adoula was "American dog"; only American dollars kept him alive, but dog was dragging his master wherever he wanted, not opposite.

Last minute, desperate US actions to prop up Adoula vain because even if Tshombe and Katanga destroyed, Adoula would not be helped, would finally founder. Adoula's difficulties were of his own making, centered on Léopoldville, not Katanga. His government corrupt, had achieved nothing, failed to gain public support in whole period its existence. Tshombe in effect being forced pay for Adoula's shortcomings and failures, American incapacity to control him. "What magic influence has he over you?" Something illogical in situation where US supporting an incompetent government which had no program of internal reform and whose only policy was to reduce functioning part of Congo to its level. US making serious error of judgment in backing loser, but "I am not going to be forced into the same rotten canoe".

Spaak might issue communique talking of economic sanctions. Tshombe had saved Belgian women from rape, Belgian property from destruction at independence, but would be Belgians and US stockholders of UMHK who would lose from economic sanctions. "Every bridge, every road, every plant in Katanga will go into the air. Preparations have been ordered and made. I pledge that these steps will be taken whether I am here to order it or not".

Tshombe said Katangans being treated like slaves, had nothing to lose by destruction European property. Said US would have big relief job on hands like in defeated Germany, would have to feed, clothe Katangans' repair industry or leave UN sitting in midst desert. Katangans would have more work than ever in rebuilding.

I several times emphasized that US did not want "make war" on Katanga but to see adoption of plan which provided constructive opportunity for future and attempted direct discussion to individual points McGhee letter. Tshombe said Americans knew Gendarmerie would mutiny if he sent Muke to take oath in Léopoldville at this time and this was obvious purpose their insistence this point. Stated ANC this very moment again attacking Kongolo and has again advanced within 2 kilometers of city. Impossible take oath these conditions. Claimed had been repeatedly tricked by UN with regard arrival UN troops in Elisabethville, ANC in Albertville, Kabalo. Why should he allow UN freedom of movement in South Katanga to perform same such game all over again. Kibwe mentioned further UMHK copper shipment (Contel 810)4 showed draft order for dispatch 70 tons to Matadi. Tshombe said he most doubtful value this measure since would be considered as "outside framework of plan" by US and UN, thus valueless. He made same reply to my question on transmitting his draft of constitution. Said whole UN plan was trick and fraud, only US interest was to prop up its puppet Adoula, "sick man of Congo".

Tshombe showed no inclination to move from current stand pat position, is perhaps waiting for outcome political melee in Léopoldville. His repeated references to destruction of transport and production facilities by the Katangans were delivered in calm but emphatic manner; he several times said UN could get to Kolwezi and Jadotville but long before that facilities would have been destroyed. Most difficult assess his determination this point. Seems doubtful that purely economic measures would provoke Katangan action. Tshombe mentioned "bridges" more frequently than anything else, thus tending confirm assumption Gendarmerie would blow bridges Jadotville and Kolwezi in event UN military advance, but was somewhat less insistent on possibility destruction other facilities (of which Le Marinel and Del Commune dams remain most vulnerable and most important).

Dean

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2862. Confidential; Priority. Received at 11:39 a.m. and repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, and USUN.

2 See footnote 3, Document 337.

3 Dated November 27. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2762) It transmitted the text of the joint statement cited in footnote 2, Document 340.

4 Telegram 810, November 26, reported that, according to the Union Minie re director in Elisabethville, Tshombe had agreed to a UMHK proposal for a further copper shipment via Matadi. (Department of State, Central Files, 870G.25/11–2662)

342. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 342. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, November 28, 1962, midnight.

2015. Eyes only Secretary and McGhee. Eyes only Principal Officers. Congo. Stevenson, McGhee and Spaak had two-hour mtg this PM with SYG. Also present were Williams, Yost, Rothschild, Davignon, Loridan, Bunche and Gardiner.

U Thant said he first wished to express his gratitude to Spaak and McGhee for joint statement by President and Spaak2 which he considered very helpful.

Spaak then said he had talked with President and Secretary. Must now begin from starting point that Tshombe's answer to Gardiner letter Nov 2 [1] not satisfactory.3 Most logical step, one would think, would be proceed with measures outlined in Reconciliation Plan (Courses of Action). However, this policy open to question because it not known what Tshombe reaction would be and where sanctions would lead. Two measures, therefore, have been considered. First, sending tripartite team to Leoville and Eville. However, had discussed situation yesterday with US and felt SYG had reservations, would consent to mission but would not sponsor it. US and Belgium had therefore reconsidered in view difficulties measure would present both for selves and SYG. Moreover, would be difficult to achieve and time-consuming. Therefore, had decided that second proposal, which he had mentioned to SYG Nov 26, would be preferable. It would be better for SYG keep leadership of operation, decide on steps and not give this role to US and GOB. US and Belgium thought it would be desirable for SYG to invite Adoula to New York to discuss reintegration problem. At same time, SYG could call upon US, GOB and UK to send reps to New York at Ministerial level. After this first stage, SYG would call Tshombe to New York and all those who had agreed on desirable steps would pressure Tshombe accept agreed measures. Tshombe would be told of plan have UMHK pay foreign exchange and taxes direct to GOC and it would be demonstrated to him how other measures would be carried out. US could tell Tshombe it would support sanctions. UK could tell him he could not rely on it for protection against sanctions. Belgium would say it ready support all measures especially payment by UMHK to GOC. US and GOB were in agreement this formula would be better, would put most pressure on Tshombe, could be implemented quickly, would be more direct and apply pressures on Tshombe all at once. If this not successful, final phases of Reconciliation Plan could be applied.

U Thant expressed thanks for interesting and constructive proposals. Reviewed history of Reconciliation Plan to date, pointing out its implementation had met with deferral after deferral. Finally, because of CAC pressure, he had informed CAC of Nov 15 deadline. His objection UN participation in new proposal was procedural. He did not want to give Adoula impression UN once again deferring action on plan. Therefore, he preferred tripartite mission proposal, would tell Adoula plan not abandoned, then he would give tripartite mission until Dec. 10. He considered main flaws in new proposal were that Adoula not competent negotiate for GOC, would have to bring Bomboko, Kamitatu and three or four other Ministers with him to New York as well as several members Parliament.

McGhee then explained second proposal not contrary to plan. Latter called for consultation of govts which was exactly what now being proposed. President liked proposal which would have advantage of reasserting SYG's leadership in implementation of plan. Much time could be saved by reps of countries concerned assembling in one place. He was sure that Spaak, Home and Rusk would come if invited. World would applaud SYG's invitation as bold effort resolve issue.

U Thant said he understood all this. However, assumed that Adoula would not come and that if he did trip would create great difficulty for him in Leoville. Also SYG's action would surely be misconstrued in UN. Bunche added that he even more concerned about reaction in UN, particularly on part Afro-Asians and Sov bloc. (Spaak suggested this reservation might be met by addition one or two members of CAC to consulting group.) Moreover, Bunche said, Tshombe would have field day in New York with US press and TV. Summons to New York might end in great personal success for him.

McGhee suggested proposal could be put up to Adoula through Gardiner. Perhaps Adoula would not object. McGhee wondered whether problem might not be resolved by sending intermediary to Tshombe in Eville after consultations among SYG, Adoula and interested powers had taken place here.

U Thant remarked this would resolve more than half his problem. Extensive discussion then produced decision that Gardiner would be sent Leoville tomorrow to explain second proposal to Adoula. Question of whether Tshombe would be summoned to New York or an intermediary sent to inform him of decisions was left in abeyance subject to future decision. Doubt was expressed that UK should be invited and it was agreed that US would sound out UK and notify Gardiner of decision through Gullion in Leoville. Considerable doubt was expressed whether UK would agree attend consultations in New York and whether it even desirable that it do so since it was generally agreed that it would not be able to participate in measures. Common front would thus be broken.

Subsequent to mtg, Spaak and McGhee discussed problem in US Mission where general agreement reached that New York talks would have better chance success if British did not participate. Principal concern was whether Gardiner, who had shown little enthusiasm for new proposal, would really push it with Adoula. It was decided that Belgian and US reps should meet again with Bunche tomorrow morning in effort firm up manner of Gardiner approach. It was agreed that while Gardiner should make first approach to Adoula, US and Belgian Ambs should coordinate with him in order support proposal with Adoula. To do this, it would be necessary that Gardiner and Ambs be in possession of same version of proposal. For use in mtg with Bunche, agreed text of proposal was ironed out by Spaak and McGhee. Resulting text transmitted by septel.4 At mtg tomorrow strong effort will be made get Bunche accept text and assure that Gardiner, instead simply explaining proposal to Adoula and stating it has SYG's endorsement, will make real effort persuade Adoula of advantages of acceptance.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2862. Confidential. Received at 6:07 a.m. on November 29 and repeated to Brussels, London, Léopoldville, and Elisabethville.

2 See footnote 2, Document 340.

3 See footnote 3, Document 324. The text of Tshombe's reply, dated November 12, was transmitted in telegram 753 from Elisabethville, November 13. It declared that Katanga had endeavored to execute the U.N. Plan and charged that the Adoula government wanted the plan to fail so that it could "pursue its policy of violence and of domination." (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–1362) For text of an annex to the letter, which listed actions that Tshombe stated Katanga had taken to carry out the plan, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 901–905.

4 Telegram 2016, November 28. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2862)

343. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 343. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, November 29, 1962, 9 p.m.

2034. Eyes only Secretary and McGhee. Eyes only Principal Officers. Policy. Subject: Congo. Reference: USUN 2015.2 Prior to meeting with Bunche this morning, Rothschild, Loridan and Davignon met at mission with Yost and MacArthur. Rothschild said text of new proposal agreed on last night (USUN 2015 [2016])3 was still satisfactory to Belgians but that Spaak thought best not present it to Bunche since it might necessitate new consultations by Bunche with SYG. This was agreed. Belgians accepted without reservations redraft of text done this a.m. in USUN, which has purpose of tightening up previous text and adding reference to conveying decisions reached to Tshombe. New text, which approved by McGhee in telecon with Pedersen, follows by separate telegram.4 Understanding is that it will be used only internally by US and Belgians. In place this text group approved brief talking paper for discussion with Bunche. Text this paper also follows by separate telegram.5

Meeting in Bunche's office at 11:30 a.m. revealed major transformation overnight in UN attitude toward new proposal, with both Bunche and Gardiner much more enthusiastic about it than previous evening. Bunche said his impression of understanding reached last night was that Gardiner would proceed Léopoldville, inform Adoula of talks here, "sound him out" on second of two proposals, e.g., "consultations" which would be called by SYG and would include Adoula, Spaak, Rusk and high representative of UMHK but not UK Foreign Minister. Loridan broke in to say the Belgians thought UK should not be excluded. They should be invited but they might not come. Bunche explained UN view that if UK invited this would present difficulties because UK had accepted only phase one of courses of action and had reservations to remainder. This would be known to Adoula and Gardiner's approach would thus be handicapped. Bunche added confidentially that British had further damaged their position with respect to Congolese by suggesting to some UN delegates that Tshombe should replace Adoula as Prime Minister. MacArthur suggested that UK need not be invited but could be called into consultations later if needed. Loridan suggested that Gardiner therefore need tell Adoula only about US and Belgian participation.

Bunche then continued with summary his understanding which was that after Gardiner had approached Adoula, US and Belgian Ambassadors Léopoldville would support proposal with Adoula. Gardiner would tell Adoula that from discussions here had emerged idea that since consultation was provided for in plan, it was desirable that SYG confer with Adoula and representatives of interested governments. This was simply practicable step in context plan and not a new proposal.

Yost suggested Adoula be told that plan having encountered obstacles it now necessary consult on moving forward. SYG would therefore invite Adoula come and consult with him and would also request presence Spaak and Rusk. Gardiner pointed out that plans were being made on assumption Adoula would agree to proposal. Gardiner said he would do his best to get Adoula's agreement. However, he wanted to know what he was supposed to do if Adoula did not agree. Yost replied that it would then be necessary to consult again. However, we hoped Gardiner could convince Adoula of desirability of consultations which would have effect of strengthening Adoula's position. MacArthur suggested that Gardiner point out to Adoula that powers concerned wish agree with SYG and Adoula on measures to be taken, then if Tshombe would not agree, powers would be committed to move forward. Consultations would assist Spaak vis-a-vis own government.

Bunche then said he had understood yesterday that there was no question of inviting Tshombe to New York. Said SYG wanted make very clear he could not invite Tshombe. Gardiner must be clear on this point in talking to Adoula. This was in fact key to winning Adoula agreement to come to New York. Moreover SYG objected Tshombe's coming because of sure negative Afro-Asian reaction. Davignon alluded to possibility that, after consulting, group might feel best way to persuade Tshombe accept decisions would be summon him to New York. It was finally agreed that if Gardiner were asked whether proposal included invitation to Tshombe he could tell him this not at all contemplated during period of consultation and would only occur if Adoula himself subsequently considered it desirable.

It was further agreed that sooner consultation in New York could take place the better. Gardiner said he could arrive Léopoldville December 2. How soon Adoula could come would depend on situation with parliament. Consensus of group was it unlikely consultations could begin before end of week beginning December 2, but that they should be held soon as possible.

Yost then reviewed talking paper developed in morning (see above) which US and Belgians suggested be used by Gardiner as basis for his conversation with Adoula. Davignon called particular attention to paragraph D(2),6 pointing out this had not been mentioned in yesterday's meeting. Said Belgium anxious participate in action proposed in D(2) if agreeable to UN. US said it also would like participate. Gardiner wondered about inclusion point D(5). He thought Adoula would take position he had done everything he had to do on constitution. Rothschild pointed out that purpose of giving Gardiner paper was so that he could give Adoula some idea of what would be brought up in consultations. Purpose was avoid Adoula's feeling cheated when he arrived in New York and someone raised subjects such as constitution. It was agreed that Gardiner should mention question of constitution to Adoula but not lay too much stress on it at this time.

Since Gardiner had no further questions concerning his mission, Loridan and Yost then asked Bunche if he could give them paper containing 16 measures which Bunche and SYG had mentioned on several previous occasions as being actions which UN might be able to take to further implementation of plan. Bunche explained that there were 17 and [not?] 16 items involved, and that these had resulted from an internal exercise of UN. It had started with 30 or 40 possible steps and had been distilled down in terms of practicability and feasibility to 17. However, SYG had not agreed to release list to anyone since he had not discussed steps with CAC. Steps covered all phases of action inside and outside plan, were a catalogue of measures from which selection could be made as required. Yost said we hoped discuss measures in detail with SYG before consultation with Adoula began. MacArthur pointed out that there might be time element in some actions which might require legislation, therefore it reasonable discuss them now. Bunche said SYG might be willing to discuss with US and Belgium but had been concerned about possible leak. Subject was then dropped without agreement as to when SYG would reveal measures to US and Belgium.

Comment: Meeting resulted in clear understanding that Gardiner would take lead in presenting new proposal to Adoula, basing himself on talking paper which, however, would not be given Adoula. Paper would be transmitted by USUN to Gullion and given by him to Belgian Ambassador. Both Ambassadors would await Gardiner's arrival and consult with him on how best support latter's approach to Adoula. UN is clearly committed to proposal and Gardiner apparently ready do his best to sell it to Adoula without suggesting any alternative measures. Consultations will begin as soon as Adoula can arrange be absent from Léopoldville. UK will not be initially invited and decision on Tshombe will await developments with Adoula having veto over invitation to Tshombe to come to New York. There appears little prospect in any event that SYG will favor this course, though it remains open as possibility.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2962. Confidential; Priority. Received at 3:25 a.m. on November 30 and repeated to Brussels, London, Léopoldville, and Elisabethville.

2 Document 342.

3 See footnote 3, Document 342.

4 Telegram 2037 from USUN, November 29. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–2962)

5 Telegram 2039 from USUN, November 29. (Ibid.)

6 Paragraph D listed elements to be included in the prospective consultations in New York, including: 1) arrangements concerning foreign exchange and taxes, 2) steps that might be taken to equip one or two ANC battalions, 3) additional economic measures to implement the plan, 4) formulas for application of the rest of the plan, such as military oath, amnesty, and military integration, 5) proposals that the Congolese Government declare its intention to give careful consideration to proposed amendments to the constitution, including those from Tshombe, consistent with the U.N. plan, and 6) methods of conveying the decisions of the consultations to Tshombe.

344. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 344. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, November 30, 1962, 1:23 p.m.

792. Eyes only Ambassador and Consul from Under Secy. McGhee. Following are some broad observations on our strategy in the Congo-Katanga issue:

We are approaching the "crunch" in our efforts to resolve the problem of Katangese secession. We have failed to induce meaningful negotiations under the Plan by merely appealing to the two parties. It is more important to recognize this fact and pass on to some other approach with a better chance of success than to attempt to assess blame as between Tshombe and Adoula.

The next means which must be employed, to which we are committed under the Plan, like in the area of forceful actions in the economic field; i.e., actions taken contrary to the desires and without the agreement of Tshombe and in some cases of the companies involved. We must keep in mind, however, that the objective of the pressures these actions will create is still to induce negotiations under the Plan. If they result in actions by Tshombe or others to destroy the Katanga economy and their continued resistance in the "bush", our policy cannot be said to have succeeded. As a consequence, there must be somebody for Tshombe to talk to when, hopefully, the time comes when he wants to talk.

Pursuant to this, I have today requested Gardiner in New York, and he has promised to try, to get Adoula to name a new negotiator at ministerial level to go to Eville in place of Ngalula. Gardiner believes it will be better for the negotiator "not to run after Tshombe but to wait until Tshombe asks to talk to him". Hopefully discussions could, in the meantime, be resumed in the Military and Economic Commissions.

The GOC must, if and when Tshombe desires to talk, be prepared to negotiate flexibly with him. In the past the GOC have often appeared merely to be holding firm in the expectation that the UN and we will in the end be willing to crush Tshombe. In the meantime, I believe we should make clear to Adoula that failure to be willing to negotiate and to stop GOC attacks at Kongolo in which we should make clear to him we know are still going on, will make it much more difficult for us and the GOB to apply the more severe economic measures that we agree are necessary.

In planning measures to put pressure on Tshombe, we must seek to minimize the political problems he will face in seeking a way out. We must also take into account, however, that just because he says he will not respond to threats and pressures, does not mean that he will not in fact do so when their full effect is felt. Tshombe is capable of yielding to pressures now just as he has in the past.

We must also continue to make it abundantly clear that we have not abandoned the Plan. All the steps we propose to take involve either a part of the Plan or pressures envisaged in the Plan to achieve all or a part of the Plan. Actually the Plan, as we know, is merely a compendium of principles applicable to the practical arrangements to reunite what, in effect, are today two separate countries. If we did not have a Plan these same arrangements would have to be made. This reunion is a complex affair. All the parts cannot be made to fit into place at one time merely by the clapping of the hands. The simplest elements of the Plan, even those which both parties are willing to carry out, require difficult negotiation in order to determine what each side is to do and when. These negotiations will be completed at different times for different parts of the Plan. Similarly the application of pressure methods envisaged under the Plan cannot be accomplished by some automatic process, but requires careful negotiation and planning among the parties concerned.

We should not admit, moreover, that an effort to push a particular part of the Plan represents an abandonment of the Plan. If we merely stand aside and exhort both parties to proceed with the Plan as a whole, which actually involves many separate elements of varying difficulty, nothing happens. It is expecting too much of the parties to ask them to face all the Plan at once.

Our best strategy, it is believed, is to take those parts of the Plan ready for immediate execution, say the oath-taking or closing of the GOK foreign office, and to urge they be done, hoping that this will result in removal of obstacles that will permit the parties to proceed to carry out other parts of the Plan. If it does not, we have to start pressing for action on next step. The more the various steps are interrelated and the accomplishment of one set as a precondition for proceeding with the other, the more rigid the Plan becomes and the more difficult its accomplishment.

We must also play for the "breaks." If the "crunch" produces any "give" on the part of Tshombe, we must be in a position to take advantage of it to further the Plan. It is highly unlikely that the final act of the drama of Katanga secession can be stage-managed by us or can even be predicted with any high degree of certainty. Our principal opportunity lies in so setting the stage that we can take advantage, as they occur, of events not now foreseeable but which could have a decisive effect on the outcome.

We must always keep in mind, moreover, that what can be achieved through agreement, even agreement under pressure, will be much easier to live with later and be more likely to "stick", than what is achieved by the direct application of force—particularly military force.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–3062. Secret; Priority. Drafted and approved by McGhee and cleared by Burdett, Fredericks, and Wallner. Also sent to Brussels, London, Elisabethville, and USUN.

345. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 345. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, November 30, 1962, 7 p.m.

1268. Called on Adoula to do what I could about prospective Cabinet changes. Since Thomas Kanza had been rumored for Foreign Minister, reminded Adoula Kanza had been excluded from U.S. at GOC request and his nomination could be embarrassing. Adoula said Kanza would not be named.

Adoula then painfully revealed that Cabinet had taken decision to suspend administrative punishments for accused persons. In great embarrassment, he confirmed my estimate that this meant freeing Gizenga. He claimed latter would not be allowed to leave Léopoldville and will be under surveillance until he is tried. (Release orders for other detenus, including Bisukiro, contain similar provisions. We doubt that they will be observed after first few days.) He also said Gizenga could occupy no government post and could not appear in Parliament.

I observed that he knew well grave effect this news would have in my country. Said it was noteworthy Isvestia again agitating for Gizenga.

Adoula said it was no coincidence Isvestia spoke for Gizenga. As to effect on foreign opinion of letting Gizenga go, he knew it all too well, but said sorrowfully that I must be aware that his failure to unify country by procrastination on UN resolutions had brought him to this pass. He had been told to be patient until all patience in Parliament and country had run out. He had been obliged to take this step to forestall Parliamentary vote for outright liberation and even now was not sure that it could be prevented. At this point he said he was in despair of working with Parliament. He commented that measures U.S. and UN were now talking about were coming too late even if we meant them. Government and Parliament were becoming unmanageable and he was about "used up."

Adoula said he had tried to dispose of Gizenga every legal way he knew how, even to discussing managed escapes with interested powers; he had asked Belgians to supply the Higher Tribunal projected under Loi Fondamentale for cases like Gizenga possibly but Belgians had abstained; Parliament could create Tribunal but this would require two-thirds majority.

I said I still hoped some way could be found to get Gizenga to Switzerland for medical reasons and prevent his return. Adoula agreed but asked how it could be done. I could give no concrete answer. (Comment: Department will note that Gizenga not yet released and there may be slim hope that release may yet be avoided.)

I remarked Tshombe would hail the news as proof of weakness of government and Communist influences on it. This drew only spark of day from despondent Adoula. He said he would like to [see?] Tshombe try such claim. After all it was Tshombe who had called for release of Gizenga by name and it was he (and West) who had so agitated the amnesty issue which opposition had seized upon.

As I left, Adoula said he was preparing a note for Bomboko to give to President describing grave situation of GOC and its relation to Katanga problem.

During conversation Adoula received call which he said gave him information that signatures were being gathered for Senate motion of no confidence. He said he could beat it but he lamented having to repeat excruciating process of last few days.2

Comment: Adoula is in sad state at present. Says he is sick and attributes it to "fatigue." He is much of a family man and is concerned for wife who is still in hospital.

I would guess that he is apprehensive about deals he had to make to get through Parliament vote and that Kamitatu forced his hand on Gizenga.

It is still doubtful whether Adoula can stay in office during next few weeks or whether he can do so without excessive concessions to left/right opposition.

Department should continue to bear in mind alternative of suspension of Parliament or convocation of constituent assembly. Kasavubu or Adoula might ask or seize authority to rule by decree during interim. To do this Adoula would have to make extensive promises in economic and political fields, particularly to assure recovery of Katanga. Before he could make such promises he would have to have something more concrete from U.S. and UN than he now has including something more than UMHK payments scheme. A military success would also help him.

In an effort to find out if Bomboko had informed Adoula about proposed confrontation in New York, I asked Adoula if he contemplated a visit to U.S. or UN. He missed drift of question and replied that if Communists took over country he would have to get out and would seek aid in United States.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–3062. Confidential; Niact; Limit Distribution. Received at 3:58 p.m. and repeated to London, Brussels, USUN, and Stanleyville.

2 Adoula had barely survived a vote of no confidence on November 28. Telegram 1245 of that date reported that Adoula's narrow victory had left him seriously weakened; the government had been "chastised and humiliated" and Adoula's authority had been "severely shaken." It concluded: "Department should note that Embassy was deployed full out on this operation at considerable risk to future relations with opposition groups. [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified] Doubt if pitcher could go to well this way one more time." (Ibid., 770G.00/11–2862)

346. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 346. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, November 30, 1962.

Unnumbered. Saw Tshombe 1100 today to make demarche contained Department telegram 450.2 Added as personal viewpoint, with regard his remarks on possible demolition of transport, production facilities in Katanga,3 that such acts of destruction would deprive entire Congolese people as well as Katanga population of important source livelihood, believed that world public opinion would not understand such facts sabotage, political future of Katangan Government could be gravely endangered as result. Also mentioned story of Tarquin [and] Cumaean Sibyl to make point that as present developments continue, Tshombe could not count indefinitely on as favorable conditions as contained in plan.

Tshombe laconic, self-contained, dogged. Said could not and would not accept threats. Said Adoula's problems result his own incapacity to rule, were not reflection Katanga problem; he had made two serious mistakes on arrest of deputies and declaration of emergency Léopoldville and had been justifiably attacked for that reason. U.S. was creating conditions for communism in Congo supporting unpopular government in face general opposition, thus making anti-Americanism widespread sentiment in Congo, in turn preparing ground for Soviets.

Tshombe said demolition measures had been taken long ago and were not recent. Declared Katanga population fed up with entire situation of threats and pressures, would go ahead on own to destroy facilities; he could not stop them if he wanted to. "Everything will be destroyed, everything." His place as a chief was in front ranks his people and he ready to die with them. Stated Kongolo again under attack by ANC—that had to be his answer oath-taking. Said he did not consider Kasavubu speech to be amnesty. Had talked on telephone yesterday to Mwambe Bertin, President of Assembly. Latter told him no draft whatever of amnesty had been presented to Assembly and that Kasavubu merely read speech telegraphed to him from New York.

I said no one wanted destroy Tshombe in personal or political sense; our sole interest stable Congo through application UN plan. He mature man, experienced politician, would recognize that forces ranged against him greater than own, make best deal possible; none of the measures we had suggested would damage his position. Tshombe said he would carefully consider points in demarche but concluded by stating twice that, in name Katangan people he would not accept "threats of measure" contained my presentation.

Dean

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/11–3062. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, USUN, and Brussels. The source text indicates that the telegram was received on November 30 but does not indicate the time of transmission or receipt. A note on the source text indicates the telegram was received by Godley's office "through other channels" by telephone. The text was repeated in telegram 858 from Elisabethville, December 5. (Ibid., 770G.00/12–562)

2 Telegram 450, November 28, instructed Dean to approach Tshombe as soon as possible and urge him to send officers to Léopoldville to take an oath of loyalty to the Congolese Government as he had promised McGhee he would do when the government issued a proclamation of amnesty. Dean was to point out that growing U.N. pressures might compel Thant to resort to "vigourous steps" unless Tshombe made substantial progress on the U.N. plan promptly and that the United States would support Thant in the implementation of the plan "even if measures we have so far been anxious to avoid become necessary." (Ibid., 770G.00/11–2862)

3 See Document 341.

December 1962–January 1963: Collapse of the Katangan SecessionDecember 1962–January 1963: Collapse of the Katangan Secession

347. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, December 4, 1962, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.70G11/12–462. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, Elisabethville, and London.

348. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, December 6, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–662. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, Paris, and Elisabethville.

349. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, December 8, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–862. Confidential; Niact; Limit Distribution. Received at 2:35 p.m. and repeated to Brussels.

350. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, December 8, 1962, 5:41 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–762. Secret; Niact. Drafted and approved by McGhee and cleared by Williams, Sisco, and Burdett. Also sent to London, Leopoldville, USUN, and Elisabethville.

351. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, December 8, 1962, 7:12 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–862. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Sisco; cleared by Williams, Burdett, and Cleveland; and approved by McGhee. Also sent to Brussels, London, Léopoldville, and Elisabethville.

352. Editorial Note

353. Letter From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Under Secretary of State (Ball)

Washington, December 11, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1162. Top Secret.

354. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, December 12, 1962, 8:54 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1262. Top Secret; Priority; Noforn. Drafted by Sisco, Buffum, and Godley; cleared by Burdett, Cleveland, Williams, and McGhee; and approved by Ball. Also sent to Elisabethville and USUN and repeated to Paris for Rusk, who was attending the NATO Ministerial Meeting.

355. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Paris

Washington, December 12, 1962, 9:39 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 870G.00/12–1262. Top Secret; Priority. Drafted and approved by McGhee and cleared by Williams, Cleveland, and Ball.

356. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate in Elisabethville

Washington, December 13, 1962, 4:32 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1362. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Godley and Ball's Special Assistant Arthur A. Hartman; cleared in substance by Williams, Wallner, and Burdett; and approved by McGhee. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to Paris for Rusk and to Brussels, London, and USUN.

357. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, December 13, 1962, 9:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1362. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Godley and Williams; cleared in substance by McGhee; approved by Williams. Repeated to Paris for Rusk and to Brussels, London, and Elisabethville.

358. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy

Washington, December 13, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Congo Security, 1962. Secret.

359. Memorandum for President Kennedy

Washington, December 13, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Congo Security, 1962(B). Secret. Drafted by Sisco, Buffum, and Cleveland.

360. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, December 14, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Series, Congo, 12/14/62. Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Kaysen.

361. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to the Under Secretary of State (Ball)

Washington, December 16, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Top Secret; Eyes Only.

362. Memorandum for President Kennedy

Washington, undated.

Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Congo Security, 1962(B). Top Secret; Eyes Only. The memorandum bears no drafting information. Bundy's copy of this memorandum bears a notation that it was received from the Department of State on December 17. (Ibid., National Security Files, Congo)

363. Editorial Note

364. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy

Washington, December 17, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Secret.

365. Memorandum by the President's Special Counsel (Sorensen)

Washington, December 17, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, Sorensen Papers, Classified Subject File, Congo. No classification marking. The document is headed "TCS–12/17/62" and bears a handwritten notation "NSC." There is no indication that this memorandum was sent to anyone. For Sorensen's recollection of the discussion that prompted this memorandum, see Kennedy, p. 638.

366. Editorial Note

367. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, December 17, 1962, 8:34 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1762. Top Secret; Niact; Eyes Only. Drafted and approved by Williams and cleared in draft by Cleveland, Burdett, Greene, and McGhee. Repeated to USUN and Brussels for Stevenson and MacArthur.

368. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, December 18, 1962, 5:14 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1862. Top Secret; Priority; Eyes Only. Drafted by Sisco and Cleveland, cleared in draft by Rusk and by Kaysen, and approved by Cleveland.

369. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, December 18, 1962, 8:17 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.5811/12–1862. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Robert J. McCloskey, Special Assistant to Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs Robert J. Manning; cleared in substance by Williams and Cleveland; and approved by Manning.

370. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, December 19, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1962. Confidential; Priority. Received at 1:18 p.m. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, Elisabethville, London, and Paris.

371. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State

Brussels, December 19, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1962. Top Secret; Niact. Received at 2:54 p.m.

372. Memorandum of Conversation

Nassau, December 19, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 325.70G/12–1962. Secret. Drafted by Tyler and approved by the White House on December 31. The conversation was held at the Prime Minister's house. For Macmillan's recollections of the discussion of the Congo at Nassau, see At the End of the Day, 1961–1963, p. 283.

373. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, December 19, 1962, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 870G.25/12–1962. Confidential; Priority. Received at 9:20 p.m. and repeated to Brussels and USUN.

374. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, December 19, 1962, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1962. Top Secret; Priority. Received at 10:35 p.m. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, and Nassau.

375. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, December 20, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Box 25, Chairman's Staff Group. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Colonel Legere for General Taylor.

376. Telegram From the Department of State to the Delegation at Nassau

Washington, December 20, 1962, 8:02 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2062. Top Secret; Priority; Eyes Only. Drafted by Sisco; cleared by Cleveland, Williams, Andrews, and McGhee; and approved by Rusk. An attached note from the Department of State duty officer to Brubeck states that Rusk had directed that the telegram should not be repeated to USUN for Stevenson and to Léopoldville for Gullion, as the telegram had indicated.

377. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, December 20, 1962, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2062. Confidential. Received at 11:15 p.m. and repeated to Brussels, London, Léopoldville, and Elisabethville.

378. Memorandum of Conversation

Nassau, December 21, 1962, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 325.70G/12–1962. Secret. Drafted by Tyler. According to Kennedy's appointment book, the conversation took place at the Prime Minister's residence between 11:07 a.m. and 12:05 p.m. (Kennedy Library)

379. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, December 21, 1962, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.2/12–2162. Secret; Niact. Received at 1:25 p.m. and repeated to USUN and Brussels.

380. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, December 21, 1962, 7:02 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/12–2162. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, Paris, and Elisabethville.

381. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Williams) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, December 21, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 750G.00/12– 2162. Top Secret. Drafted by Godley.

382. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, December 21, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Congo 381. Top Secret. The source text bears a notation that it was seen by Gilpatric.

383. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, December 24, 1962, 3:03 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/12–2462. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Sisco, cleared by Beaudry and Cleveland, and approved by Williams. Repeated to USUN for Stevenson and Brussels.

384. Telegram From the Army Attache in the Congo to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Léopoldville, December 24, 1962, 2:35 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.5811/12–2962. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to the Department of State for McNeil (McGhee?) and to the White House. Received at the Department of State at 12:40 p.m. on December 27. The source text is the Department copy.

385. Telegram From the Army Attache in the Congo to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Léopoldville, December 24, 1962, 3:15 p.m.

Source: Department of Defense, OSD Historical Office, Secretary of Defense Cable Files, Congo. Secret.

386. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, December 28, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Box 25, Chairman's Staff Group. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Colonel Legere for General Taylor.

387. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen)

Washington, December 28, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2862. Confidential. The source text was initialed by Cleveland but bears no drafting information. A somewhat condensed version of the memorandum was cabled to the President in Palm Beach, Florida, from the White House. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

388. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, December 28, 1962, 6:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2216. No classification marking. No drafting information appears on the source text. The meeting was held in the Secretary's office.

389. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Sloan) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric)

Washington, December 29, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RD 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Congo 381. Top Secret.

390. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, December 29, 1962, 8:38 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2962. Secret; Priority. Drafted and approved by Cleveland and cleared in draft by Williams, Davis, McGhee, Stevenson, and Rusk. Kaysen sent the text to the President in Palm Beach in a telegram stating that Rusk and Stevenson had talked to Bunche and received assurances that U.N. military plans were limited and that Thant was willing to make a statement of political objectives. (Telegram CAP 5676–62, December 29; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

391. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, December 30, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–3062. Confidential; Priority. Received at 6:30 p.m. and repeated to Léopoldville, Elisabethville, Brussels, and London.

392. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, December 30, 1962, 6:42 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–3062. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Sisco; cleared in substance by Williams, Kaysen, McGhee, and Ball; and approved by Cleveland. Repeated to London, Léopoldville, Brussels, and Elisabethville.

393. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, December 31, 1962, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–3162. Secret; Niact. Received at 1:12 p.m. and repeated to USUN, Brussels, Elisabethville, and London. Passed to the White House and JCS.

394. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, December 31, 1962, 6:49 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–3162. Secret. Drafted by Beaudry and approved by Davis. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, USUN, Elisabethville, and Salisbury.

395. Telegram From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy

Washington, January 1, 1963, 10:05 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Secret; Operational Immediate. The message was sent to the President's Air Force Aide, Brigadier General Godfrey T. McHugh, for the President.

396. Telegram From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy

Washington, January 2, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files Congo. Secret; Operational Immediate. The message was sent to General McHugh for the President. The source text doesnot indicate the message number or transmission time, but it bears a handwritten note stating that the copy as received was destroyed on January 9; thus the message was evidently sent.

397. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate in Elisabethville

Washington, January 2, 1963, 9:01 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–263. Confidential; Niact. Drafted and approved by McGhee and cleared in substance by Fredericks, Ball, and Rusk. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, Paris, and USUN.

398. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Ball)

Washington, January 2, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Secret.

399. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, January 3, 1963, 2:25 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–363. Secret; Niact. Drafted and approved by Rusk and cleared by McGhee and Ball.

400. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, January 3, 1963, 4:29 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–363. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Beaudry, Ball's Special Assistant George S. Springsteen, Jr., and Ball and approved by Ball. Also sent to Léopoldville and Elisabethville and repeated to Brussels and USUN.

401. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, January 3, 1963, 6:10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–363. Secret; Niact; No Other Distribution. Drafted and approved by Rusk and cleared by Cleveland, who also initialed for Williams. Repeated to USUN, London, and Brussels.

402. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, January 4, 1963, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–463. Secret; Niact. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, and London.

403. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, January 5, 1963, 4:26 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–563. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Sisco and Whitehouse; cleared by Cleveland, Williams, and Beaudry; and approved by Ball. Also sent to Elisabethville and USUN and repeated to London and Brussels.

404. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, January 6, 1963, 4:11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–663. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Eisenberg, cleared in substance by Cleveland and McGhee and in draft by Ball and Kaysen, and approved by Williams. Also sent to Elisabethville and repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and Paris.

405. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, January 8, 1963, 6:59 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–763. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Wallner, cleared by Williams and in draft by Beaudry and Kaysen, and approved by McGhee. Also sent to Elisabethville and USUN and repeated to Brussels and London.

406. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Consulate in Elisabethville

Léopoldville, January 9, 1963, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–963. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to the Department of State as telegram 1764, received at 5:03 p.m., which is the source text.

407. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and Secretary-General Thant

January 9, 1963, 7:16 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Calls. No classification marking. Drafted by McGhee based on attached notes by Bernau. Secretary Rusk was in Washington; Secretary-General Thant was in New York.

408. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, January 9, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–963. Secret; Niact. Received at 8:25 a.m. on January 10 and repeated to Elisabethville, USUN, Brussels, London, Lagos, and New Delhi.

409. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, January 10, 1963, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1063. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Elisabethville, Brussels, London, and Paris.

410. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, January 11, 1963, 2:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2216. No classification marking. The source text, which is headed "Mac Godley's debriefing—Secretary's Conference Room," does not indicate the drafter. Godley had just returned from an information-gathering trip to the Congo. Participants in the meeting not previously identified include Robert C. Good, Director of the Office of Research and Analysis for Africa in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research; Edward Streator of that office; Philip Merrill, Special Assistant to the President's Special Representative and Adviser on African, Asian, and Latin American Affairs; and the Secretary's Staff Assistant William E. Knepper.

411. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo.

Washington, January 14, 1963, 7:59 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1463. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Cleveland and Sisco, cleared by Williams and Beaudry, and approved by McGhee. Also sent to USUN, Brussels, and Elisabethville and repeated to London.

412. Memorandum by the Director of the Office of United Nations Political Affairs (Sisco)

Washington, January 16, 1963, 12:15 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1663. Limited Official Use. Copies were sent to Rusk, Kaysen, McGhee, Williams, and Tyler. The source text bears Rusk's initials, indicating that he saw it.

413. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, January 24, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. The source text does not indicate a drafter, but the Department of State copy indicates the memorandum was drafted by Cleveland. (Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/1–2463)

347. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 347. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, December 4, 1962, 5 p.m.

1298. London for Williams. SYG invitation to Adoula.2

1. Saw Prime Minister last night at 10:00 p.m. at his invitation. Belgians preferred I go ahead since they awaiting Brussels reaction to suggested change in text Spaak letter to Adoula.

2. At end of two hours' conversation in which I pushed all points in reference telegrams3 Adoula affirmed that "there was possibility" he would go to New York if: (A) Secretary General convoked meeting and stated clearly its purpose. Adoula might ask for meeting to check lack of progress on plan but was up to Secretary General to convene other powers. (B) Adoula would wish to know exactly who would be at meeting i.e., what powers and what reps of what powers. He is interested in composition of US Delegation and he would want Robiliart present with Belgians. Also this is means of insuring Tshombe or Tshombe rep not included. (C) Before going he would need most detailed indication of what would be done at the meeting. In other words, he sees himself going to New York not to begin new negotiations but to register decisions. At least he would want full agenda. (He has, of course not been given copy of agreed US Belgian paper.) He has been given copy of letter from Spaak of which we have been promised copy and which is said to trace a program.

3. Adoula said he would discuss with Bomboko and take further advice and probably have an answer Wednesday4 evening.

4. Adoula continues suspicious of program and most frequently voices query as to why it would be necessary to go to New York to make arrangements for UMHK payment scheme. My reply was he would be going to New York not merely for UMHK payments scheme, but to consider full plan. Adoula also responsive to argument Spaak seems to require the meeting in New York for political reasons and to pressure UMHK.

5. Adoula still fears UMHK will not actually follow through on proposal and also suspects that payment scheme may be used defer application of other measures of pressure or fulfillment of measures of plan. If this should turn out to be the case after he had gone to New York, he thinks his tour in office would collapse in absurdity. He even said he does not think USG should try to give him assurance on the subject because USG might also be made dupe.

6. Adoula continues to be impressed, however with the amounts of foreign exchange which might accrue to him. I did not discuss the distribution in terms of percentages.

While Adoula did not state categorically that internal political crisis would prevent his going, he conditioned everything on it and said he would have to be judge of this factor. It was still too early for him to say. He seemed to think that a week or ten days would be necessary before he could go if he went. I urged need for haste and did not press date because I thought more important get decision on principle.

7. Belgian Ambassador De Kerchove and Davignon saw Adoula this morning and went over same ground with similar results. Bomboko was present. Adoula principal refrain was why go to New York? And, why was it necessary for Prime Minister to go? Belgians explained that only he capable of sorting out the problem. (Adoula probably deferring to Bomboko in suggesting Prime Minister presence not necessary.)

8. Belgians say Bomboko began by counseling against the visit but became increasingly positive toward it. One possible explanation they say, is fact he worried by his talks in London with Kaunda5 and indication that the latter because he needs Nkumbula6 support is dickering with Tshombe.

9. Belgians believe they convinced Adoula of intrinsic worth of plan, of their bona fides in offering it and of wisdom of Spaak's tactics.

10. Belgians did not raise with Adoula subject of amnesty and constitution. Davignon indicated that he believed idea of amnesty should now be dropped in view tense political situation and with respect to constitution, he thought formula in Belgian/American paper was about as far as one could go. It was necessary however for Spaak to say he had carried latter issue to SYG and Adoula in top brass meeting. (Since his visit here both Davignon and Belgian Ambassador have become more impressed with dangers present in local political situation. This has not abated since Adoula narrowly beat vote of no confidence.) In essence danger is that extreme left is close to taking over with Tshombe assist.

11. Belgians say they amended letter from Spaak in sense of paragraph 2.A above. As I understand it SYG would see Adoula first and then other powers would be convened. Davignon also suggested to Adoula meeting might be held in Geneva if New York locale should be embarrassing to him politically.

Belgians and I will make no further representations on plan today unless we are called by Adoula or Bomboko.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.70G11/12–462. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, Elisabethville, and London.

2 Telegram 1291 from Léopoldville, December 3, reported that Gardiner had presented Thant's invitation to Adoula that afternoon and that Adoula's reaction was negative but not irrevocably so. (Ibid., 033.70G11/12–362)

3 No telegrams are cited. Telegram 797 to Léopoldville, December 1, suggested points that Gullion should emphasize in following up Gardiner's approach to Adoula. (Ibid., 770G.00/12–162)

4 December 5.

5 Kenneth Kaunda, head of the United National Independence Party of Northern Rhodesia.

6 Harry Nkumbula, head of the African National Congress of Northern Rhodesia. He and Kaunda had announced plans to form a coalition government.

348. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 348. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, December 6, 1962, 7 p.m.

1321. Re Embtels 13132 and 13143 . Following conferences with Belgians, I called on Adoula late last night after he had met with Gardiner. I showed him texts described reftels4 and gave him copy of paper on instituting Greene plan which Mobutu had approved.5

Adoula glanced hurriedly at text of proposed communique about his visit to New York. Said it was preposterous. He then launched into long emotional description his position partly I think intended for benefit his wife who had just returned from hospital and resting on couch beside him.

He said he had never been so discouraged as at present. He had been idiotically patient sticking with UN and U Thant plan. He had not been consulted on plan but had given his consent on understanding that it would be carried out promptly and in good faith by UN and sponsor nations, but circumstances intervened and it now too late for him and Congo. Idea that he should now go to New York with his government in ruins and security of country at stake, was out of question. Moreover he could see nothing in propositions made to him by Belgians and me which required his presence in New York.

He complained about ineptitude and hypocrisy of UN; said it had not been able to deliver on anything and now could not even keep his people from being arrested.

(Allegedly Tshombe had arrested some of the customs and immigration officials whom he had had standing by in Elisabethville.)

Tshombe was bombarding his troops and villages daily and US and UN seemed powerless. Meanwhile Cuban pilots appeared under wraps and US was delaying delivery of rockets.

Adoula went on to say that US must bear heavy responsibility for state of affairs since US dominant in UN. UN had been brought into Congo at US suggestion and US controlled tempo of its actions; now he was having to pay for all the delays which had been imposed upon him. He found it nearly impossible to defend himself before Parliament on this ground.

When I suggested that he might consider Parliamentary vacation this touched off new explosion. He declared that US visitor after US visitor had pressed set quorum on Parliament so it could consider constitution and amnesty and had urged virtues of Parliamentary system. Results bid fair to hand victory to Tshombe or to communists. He found himself powerless to prevent release of Gizenga because if he did not let him go under some conditions Parliament would let him go under no conditions. He found it misplaced that I should now speak to him about adjourning Parliament.

Adoula then with tears in his eyes began to talk of reports and rumors of Soviet offer of aid and aircraft. He said he would always resist the offers but they would be made whether he was in power or not. If they were made to him he could only let them be passed to Parliament and he would resign. He feared visit at any time from Soviet Ambassador. He was confident that both Parliament and the army would accept Soviet offer. All of this he claimed was result of US and UN hesitancy and timidity on UN plan. He feared that latest offer on UMHK payments was only another delay especially since it seemed to be a pretext to lure him to New York to start new negotiation.

He had told Secretary General he was going to resign by January 1, 1963. He did not believe he could last out next 10 days. Comment: Adoula outburst represented an abrupt change in mood of 24 hours previously but as Department is aware his nervous strength has been rapidly draining as time passed and Thant plan not applied. I believe return of Bomboko and Bomboko first contacts with political crisis here have been a main factor in working Adoula to this pitch. Reported arrest of GOC officials was also major irritant. I told Adoula that it was ridiculous as well as tragic not to go the last mile with the UN which was now obliged to succeed. I cited to him all of strong indications of US preparedness "to see the plan through" which had manifest in last two weeks. I said I would expect him to let me know of any offers from Soviet bloc, which might lead his country to disaster. However state he was in, I doubt if he even understood or heard me.

Following this talk I met with Gardiner, Davignon and Kerchove at latter's residence. I told them that in my opinion we should be thinking not about getting Adoula to New York but about real danger of dramatic reentry of Soviet Union in picture. This is I believe Kerchove view. Davignon and Kerchove thought of possibility of getting Bomboko to New York but I believe even this dubious.

It may still be possible however to send a very high-level mission to Adoula. He did interrupt his jeremiad slightly to heed the suggestion that perhaps Spaak or U Thant might come here. Gardiner says latter unlikely.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–662. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, London, Paris, and Elisabethville.

2 Telegram 1313, December 6, reported that the Embassy believed the Soviet Embassy might be about to make a concrete offer of military aircraft and other supplies to the Congolese Government. Adoula had told Gullion the previous evening that there were "reports" and "rumors" that the Soviets would make such an offer and that if they did, he could not refuse it but would inform Parliament and resign. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 1314, December 6, recommended immediate provision of rockets, military technicians, and at least one fighter plane to the Congo, stating that the possible Soviet provision of aircraft seemed to warrant consideration of "drastic measures." (Ibid.)

4 The reference telegrams did not transmit any texts. Gullion was apparently referring to telegrams 1310 and 1312, both dated December 5. Telegram 1310 transmitted the text of a Belgian draft of a possible Congolese request to the United Nations for U.N. provision of three fighter bombers. Gullion had agreed to discuss it with Adoula; he thought it was significant that the Belgians favored such a move. (Ibid., 332.70G/12–562) Telegram 1312 transmitted the text of a Belgian draft of a communique that would be issued by the Congolese Government announcing that Adoula would go to New York. (Ibid., 033.70G11/12–562)

5 Telegram 1303 from Léopoldville, December 5, reported that Mobuto had accepted a revised draft of a Congolese statement requesting the United Nations to implement the Greene plan. (Ibid., 770G.5/12–562)

349. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 349. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, December 8, 1962, 6 p.m.

1353. Eyes only Ambassador. Adoula summoned me at 1500. In striking contrast to his mood of last few days, he was brisk, confident and cordial. Said he wished me to know there was grave discontent in Army. Minister of Defense Anany had told him that had Government fallen on vote of no confidence Army would have arrested Parliamentarians.

Adoula said Army was still more disturbed because there was now before Parliament motion against Thant Plan. He was informing President of two Chambers he could not permit such discussion. Army was at front in support of Thant Plan and country salvation was committed to it. Adoula showed me telegram to Gardiner from Bunche received today in which Bunche expressed gave misgivings about action of Parliament and said there should be no weakening on Plan on verge of satisfactory results. Adoula said if Parliament went ahead with discussion it would be dissolved.

Motion about Thant Plan was Abako submission. He had asked to see President Kasavubu leader of Abako but had received word President was "absent." This did not seem to bother Adoula. I did not comment on Adoula's revelations but said I would report them. I did ask how long Parliament vacation might last.

He replied "X Days" which he said for him meant the life of the Legislature, i.e. about one year. I asked whether he had given any thought to calling a Constituent Assembly. Adoula said he was thinking about it.

Adoula said maybe Tshombe had good thing in convening Provincial Assembly only now and then.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–862. Confidential; Niact; Limit Distribution. Received at 2:35 p.m. and repeated to Brussels.

350. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 350. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, December 8, 1962, 5:41 p.m.

859. Eyes only for Ambassadors and Consul from Under Secy. McGhee. Spaak's willingness face show-down with Tshombe on UMHK payments (Brussels' 8042 ) gives us what is perhaps final opportunity make voluntary progress towards end Katangan secession along lines envisaged in UN Reconciliation Plan. If accompanied by forthcoming attitude on part of GOC, it is believed that there is real possibility that Tshombe will acquiesce in the proposal and that the back of his secession will be broken.

In any event Dept. still feels strategy outlined in Deptel 792 to Leopoldville, repeated others,3 is still valid. Since success in what we seek depends on cooperation of a number of different governments and other elements, each of which has its own particular interests, objectives and evaluation of situation, our odds can be greatly improved if we can persuade them, insofar as possible, to adopt our strategic concept so that our efforts will be self-reinforcing.

Unless you perceive some reason why this should not be done in your particular situation, you should take earliest opportunity have full and frank discussion with whomever you normally deal in such matters going over fully our concept of strategy outlined in Deptel 792 (which must of course be modified in Elisabethville) and attempting persuade government or other element concerned to take actions along following lines. If we are to take advantage of present opportunity we must induce some movement along these lines within next few days.

1. UN. We must persuade the UN to give conciliation phase of Plan another chance, even as we move on to economic pressures. Gardiner should again play an active mediatory role between Adoula and Tshombe on all aspects of the Plan. He should urge Adoula to make conciliatory statements, to get a top level negotiator back to Eville and discussions going again in Mixed Commissions. The UN should adopt a firmer attitude toward Adoula, now that he has taken Kongolo, to activate Tripartite Observation Teams and stop further military ventures. Every effort must be made to obtain a real standstill and cease fire on the part of both parties. The UN should realize the great importance of a change in UMHK payments to the GOC and give this every support. The UN should understand that the other purely economic sanctions they propose will have less effect, and may not in themselves be decisive in forcing Tshombe to capitulate, or even to negotiate. We will, in any event, expect to approve in advance individual sanctions they wish to apply. We must make it clear that we will take a careful look at any UN proposals for forceful action, either in Eville or elsewhere, which would lead to hostilities. We will not support the unprovoked use of force by the UN.

2. UK. We must continue to keep the UK advised of our plans, and express the hope they will at least continue to acquiesce in actions we, the UN and the GOB may feel impelled to take and not unwittingly make moves which would inhibit our actions. In particular, we should discourage the UK from making unnecessary statements of opposition to economic sanctions in the Congo even when qualified by assurances that they do not intend to oppose them.

3. GOB. We must continue to persuade the GOB to force change in UMHK payments to the GOC, with or without approval by Tshombe and without waiting for specific political concessions from Adoula. The alternative is across-the-board sanctions against Belgian companies in the Congo, with strong possibility for shut-down of plants in the Katanga and attacks against Belgians there and damage to plants, which is much the greater danger. We must assure them of our willingness to share in any losses incurred as a result of UMHK cooperation. We hope the GOB will realize their responsibilities, both from a historical standpoint and from the standpoint of their trade and investment in the Congo, to make a substantial contribution to the UN Import Program for the Congo and the carrying out of the Greene Plan.

4. UMHK. We must persuade the UMHK that their long-range interests lie in effecting unity of the Congo through the Plan; that they must be willing, as requested by the GOB, to take considerable risks to this end, at least to the point of making change in their payment to the GOC with or without Tshombe's approval. We must convince them of the inevitability of the end of the Katangan secession and that there is less danger to their personnel and interests through change in their payments to GOC than through more severe economic measures which will inevitably come if there is no progress, or hostilities which could come at any time through miscalculation. We must convince them of their obligations toward GOB and Western interests in the Congo. We must make it clear we are willing to help them with what losses they may suffer, but only if they cooperate with the Plan.

5. GOC. We must persuade Adoula that positive action is required on the part of the GOC if the Plan is to be accomplished. He must arouse himself and his government to make a last effort to carry out the Plan through conciliation. There is a limit as to what the UN can do without his cooperation. The UN will not initiate use of military force to achieve its objectives. Although we are prepared to go forward with economic pressures, there is no proof that they alone can assure Tshombe's capitulation. The GOC must always be ready to talk to Tshombe if and when he begins to feel the pressure. We must urge upon Adoula his obligation, in the light of what we and the UN are doing for him, to give more heed to the suggestions we make. We must urge him to stop further military actions, to activate Tripartite Observation Teams, to send a high level representative to Eville, and to reestablish discussions in the mixed Military and Economic Commissions.

6. GOK. We must recreate a situation which would induce Tshombe to resume negotiations under the Plan. We must make it clear that this route is still open to him and that security will be provided to him and his associates. We must urge upon him the necessity to negotiate flexibly under the Plan. We must make it clear that we are not against him and that he is free to achieve anything in the Congo politically that he is capable of achieving on his own. We must convince him that he has no real support in Western or African countries. We must convince him of the determination of the UN, USG, and GOB to see an end to his secession, no matter what the cost or how long it takes. We must convince him to acquiesce in the change in payments by UMHK to the GOC as being the only way of avoiding more severe economic measures.

7. Katanga Europeans. We must persuade the Europeans in the Katanga of the inevitability of ending the secession, and that this can best be done by peaceful means; i.e., through agreement by Tshombe or the change in UMHK payments scheme, rather than through the more severe economic measures which will inevitably result if there is no early progress. We must convince them that not only the interests of Katanga but their own can best be served by urging Tshombe to negotiate under the Plan and to carry out the Plan in good faith. We must attempt to reinforce their loyalty to GOB and Western interests in the Congo as a whole.

Rush

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–762. Secret; Niact. Drafted and approved by McGhee and cleared by Williams, Sisco, and Burdett. Also sent to London, Leopoldville, USUN, and Elisabethville.

2 Telegram 804, December 7, reported that Spaak had told MacArthur he was drafting a message to Tshombe in which he planned to say that Katanga faced the likelihood of U.N. military action unless it accepted a change in Union Miniere payments from the Katangan Government to the Congolese Government. Union Miniere officials had agreed to the proposed financial arrangements, and Spaak was seeking their agreement to send a representative to Elisabethville to join in urging Tshombe's acceptance. The Belgian Cabinet had approved the plan that morning. (Ibid., 770G.00/12–762) The text of Spaak's draft message was transmitted in telegram 842 from Brussels, December 12. (Ibid., 770G.00/12–1262)

3 Document 344.

351. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 351. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, December 8, 1962, 7:12 p.m.

1551. We understand SYG expecting to take a number of steps simultaneously on Tuesday2 including following: (a) Letter to Tshombe telling him that in view of lack of progress on UN Reconciliation Plan that UN moving into second phase;

(b) Letter to Belgians requesting they assist in implementing copper and cobalt embargo imposed by GOC and urging they convince UMHK to make payments to GOC rather than to Katanga;

(c) Letter to US, UK and possibly others, requesting that we assist in implementing GOC embargo on copper and cobalt;

(d) Letter to UK, South Africa and Portugal requesting its cooperation in exercising their influence on neighbors of Katanga to prevent transit of copper shipments.

These steps would presumably be preceded by Adoula letter to various UN members to stop import on any copper and cobalt on which revenues have not been paid to GOC.

As indicated in Brussels 804 repeated USUN,3 Belgian cabinet has now taken decision to apply pressure on UMHK to make payments to GOC. Spaak has also indicated intention to send Belgian representative to Eville within the next 24 or 48 hours with view to giving Tshombe one final opportunity.

We agree fully with Brussels comment that in view of this hopeful development nothing should be done by UN which would rock boat at this critical hour. We therefore strongly urge that UN delay sending any letters for time being in order to give opportunity for Spaak-UMHK ploy to be played out. We appreciate fully that SYG feels strong compulsion to take immediate steps to report them to CAC members. However, sending letters likely to make it more difficult for Spaak to take necessary steps with UMHK and will receive negative response from UK. US itself in present circumstances would have to delay its own response.

If it is not possible to have the UN withhold letters we would suggest they be couched so as to make request for embargo contingent on results current Belgian efforts get UMHK to cut off payments to Katanga. Letters could state that if this step fails SYG would recommend application of embargo.

In explaining this to SYG, you should emphasize strongly that this does not in any way mean any diminution of resolve on our part but rather our best judgment as to the most practical way to proceed in order to achieve objectives which we and UN fully share. Request you see SYG soonest.4

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–862. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Sisco; cleared by Williams, Burdett, and Cleveland; and approved by McGhee. Also sent to Brussels, London, Léopoldville, and Elisabethville.

2 December 11.

3 See footnote 1, Document 350.

4 Telegram 2219 from USUN, December 8, reported that a USUN officer had met with Bunche. (Ibid., 770G.00/12–862) Thant sent a letter to Tshombe on December 10, to the Belgian, Portuguese, and South African Foreign Ministers on December 11, and to the U.K. Foreign Secretary on December 12; the texts are in U.N. doc. S/5053/Add.l4/Annexes XII–XV, respectively. On December 11, Adoula sent Thant the text of identical letters he was sending to 17 governments requesting their assistance in enforcing a Congolese embargo on all exports of Katangan copper and cobalt; see ibid., Annex XVI; also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, p. 911. The text of identical letters from Thant to the 17 governments supporting Adoula's request are in U.N. doc. S/5053/Add. 14/Annex XVII.

352. Editorial Note 352. Editorial Note

The situation in the Congo was discussed at the daily White House staff meeting on December 10. A memorandum for the record by Colonel Lawrence J. Legere of the NSC Staff, dated December 10, records it as follows:

"b. (1) There ensued a long discussion about the Congo, triggered by Bundy asking to be brought up-to-date. Kaysen said that Spaak was making an approach to the UMHK (Union Miniere Haut-Katanga), who have been quite the villains in this piece, but no one is very optimistic about the outcome of this approach. U Thant's idea of the next step is economic sanctions against Katanga.

"(2) After a little pessimistic brooding around the table, the discussion proceeded to broader issues. Kaysen said that the threat of a 'Soviet presence or menace' in the Congo was the gut issue—i.e., if we were certain that the Soviets would not rush in to replace us, we would probably try to leave and convince everybody else to do likewise. Kaysen and some of the others also agreed, not for the first time at these meetings, that it was extremely important to convince Adoula or any Léopoldville government that it must be prepared to negotiate with Tshombe; the trouble is that any Léopoldville government which honestly agrees to negotiate with Tshombe would probably not survive very long. Once again the knowledgeable people on this subject around the table expressed the view that Ambassador Gullion and our people at the UN felt that they must 'beat' Tshombe—i.e., that he must be made to yield on everything they think is desirable.

"(3) At this point Bundy, Kaysen and Dungan said that one of the best things that could happen might be for the Congolese National Army to drop a few bombs in the Katanga from a few aircraft which the United States would furnish them for that purpose. The idea seemed to be that this would tend to remove a lot of the intricate complexities of the Congo problem (UN, UMHK, etc.), and perhaps reduce it to a nice clean war between Léopoldville and Elizabethville. There was a little laughter around the table at this suggestion; for example, Bundy said that 'we were all certainly a bunch of hawks', but there was an unmistakable undercurrent of seriousness nevertheless. Bundy asked Kaysen to see Under Secretary Ball about the entire Congo situation sometime today." (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Box 25, Chairman's Staff Group, Dec. 1962–Jan. 1963)

In a telephone conversation that afternoon, Kaysen told Under Secretary of State Ball that "Bundy seems to detect from the President, or from himself, a disposition to use force." Ball replied that the President had "explicitly outruled the possibility." (Memorandum of telephone conversation, December 10, 3 p.m.; Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Congo)

A re-examination of U.S. policy concerning the Congo had begun a few days earlier. In a December 8 telephone conversation with Ball, Kaysen stated that Bundy had told him the President had the Congo "much on his mind." Ball said the President had "asked a couple of days earlier for a paper to be prepared which would list all the alternative possibilities." Such a paper was in preparation, but Ball stated that he intended to prepare a separate paper and for that purpose was meeting that day with members of the staff of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research. (Memorandum of telephone conversation, December 8, 11:45 a.m.; ibid.)

353. Letter From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Under Secretary of State (Ball) 353. Letter From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Under Secretary of State (Ball)1

Washington, December 11, 1962.

Dear George: We have become increasingly concerned by reports indicating that the situation in the Republic of the Congo is deteriorating rapidly. While the capability of the Congolese Central Government to control the situation is being undercut by opposition factions, there are reports that the Soviet Government has indicated its willingness to offer military aircraft and other military supplies to assist the Congolese Government in ending the Katanga secession. The possibility of Soviet military intervention manifestly adds a new critical factor to the Congo crisis and compounds the difficulties already confronting the UN and the Congolese Government. These developments pose a threat to the Congolese Central Government and to the UN position which, in turn, threatens achievement of the US objective in the Congo.

While I am aware of the UN, US and Belgian political and economic measures which may be undertaken shortly in a further effort to end Katanga secession, I am concerned that these complex measures may not eventuate in sufficient time to favorably influence the situation. Unless positive action is taken on an immediate basis, the UN effort may collapse and the Congo revert to the chaos of July 1960.

Prior to his departure for the current series of NATO meetings, Paul Nitze requested the opinion and recommendations of the JCS on the following two questions: 1. Should the US make a positive offer of military support to the UN and the Congolese Government to counter the possibility of Soviet intervention?

2. If such an offer is considered warranted, what should be the nature and dimension of the US military support offered to the UN and the Congolese Government?

The JCS views are contained in the attached memorandum. I concur with their expression of urgency and their proposals for US action. I recommend that these views be brought to the attention of Secretary Rusk and Ambassador Gullion and that we take the necessary action to implement these proposals as soon as possible. I believe it imperative that, at the earliest possible date, the UN Secretary General be informed of our determination to undertake such action to preclude collapse of the US and UN efforts to bring about a solution in the Congo.

Sincerely,

Bill

Enclosure

Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, December 11, 1962.

JCSM–983–62

SUBJECT

Congo Developments (U)

1. Reference is made to the memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA), dated 7 December 1962, regarding recent Congo developments.2

2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the central issue of the Congolese problem is to keep a pro-Western regime in power. Any such regime will be in political jeopardy as long as the Katanga problem remains unresolved. The persistence of the problem stems from the inability of either the Congolese Government or the United Nations to bring sufficient pressure to bear on the Tshombe regime and its supporters.

3. In August of 1962 the United States approved a military assistance program for the Congolese National Forces which will be implemented when approved by the Congolese Government. An impact shipment of about $150,000 has been made. Further implementation of the over-all program, coupled with a public announcement of United States Military Assistance under the UN umbrella, could have an immediate favorable impact upon the stability of the Congolese Government. In addition, the United States has been providing equipment, and required military air and sea lift since 1960 in support of UN operations in the Congo. This support should be continued.

4. In view of the political defeat which the United States and the United Nations would incur through collapse of the Central Congolese Government, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that additional actions should be taken to bolster the UN effort in the Congo in order to insure preservation of a Western oriented Congolese Government.

5. In accomplishing this objective, a direct commitment of US forces under UN aegis should provide the support required to maintain the present government. It is the view of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, however, that such a commitment should be made only if it is determined that collapse of the Central Congolese Government is imminent. A decision to commit forces under these circumstances poses a degree of US involvement with such far-reaching political and ideological ramifications as to require serious consideration at the highest level before a decision is made to commit US forces.

6. In light of the above, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that: a. The United States undertake to revitalize present UN political and military efforts in the Congo.

b. Simultaneously with the revitalization efforts, the United States should, as soon as possible, implement the approved military assistance program for the Congo.

c. If required to prevent the collapse of the Central Government, offer the UN a US military package consisting of one Composite Air Strike Unit with necessary support elements and the requisite base security forces. A commitment of US units should carry with it recognition that, if necessary, the United States will also furnish under UN auspices any additional forces required to tip the balance of power decisively in favor the UN forces in the Congo. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the objectives of such a commitment are to destroy or neutralize the Katangese air capability and to provide immediate political support for the Central Government. They recommend that US combat units be withdrawn as soon as these objectives are achieved.

d. Accompany any of the foregoing with timely announcements that US actions are in support of UN operations in the Congo.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Curtis E. LeMay3
Acting Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1162. Top Secret.

2 Not attached to the source text.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

354. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 354. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, December 12, 1962, 8:54 p.m.

867. Eyes only Ambassadors. At moment we are pursuing UMHK payments scheme in hopes that some practical reintegration of the Katanga will be achieved. In meantime developments in Leopoldville in recent days cast serious doubt that stable moderate government can be maintained. While fully recognizing difficulties we have had with Tshombe, we must recognize that position of the present government in Leopoldville, and Adoula specifically, is so eroded that it cannot take actions required as long as Parliament remains millstone around his neck. As long as this situation exists, we probably not going to achieve any of our objectives: keeping out Communists; reconciliation of Katanga and maintaining a moderate government in the Congo, a government that in fact governs.

We have concluded that this apparent paralysis in Leopoldville requires us to take some specific measures. Regardless of who may be more to blame—Tshombe or Adoula—for lack of progress, fact of matter is that it will do us little good to pursue Thant reconciliation plan if government in Leopoldville not able do its share to achieve practical objectives.

Support for reintegration of the Katanga is essential to maintain a friendly Central Government, but does not assure it unless rapid progress made.

We are convinced that we have now reached the point where a variation in our approach is required if our objectives are to be achieved without massive bilateral US involvement.

We recognize lack of acceptable alternative to Adoula. We, like Spaak, after surveying the field, have concluded that Adoula, despite his many shortcomings, is the best choice available who is likely to command a wide degree of popular support. Moreover, he has the tremendous advantage—despite his recent poor showing in the vote of confidence—of having been voted into office unanimously by the Congolese Parliament. He therefore enjoys that degree of legitimacy which makes him acceptable to the international community as the accepted spokesman for the Congolese people.

A motion has been tabled in Parliament calling for "suspension of the UN plan," and its adoption is a distinct possibility. If this vote, or some other vote involving fundamental GOC policy were to go against Adoula, whole underpinning of our present approach would be called into question. A new government brought in through the normal Parliamentary negotiating process would almost certainly be of a more radical stripe and therefore less desirable in terms of achieving our primary purpose. One alternative which has been considered in this connection is the possibility of installing a rightist government by a military coup. While this need not be ruled out in extremis, such a move would cause a number of difficulties—especially in light of the anticipated leftist opposition—and raise serious questions as to what support UN members would give to a Central Government of questionable legitimacy.

We therefore would appreciate your views on Adoula, with assistance of Kasavubu, Mobutu, Ndele and Mendaka taking decisive measures along following lines.

First, Kasavubu should prorogue Parliament for a period of 30 days (which he can do legally. If necessary, this period could be extended even though extra-legal).

Secondly, there would be understanding that moderate government with Adoula at head would be maintained in power by Mobutu et al.

Thirdly, Adoula should take steps to make his government more efficient by including technicians who could help to re-energize executive in form more vigorous effort to achieve understanding with Tshombe.

Fourth, we would be prepared urgently to assist GOC in creating small air force and to urge UN to take steps to neutralize Katangan air force.

[1 paragraph (1-1/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

If such a plan were put into effect, there would have to be clear understanding between us and Adoula. We have taken number of steps in recent days to assist GOC. We also ready re-invigorate Greene plan, offering to increase amount of equipment, step up schedule of training for ANC and expect bring Air Panama contract to be ready GOC signature. We also prepared to help in other ways as required. But Adoula, with Parliament suspended and being maintained in power by Mobutu et al, would have to take more positive action—and would be in a better position to do so—in working out satisfactory arrangements for practical reintegration within framework of Thant plan. Such steps would include: stopping further military action north Katanga, sending high-level negotiator to Elisabethville, re-establishing mixed military and economic commissions and getting down to brass tacks to work out practical division of powers between GOC and Katanga.

Request urgent comments action addressees on above line of action. For the purpose of this exercise, you should assume a change in US policy to the effect that we will be prepared to support UN in its efforts to end Katanga secession with stronger measures than we have hitherto contemplated. You should not assume, however, that such a change in policy has in fact taken place.2

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1262. Top Secret; Priority; Noforn. Drafted by Sisco, Buffum, and Godley; cleared by Burdett, Cleveland, Williams, and McGhee; and approved by Ball. Also sent to Elisabethville and USUN and repeated to Paris for Rusk, who was attending the NATO Ministerial Meeting.

2 Telegram 2322 from USUN, December 13, commented that, under the circumstances, the program set forth here was best calculated to achieve the objective of strengthening the Adoula government. It expressed hope, however, that future negotiations between Léopoldville and Elisabethville could be conducted on a central government-provincial government basis rather than on a "two-equal-sovereigns basis." It also warned against reverting to the situation before July 1961 and especially before January 1961, when the Congolese Government seemed to most African governments to be a "creature" of the Western powers. (Ibid., 770G.00/12–1362) Telegrams 919 from Elisabethville, December 14, and 1424 from Léopoldville, December 17, also commented. (Ibid., 770G.00/12–1462 and 770G.00/12–1662, respectively)

355. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Paris 355. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Paris1

Washington, December 12, 1962, 9:39 p.m.

Tosec 15. For Secretary from Ball and McGhee. Following is a summary of developments and additional observations which might be useful to you in connection with your discussions with Mr. Spaak on Congo. You will have seen Spaak's latest views and latest developments on GOB side in Brussels 840 and 842 to Dept2 repeated for you Paris.

1. There is still question as to whether Spaak proposals to Tshombe for change in method UMHK payments to GOC are acceptable to Tshombe; final decision, with whatever conditions he may attach, expected within 24 hours. We have suggested, however, that Tshombe not announce this as his proposal since this might make more difficult Adoula's acceptable (Deptel 885 to Brussels repeated Paris Tosec 14).3 We would prefer that the proposal be considered as coming from GOB and/or UMHK. Although we do not know the precise form of the Belgian proposals, we are concerned that they will not result in adequate foreign exchange being retained by GOC, particularly if GOC must purchase portion of Katangan francs required for UMHK counterpart needed in Katanga operations in foreign exchange as intimated GOB plan, rather than as credit or in exchange for Congolese francs.

2. SYG has sent letter to GOB urging change UMHK payments scheme and to UK, South Africa, and Portugal asking them to assist in denying passage of Katanga products. Secretary General holding for at least 8 days (until Dec. 19) letters to some 11 countries, including US, asking them to halt purchase Katanga products. If UMHK change in payments scheme becomes effective prior to that time, these letters would presumably not be sent. Adoula, however, has already appealed publicly for embargo

3. In Deptel 1597 to USUN repeated Paris,4 we have asked that SYG be advised of our concern that letter appears to imply UN intent take military action in event further Tshombe noncompliance. We have asked it be made clear that we do not consider provocative or aggressive measures justified present circumstances and that if not consulted in advance we would have to publicly disavow any unprovoked forceful measures.

4. FYI. We are not, however, optimistic that GOB–UMHK change in payments proposal will in itself produce necessary results, and remaining purely economic measures contemplated by UN considered likely to be even less effective. We see time running out on us and our choice as narrowing between disengagement, which after thorough study, does not appear acceptable, and a stronger approach. Such an approach also appears necessary if we are to be successful in producing a stable government in Leo. We are, in a separate cable, being repeated for you in Paris,5 requesting advice of Léopoldville, Eville and USUN regarding how this might be accomplished under assumption we are prepared to take stronger measures in backing up UN Plan. We are, without for moment discussing it with UN, other governments, or even specifically with our Embassies, giving urgent consideration in preparation for meeting with President Friday6 morning, possibility of offering support UN effort even, after all other measures fail, if use of force is required. We are in this connection giving consideration to what backup UN would in such circumstances need from us, perhaps in form of unit US combat aircraft. We are fully aware of issues, including those with our allies, which such a course would raise.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 870G.00/12–1262. Top Secret; Priority. Drafted and approved by McGhee and cleared by Williams, Cleveland, and Ball.

2 Telegrams 840 and 842, December 12, reported conversations with Spaak and Rothschild concerning Spaak's effort to obtain Tshombe's acceptance of the plan for Union Miniere to make its payments to the Léopoldville government. Rector Dubuisson of Liege University had taken Spaak's message to Tshombe to Elisabethville. Telegram 840 stated that Dubuisson had reported that he had not delivered the message but had discussed the subject with Tshombe and was optimistic. Telegram 842 stated that Dubuisson had reported that Tshombe had agreed to take the initiative in requesting Union Miniere to change its payments system. (Both ibid., 770G00/12–1262)

3 Dated December 12. (Ibid., 870G.10/12–1162)

4 Dated December 12. (Ibid., 870G.10/12–1062)

5 Document 354.

6 December 14.

356. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate in Elisabethville 356. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate in Elisabethville1

Washington, December 13, 1962, 4:32 p.m.

499. Pursuant to Secretary's instructions Department telephoned Dean 10:30 AM Washington time. Dean stated he had just received text UMHK payments scheme which Tshombe had approved.2 Dean has acknowledged receipt in writing and has expressed hope that text will be considered secret until it has been referred to Adoula. Dean stated his association with payments scheme had not been requested. He was told by Department that if requested he should support Belgian demarche. In subsequent Department telecon with US Del Paris Secretary's wishes were expressed that US reps both Eville and Leo, in coordination with Belgians and UN, give full support to scheme and do everything possible develop negotiations. Everyone recognizes substance of plan may be inadequate but Spaak has sent additional instruction which may or may not have been incorporated in latest draft. Spaak believes and Secretary concurs that whether or not additional instructions incorporated we should spare no effort to have this constructive development succeed. Department continues believe that payment by UMHK of foreign exchange and taxes to GOC is the most important element of progress towards success U Thant Plan.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1362. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Godley and Ball's Special Assistant Arthur A. Hartman; cleared in substance by Williams, Wallner, and Burdett; and approved by McGhee. Also sent to Léopoldville and repeated to Paris for Rusk and to Brussels, London, and USUN.

2 A letter from Tshombe to U Thant, December 12, proposed to authorize Union Miniere to transfer the foreign exchange proceeds derived from its exports to the Congolese Monetary Council in return for which the Monetary Council was to return 50 percent (but no less than a specified minimum) to Katanga; for text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, p. 912. The text of the letter to Thant, with a covering letter to the Consulate, was transmitted in telegram 913 from Elisabethville, December 13. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1362)

357. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 357. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, December 13, 1962, 9:30 p.m.

873. For Ambassador from Williams. Re Deptel 870 to Léopoldville, repeated Paris Tosec 20.2 Believe Adoula's reaction to UMHK payments scheme to be crucial. Reftel points out great importance Secretary and others in Department attach to scheme and fact that it is key to progress on U Thant Plan. I personally believe a satisfactory UMHK payments scheme to be the most important single element in conjunction with others in effectuating the U Thant Plan.

You should make Adoula realize that the United States has exercised every effort to get the GOB, UMHK and Katanga to take forward steps of recognition by UMHK and Tshombe of UMHK payments to Central Government. Not only does USG believe UMHK payments will be efficacious in achievement of other parts of U Thant Plan, but with Adoula's acceptance of the proposal USG could more readily undertake other efforts to achieve reintegration if necessary. Contrarywise, if Adoula does not accept proposed plan while US would proceed to secure implementation of U Thant Plan, it would be more difficult to take strong measures which might prove necessary.

Your attention called to parallel cable from Department3 indicating adoption attitude toward Tshombe's proposal that it constitutes clear cut acceptance of UMHK obligations to make its payments to Central Government; that UMHK should stop further payments to GOK and proceed to negotiate with Adoula necessary modalities and that as little as possible should be said about Tshombe's conditions which need not be accepted as preconditions to the change.

Two things of utmost importance. First that Adoula make a response that will establish a good public position both in Congo and in the rest of the world. Second, that he understand the advantages of the payment plan and undertake to negotiate and accept mutually satisfactory plan.

Therefore hope would be possible for you to persuade Adoula to respond to Tshombe proposal by welcoming Tshombe's recognition of UMHK's obligation to make future payments to Monetary Council, that he expects such payments will be made and that he is prepared to work out procedures for UMHK and Katanga to receive their appropriate sharing of foreign exchange.

To give earnest to his intentions he might indicate he has appointed someone such as Ndele, assisted by Badre, Frasca,4 or other technicians to work out details of implementation.

Adoula should realize that any arrangements would apply only for interim period and after unification currencies identical exchange controls will result in equal criteria applied to use of exchange available for all parts of Congo and normal trade flows which should be established will serve to balance payments between different parts of country.

This is a critical point in integration program and trust you will be able to convince Adoula of importance of proper public posture and of possibility to use this offer as a major step to the achievement of the U Thant Plan in all of its other aspects.

FYI: Recognize need for clarification and satisfactory spelling out of important details which will have to be achieved in negotiation in particular that Léopoldville not required purchase Katanga francs for conversion UMHK Congo francs for more than 250 million francs stipulated in Tshombe letter5 plus estimated 60 million conditional on lack traditional exports to Katanga.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1362. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Godley and Williams; cleared in substance by McGhee; approved by Williams. Repeated to Paris for Rusk and to Brussels, London, and Elisabethville.

2 Telegram 499 to Elisabethville, Document 356, was repeated to Paris as Tosec 20.

3 Reference is to Tosec 25 to Paris, December 13. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1362.

4 Felice Frasca, President of the Congolese Monetary Council.

5 See footnote 1, Document 356.

358. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy 358. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy1

Washington, December 13, 1962.

1. Attached are some background papers for tomorrow morning's Congo meeting. George Ball will have an official Department proposal for the meeting but this will not be ready until tomorrow morning. If you have time to look at any of the attached you may find it useful.

2. At Tab 1 is a good clear statement by Roger Hilsman on the alternatives.2 It argues that, as a preferred alternative, we should choose to move with greater force in the Congo in order to achieve integration. The only other alternative is withdrawal. This would have large costs in terms of our general position in Africa vis-a-vis the Soviets and in the prestige and future usefulness in the UN. At Tab 2 are (a) a recent cable from Moscow, and (b) another Hilsman paper on the possibilities of Soviet military assistance or direct interference in the Congo.3 Both come to essentially negative conclusions, at least for the near future.

3. Hilsman's first paper makes a good argument. I think there are two comments to be made on it. First, it overstates the Soviet threat. Accordingly, the immediate costs of the continuance of our present policy of attempting reconciliation through persuasion are likely to be less spectacular. Probably the Adoula government will fall, to be succeeded by a more radical government. Perhaps the more radical government will attempt military action against Katanga. However, without our support, neither the central Congo government nor the UN can take significant military action. Accordingly, the situation may just continue to deteriorate, perhaps at an accelerated pace and with increasing sporadic violence. The more radical government may well denounce the UN operation and ask for its withdrawal. This would be a significant defeat for U.S. policy. Our position in the UN and the UN's future usefulness in peace-keeping and our position in Africa would all be damaged seriously by this course of events. However, this is different from Soviet intervention in Africa or a spectacular outbreak of civil war.

My second comment is that, while Hilsman properly emphasizes that our plan of action must be such as to give Tshombe room to back down, he does not emphasize enough the importance of limiting the objectives of forcible action. What we want is to achieve that degree of disarmament of Tshombe and explicit admission by him that Katanga must integrate which will make integration stick, provided that Adoula is willing to come to terms with the realities of Tshombe's economic and political power. In the past Adoula, the UN people, and, I fear, our Embassy in Léopoldville have all stood, perhaps unconsciously, for unconditional surrender. It is obvious that Tshombe might as well go down in flames as surrender unconditionally, and if pressed to the end, he will do so. This proposition, in turn, underlines the importance of dismissing Parliament and strengthening Adoula's rule in the first place, and then making it clear to him that he must use his strength to deal with Tshombe, after we have achieved the limited objectives of partially disarming him and ending formal Katanga secession.

CK

1 Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Congo Security, 1962. Secret.

2 Tab 1 was a memorandum from Hilsman to Ball, dated December 11, on "The Congo: An Appraisal of Alternatives." It is summarized and the circumstances of its drafting are described in Roger Hilsman, To Move a Nation: The Politics of Foreign Policy in the Administration of John F. Kennedy, pp. 263–266.

3 Tab 2 was telegram 1478 from Moscow, December 12, and a memorandum from Hilsman to Rusk, dated December 7, on "Possible Soviet Military Assistance to the Congo." The memoranda in Tabs 1 and 2 were part of a package that Ball sent to Bundy on December 13. The package included copies of a December 12 memorandum from Chester Bowles to the President, a December 10 memorandum and a December 12 draft from Williams, memoranda of December 12 and November 29 from Hilsman, and Bundy's December 11 letter (Document 353). Ball's covering memorandum noted that the attachments "all move in the direction of a hard line on the Congo." (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo) The Bowles memorandum is printed in part in Chester Bowles, Promises to Keep: My Years in Public Life, 1941–1969, pp. 497–498. Telegram 1478 from Moscow is in Department of State, Central Files, 661.70G/12–1262)

359. Memorandum for President Kennedy 359. Memorandum for President Kennedy1

Washington, December 13, 1962.

SUBJECT

New Policy on the Congo

The Impasse

We are seeking to prevent an increase in Communist influence in the Congo, to reintegrate the Katanga, and to strengthen and maintain a moderate government in Léopoldville that can in fact run the country. Without reinvigoration, our present policy cannot achieve these ends.

Tshombe is getting stronger and continues to maneuver for an independent Katanga.

There is an apparent paralysis in Léopoldville and Adoula is unable, with a hostile Parliament around his neck, to take steps necessary for reconciliation and reintegration.

A Communist bloc presence in Léopoldville is now a distinct possibility. But how much initiative the Soviets take will be directly related to their assessment of our will to act in Central Africa. Their disadvantages in trying to operate in Central Africa are so great that they will not move unless it appears we are disengaging.

The United Nations, with limited financial resources and probably early withdrawals of Indian troops, cannot remain in the Congo much longer as an effective force.

Because United States and UN policy have for all practical purposes been indistinguishable, the Organization's failure in the Congo would be a major failure of this Administration's policy and would seriously undermine the peacekeeping role of the United Nations.

The Need for a New Policy

The basic assumption of our present Congo policy is that we could get Katanga reintegrated into the Congo and an effective moderate government established and functioning in Léopoldville, by persuasion and diplomacy backed up by threats of economic action.

This assumption has turned out to be wrong. It is wrong because Tshombe and his supporters are clearly not going to reintegrate unless they have to and nothing we have done convinces Tshombe that, in the last analysis, he will be forced to it.

It is also wrong because we are not building an effective Central Government in Léopoldville. A largely irresponsible Parliament and a flabby administration are not good enough as a political framework; Adoula is the best leader on the horizon, but we should be helping to develop other political leadership.

The Situation this Week

After much international conversation, Foreign Minister Spaak has sent a private emissary to Tshombe to get him to accept a change in the method by which UMHK makes its payments. The decision to make the payments to the Central Government instead of to Tshombe should have been taken without trying to "clear it" with Tshombe, but Spaak elected to consult Tshombe first. We do not yet know on what terms Tshombe will accept Spaak's proposal. We do know from experience that if it requires any action on his part to carry out the detail, that action will not be taken.

Shutting off the UMHK payments to Tshombe is still the best single thing that can be done to put pressure on Tshombe and lead him to make Katanga in fact a part of the Congo. But UMHK is naturally reluctant to get out in front of governments, and the Belgians are naturally reluctant to seem more resolute in this matter than the United States.

There has also been much talk about halting the purchase of Katanga copper and cobalt. Adoula has now, without adequate consultation, proposed to eleven countries that they stop buying Katanga copper and cobalt. Secretary General U Thant was about to do the same, but we prevailed on him to delay his action until next week, to give the Spaak efforts on the payments scheme time to work.

We do not believe that economic sanctions would be very effective. Moreover, they would require several months to make them effective, and new legislation in some countries, including Belgium.

There is, therefore, no immediate prospect that measures now in train under the "U Thant Plan" will do very much either to reintegrate the Katanga or to build in Léopoldville a government that can govern.

Alternative Lines of Action

We have carefully considered and rejected, for the time being at least, the following alternatives: (a) Disengagement by the United States. The prohibitive cost would be a serious decline of US influence in Léopoldville, an expanding Soviet bloc position in the Congo and the heart of Africa, and probably irreparable damage to the UN as a peacekeeper;

(b) Turning the matter over to the Africans. The Africans cannot handle it, and this would open the Congo to eventual Communist takeover;

(c) Buying Léopoldville's acquiescence to Tshombe's secession. Léopoldville cannot be bought so long as it has the alternative of Soviet aid; and

(d) Backing Tshombe as the unifier of the Congo. We see no prospect that Tshombe could win enough support throughout the Congo to make this a realistic possibility.

The Central Problem: U.S. Policy and U.S. Will

What is wrong with the picture is the absence of a U.S. decision as to what we would do, in the final analysis, to prevent chaos, large-scale massacres, and/or a major Soviet presence called in by radical successors to Adoula. If we continue to pursue present policies, they will result in hardening the Tshombe secession, further weakening the position of Adoula (because of his inability to solve the Katanga problem, the one big modern-style political issue in Congo politics). If we go down this road, we may eventually have to use United States, and perhaps other Western forces to clean up a very messy state of affairs.

If we are clear now that in the ultimate case we would use our own power in Central Africa, then anything short of that will prevent a breakdown in the Congo is preferable to waiting too long and then having to go in with too much.

We therefore recommend that the United States Government take it as a major objective to develop a modern and moderate Central Government in the Congo, to get Katanga reintegrated into the Congo and to prevent a Soviet presence in the Congo. We recommend immediate steps both to move rapidly toward these objectives and to demonstrate that we have in fact taken this decision and are prepared to back it with the full weight of United States power.

A Democracy cannot bluff unless it means it. If we mean it, and if it is clear to all concerned that we mean it, we can use the possibility of our fuller intervention later to accomplish our purposes with less intervention now.

Recommended Approach

We recommend three kinds of steps to move ahead, on the assumption that we really mean it: (a) The UN forces in the Congo should be built up to the point where it would clearly be ridiculous for Tshombe's Katangan forces to challenge them.

(b) Convince Adoula to prorogue the Parliament, to govern with a backing of a pro-Western group headed by Mobutu, and to establish more effective administration with UN, U.S. and Belgian assistance.

(c) Continue to pursue vigorously the most feasible elements of the Thant Plan, notably the division of revenues (without further consultation with Tshombe, if necessary), the Central Government's amnesty, the military standstill in North Katanga, and an attempt to force an agreed division of powers and the beginnings of military integration between the Central Government and the Katanga.

In these circumstances, we recommend three major steps:

1. Military Steps to be Taken.

At the present time, our assessment is that, with the new Indonesian battalion (one of them supposedly a paratrooper battalion) and the relatively good security situation in the rest of the country, the UN has enough ground forces to handle any challenge from Kataganese gendarmerie if it is not challenged from the air.

The problem is, therefore, to make sure that no present or conceivable Katanga air capability has a chance to operate against the UN forces. This means following through on all of the present arrangements to beef up the UN air forces in the area with Swedish, Italian, Iranian, and Ethopian equipment and personnel. Beyond this, it means placing in the Congo to back up the UN forces an American fighter unit. The assessment of all military forces in the Congo is attached at Tab A. An analysis supporting the proposal for a United States Air Force unit is at Tab B.2

It would be a departure from the original Hammarskjöld policy for the United Nations to accept an American unit as a part of the regular UNOC Force. Moreover, we would want to maintain command of our own Air Force units in the area. If the Secretary General is willing, it would probably be possible to develop a request from the Adoula Government, endorsed by the UN, for the placement in Léopoldville of an American Air Force unit with the mission of (a) protecting our transport planes which are operating in the interior of the Congo on behalf of the UN; (b) backing up the UN Forces; and (c) training and developing an adequate national air force for the Central Government of the Congo.

Our willingness to do this would be very well received by a great majority of the UN members, and especially by members of the Congo Advisory Committee. To the Secretary General, it would symbolize and demonstrate in a practical way our earnest resolve to see this thing through and avoid a major failure by the UN in its largest peacekeeping attempt.

Needless to say, the presence of U.S. forces—or even the clear knowledge that U.S. forces were available for this purpose—would be a significant pressure on Tshombe and his associates. Tshombe could interpret this decision in no other way than as proof that any resistance on his part to the UN, or any attempt to destroy European facilities in Katanga, would be met by a devastating counter blow.

We are suggesting a build-up of U.S. military forces under a UN umbrella, for the purpose of avoiding the use of force to reintegrate the Katanga. The idea is not that the United States or the UN would take a military initiative to destroy Tshombe's government. But the UN, with U.S. backing, would be placed in a position where the alternative of military resistance was no longer open to Tshombe, and political negotiation leading toward reconciliation and reintegration would be the only rational choice left to him.

Strengthening the Central Government

The steps required to strengthen the Central Government are set forth in Tab C.

In general, while Adoula is not an ideal choice, we believe he is the best individual available to hold the reins of government in Léopoldville and, even with Parliament dismissed, he would enjoy the virtue of having taken office legitimately. [2 lines of source text not declassified] For obvious reasons, we would prefer to keep the entire operation as overt as possible, and the fact that Kasavubu can legally prorogue Parliament for thirty days facilitates this. In this connection, we would expect Adoula to establish a more effective executive branch. While we have considered giving additional assistance to the GOC in establishing its own air capability, this requirement would, for the time being, be redundant in view of the strengthening of the UN air force. [2 lines of source text not declassified]

Reconciliation and Reintegration

The detailed agenda of steps required is available—indeed, is all too familiar. But in a new atmosphere produced by a new demonstration that we mean it, some of the steps required could be taken immediately.

Adoula could order the standstill with minimum difficulty if assured of this more forthcoming US/UN support. Moreover, although the UMHK is not negotiating the subject with Tshombe, when it is faced with US determination to end secession, this might stimulate them to turn over immediately their taxes and foreign exchange to the Monetary Council with or without Tshombe's agreement. Working out the agreed division of power between the Central Government and the Katanga and arrangements for military integration would be a more complex task. We think this could best be achieved by having U Thant personally fly to the Congo and negotiate a final settlement with Adoula and Tshombe on these questions. Both sides would be given to understand that we would tolerate no nonsense in firming up specific arrangements based upon the negotiations that have already been held.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Congo Security, 1962(B). Secret. Drafted by Sisco, Buffum, and Cleveland.

2 The tabs were not attached to the source text.

360. Memorandum for the Record 360. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, December 14, 1962.

SUBJECT

Meeting with the President, December 14, 1962 10:00 A.M., on the Congo2

George Ball opened the meeting by presenting the paper attached, entitled "New Policy on the Congo."3 The repetition of past patterns of events and indications that Tshombe was growing stronger and Adoula weaker all called for some new decisions in the Congo. Despite Adoula's limitations, he was the best available leader in Léopoldville from our point of view. He needs both strengthening and direction. Our aim in the Congo should be a degree of reintegration which preserves some measure of autonomy for Tshombe. Tshombe himself, it should be noted, is an alternative superior to others available to us in Katanga. At the minimum we had to reduce the Katanga military forces considerably, require Tshombe to give up his pretense to sovereignty and achieve a fair division of the revenues in Katanga and the Central Government. The course of events makes it clear that such a solution cannot be achieved by further negotiation, since Tshombe has no incentive to move in this direction. Accordingly, it must be imposed. This will require the UN to make a more impressive show of force than it has yet done. This, in turn, will best be accomplished by adding U.S. military power in the shape of an air squadron to the UN force. It would be our expectation that the force would not be used, but we must be prepared to use it if necessary. ANC ground forces, with some bolstering up in accordance with the Greene Plan, plus the present UN ground forces, are sufficient.

The President asked about the significance of the UMHK's decision to pay its revenues to the Central Government, and also about the constitutional problem.

Mr. Ball replied that, while we had to play out the UMHK move, there was every indication that it was another Tshombe dodge, and that it would result in no more progress than previous similar starts. Accordingly, we must decide now on a show of force. On the constitution, he said that the present document was extremely complicated, and negotiation on it might take years. What was needed was a simple understanding between Tshombe and Adoula on the essentials of the Katanga-Congo relations.

The President then raised the question of how we could deal with American public opinion, with the Congress, and with the views of our European allies. Tshombe's reputation in the U.S. was on the whole favorable. The sense that the alternatives to Tshombe and Adoula were sufficiently adverse to U.S. interests to justify American military intervention did not exist. What could we do to create it?

The President also asked Secretary Ball about UN cover versus direct U.S. military assistance to Adoula. The President was concerned about putting U.S. military units under UN control. Mr. Bundy noted that units would be under U.S. control, in fact. The President, however, was concerned with the question of form. Various analogies were made, including South Korea, the present Globemaster arrangement in the Congo, and the relations between our forces and the Government of South Vietnam. Secretary Ball pointed out that originally Hammarskjöld and later U Thant had the view that it was undesirable to have great power participation in UN peace-keeping operations. It was his judgment now that the Secretary General's investment of his personal prestige in the success of the Congo operation and the strong sentiments of African and Asian nations would permit the UN to accept American forces. Mr. Cleveland pointed out that we could arrange it so that the force was not formally part of UNOC although it was used in close consultation with UNOC and the Secretary General.

Governor Williams raised the point that the Kamina base was the desirable place at which to put the squadron. Secretary Gilpatric agreed, and said they could be flown in by transports from Adana and Tripoli, and that the whole squadron and the ground security forces necessary for it could be in place in 48 to 72 hours from the time of decision, using some 20 sorties of large transport planes.

The President asked whether we would make this move in response to a request by U Thant. He also raised the question of how we make it into an anti-Communist effort since this was the only way we could justify these movements publicly in the U.S. Messrs. Bundy and Kaysen pointed out the importance of the use of U.S. force in providing us with an influence on both the UN and Adoula. It was important that we make the UN and Adoula realize that our force was to be applied for limited objectives and what we were doing involved in essence a certain guarantee of Tshombe, as well as a guarantee of Congo integration.

Admiral Anderson observed that what we had was a political, rather than a military, problem in the use of force, and this must be understood. The military part of the job could be done by any force. It was the political part that required U.S. force. Mr. Bowles spoke about the Communist threat if integration failed and Adoula failed. He also spoke of the strong feeling against Tshombe of the Africans. Secretary Ball agreed with Anderson's characterization of the situation of the use of the U.S. force. One of its central features was to show U.S. determination to come to a solution of the problems, a determination which had been suspect in New York and Léopoldville, as well as in Elisabethville. He went on to repeat our aims with respect to Tshombe: to force him to give up the bulk of his military forces; to secure an equitable division of the revenues between Katanga and the Central Government; to give up the pretense of independent Katanga sovereignty. To do this, we need a UN force and guarantee for Tshombe that structure of the Congo would be a loose federation, and that the ANC will not overrun Katanga. Accordingly, Adoula must guarantee that there will be a loose federation according to certain agreed constitutional principles, and that he will prorogue parliament shortly in order to be able to carry through the required measures, and that he will accept Tshombe's position as head in Katanga in a Congo Federation. To bring these results about we will probably need to get increased economic assistance to the Central Congo Government. In response to the President's question, Mr. Williams said that we could produce in 48 hours a draft set of constitutional principles and modifications in the present document which would embody these principles.

Secretary Gilpatric raised the question of whether we should put our squadron at Wheelus. The President felt that if we put in force at all, it is better to put it into the Congo and get the maximum results from it.

The President asked whether we didn't need a paper defining our goals for Adoula and Tshombe. Mr. Bundy responded that, while it was easy to produce a paper, it might not be useful since we were obviously dealing with a moving negotiation.

The President gave Mr. Ball the responsibility for producing by Monday a paper describing the elements of the agreed program. The President again asked whether U Thant would agree to U.S. forces, and Mr. Cleveland responded in the affirmative.

The President then decided that we should undertake to put in an air squadron, but that it should be at Adoula's request, in cooperation with the UN, rather than under UN command. Mr. Cleveland agreed that this was legally possible, and the President repeated his view that this would be more desirable domestically. Mr. Cleveland suggested that we remind the public of the speed with which the Soviets provided military assistance in August and September of 1960 when Lumumba was head of the Congo Government.

The President returned to the question of steps to be taken. These included: a. discuss the proposal with U Thant;

b. discuss it with Adoula;

c. if satisfactory conclusions arose from these discussions, put the squadron in;

d. reserve for a later time Congressional presentation;

e. Bowles to include in his speech tonight4 our concern with the Communist threat in the Congo and the need to protect the interests of both sides in the Congo-Katanga dispute;

f. McGhee to do a backgrounder at the State Department explaining the present state of the situation. He also was to approach Senator Dodd and get whatever help from Senator Humphrey he could;

g. George Ball was to look into the usefulness of bringing up to date and issuing the Congo "White Paper," which was drafted in the fall.5

Carl Kaysen6

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Series, Congo, 12/14/62. Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Kaysen.

2 The participants in the meeting, in addition to the President, were Ball, McGhee, Bowles, Williams, Hilsman, Gilpatric, Davis, Cleveland, Chief of Naval Operations Admiral George W. Anderson, Colonel Greene, Bronson Tweedy of the Central Intelligence Agency, McGeorge Bundy, and Kaysen. Kaysen's handwritten notes of the meeting are ibid.

3 Document 359.

4 The text of an address that Bowles made in New York on December 14 is printed in Department of State Bulletin, December 31, 1962, pp. 1002–1007.

5 Not found.

6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

361. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to the Under Secretary of State (Ball) 361. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to the Under Secretary of State (Ball)1

Washington, December 16, 1962.

SUBJECT

Report of Conversation with Secretary General U Thant on the Congo

At your direction I went to New York this afternoon to participate, with Ambassador Stevenson and Ambassador Yost, in a further meeting with Secretary General U Thant on the Congo. Ralph Bunche is out of town, so the Secretary General was alone. He was also in a somewhat different mood from that reported by Ambassador Stevenson on Saturday.2 He had done some homework on the legal issues; he was more impressed by the change in the degree of United States resolve, and he was ready at the proper moment with a procedural proposal which amounted to a back-handed acceptance of the idea of putting a U.S. military unit into the Congo in support of UNOC.

Ambassador Stevenson led off, saying that we were coming back to him because of our assessment that the Secretary General's counter proposal for some miscellaneous forms of additional help for UNOC, without a U.S. military air unit, would not be adequate to get the UN reconciliation plan carried out on the required time schedule. Ambassador Stevenson then asked me to describe the Washington thinking in detail, making clear the President has taken no decisions on this subject.

Most of my remarks followed very closely the instructions in the draft cable (Tab A)3 which, though not actually sent as a telegram, had been carried to Ambassador Stevenson as an approved instruction.4 But I led up to the points in the instruction with the following analysis: (a) We had considered, I said, what the United States would have to do if the UN failed in the Congo and pulled out, leaving the Congolese to their own devices. The obvious answer was that some form of direct U.S. involvement would be required, to preclude the opportunity for Soviet penetration which the Soviets had demonstrated they would back up. This direct involvement might have to go so far as to use U.S. forces.

(b) If, in the ultimate, we did have to be deeply involved in the Congo through bilateral arrangements, then the question arises: What can we do short of this undesirable alternative to help the UN make a success of the existing reconciliation plan, so we will not have to face the consequences of failure? The answer again is clear: We should be willing to provide whatever degree of support is required for such success, up to and including direct use of U.S. forces in support of the UN plan.

(c) How much support is required? Time is short, which affects the support need. The Indian troops are scheduled to be withdrawn late this winter (they are now scheduled to leave the end of February, but Thant said he thinks he will be able to get the Indians to hold off until the end of March). The UN is running out of funds, and we see great political difficulties in asking Congress for more Congo-military money to support a continuation of the present ineffective arrangements. It therefore seems necessary to make crystal clear to all concerned, including especially Tshombe and his associates, that the United States is in fact fully committed to the success of the UN plan. That is what leads us to offer a military unit to back up the UN forces and make possible a quick resolution of the matter by closing off the alternative of maintaining Katanga's secession by military resistance.

After this introduction, I followed closely the five points in the draft instructions,5 reading for the Secretary General the full text of the material on the legal issues. I also described the ways in which we had tried to take the UN's natural sensitivities into account: we had not proposed that the American unit be under UN command; we were prepared to have it sent only on request by the UN; we could put in a smaller-than-usual squadron in order not to seem to be placing a disproportionate number of planes and American personnel in the Congo; and we were willing to provide other kinds of equipment and supplies, of the sort suggested by the Secretary General in his counter proposal on Saturday.

The Secretary General then discussed the matter quite systematically under the following headings:

1. Big Power Involvement.

The Secretary General first elaborated a hypothetical case in which the Syrian-Israeli border dispute would cause the Syrians to ask for Russian assistance to bolster the UN's peacekeeping forces in the Middle East. He also referred again, as he had with Ambassador Stevenson on Saturday, to the Krishna Menon proposal for Russian troops in the Congo.6 (We said the obvious reply in either case would be to suggest to the Russians that they start supporting the UN by paying up their arrearages on the UNEF and ONUC accounts. Besides, we said, the U.S. and the USSR are not in parallel positions vis-a-vis the UN. The Soviet Union does not effectively participate in the UN's executive work, and opposes it whenever possible. The United States is a consistent supporter of the UN's executive function.)

The Secretary General also asked what British and Belgian reactions might be. We said we had not discussed this with anybody else outside the U.S. Government except Ralph Bunche and himself. In answer to his question about the British—"Will this be an open split between two close allies?"—we said we thought that could be avoided and that the matter might be discussed between the President and Prime Minister Macmillan in Nassau this week. His concern about the Belgians' troubled feelings about Belgian civilians in the Katanga suggested (we said) one of the reasons why it made sense from the Belgian point of view to have a greater commitment of U.S. power in the area—to help protect Belgian civilians in the case of trouble.

2. The UN's Plan of Action.

The Secretary General said he was "fairly confident" that the UN could "dispose of the problem" by the end of February. 4500 Indonesians were on their way, 1800 of them by the end of December. The UN Air Force in the Congo was being built up from the four existing Swedish planes (3 of them operational) to eight Swedish planes, six Filipino jets with Filipino pilots and 4 Italian jets with Ethiopian pilots. With this force it should be possible to immobolize Katanga's forces and make military resistance seem very unwise to Tshombe. If, in spite of the UN's efforts, the matter was not resolved by March, a U.S. military unit might then be acceptable.

In the course of the discussion of this point, U Thant gave a clear and detailed picture of the Secretariat's present thinking on economic and military movements in the Congo: (a) He does not quarrel with our jaundiced view of the economic embargo letters (which will be sent out Monday, December 17th). He understands they will require legislation in some of the key countries, notably Belgium, and that such legislation may not be forthcoming. However, Adoula has asked the UN to support Adoula's efforts to get control of all export revenues from the Congo, and the Secretary General feels obliged to help Adoula in this matter.

(b) Moreover, even if none of the importing countries respond, there is much that the UN can do to cut off exports from the Katanga of contraband copper and cobalt. The first step would be to afford UN protection to immigration, customs and revenue officers representing the Central Government at Kipushi and Jadotville.

(c) The Secretariat plan would call for moving 800 to 1,000 troops to Kipushi (20 miles from Elizabethville) and another 800 to 1,000 troops to Jadotville, both of the moves being accomplished some time in January. This would place the UN astride the railroads by which copper and cobalt are exported through Rhodesia and Angola, and potash is brought in from Northern Rhodesia for use in processing both the copper and the cobalt in UMHK's installations.

(d) The Secretary General has been in touch with Kaunda, through private channels. Kaunda has agreed to cooperate, when (in a couple of weeks) he becomes head of the Northern Rhodesian Government.

(e) The Kolwezi Airport would also need to be occupied in January. Most of the Harvards are based there, and perhaps Kolwezi should be used as the place to which Tshombe would be told to send all of his military planes for impounding. (Thant said the Congolese Air Force was still active: there was a raid on Kongolo Sunday morning.)

(f) The UN would thus be firmly installed in four places, including Elizabethville. It would probably be desirable for the UN to take over the radio transmitting station, for use by the Central Government.

(g) Thant conceded that these military movements would result in at least one substantial fight with the Katanga gendarmerie. He was optimistic that the UN forces would be such that only one fight would be required to demonstrate their superiority.

We said it would obviously be preferable if Tshombe could be induced by an overwhelming show of strength in the air to get on with the reconciliation plan without the need for any messy fighting on the ground. We also said we doubted that the relevant opinion makers in most countries would understand the difference between UN troop movements of the kind Thant described, and "taking the military initiative" which he had repeatedly said the UN would never do.

3. A "Way Out".

The Secretary General suggested that his reaction to a U.S. military unit would be quite different if, instead of the UN requesting this kind of assistance from a Permanent Member of the Security Council, the unit were to be requested by Adoula. Thant made clear that he was not talking about bilateral military aid to Adoula, which he described as clearly a violation of standing Security Council resolutions. But he said that if Adoula were to appeal to the United States (and at the same time to a number of other countries) to give additional help to the UN, and if Adoula were to specify the kind of help (a U.S. military air unit) he thought was particularly needed, the UN's legal and political problem would thereby be eased considerably. Thant thought that if he were sure of a positive answer, Adoula would be willing to do this. He said it was not unlikely that the Russians would insist on a Security Council meeting to discuss the matter, but thought he could defend his own position in the matter if the U.S. unit were being made available to back up UNOC at the request of Adoula, not of the Secretary General.

Warming to his proposal, Thant said that Adoula might also ask the Belgians and a good many other countries that have been cooperating with the UN to assist in ways appropriate to their own resources. Most of the others would do little or nothing and the U.S. response would be "massive", but a wide distribution of requests for help would nevertheless be useful. Such a request would not need to be sent to the Soviets, since they have not cooperated with the Congo operation in any way previously.

The Adoula request should be clearly for the purpose of carrying out the UN reconciliation plan. It would, indeed, ask for this additional support to UNOC as one of the "other measures" referred to in the Secretary General's announcement of the plan.

The Secretary General said that after we had considered the whole problem, and if we decided to move along these lines, he suggested we supply him with detailed information on: (a) The character of the force that would be made available;

(b) The "nature of its function", by which he seemed to mean the force's mission; and

(c) Its relationship to the UN—i.e., the command and control arrangements that would apply.

With this information in hand, he would be in a position to draft (in cooperation with us, of course) the kind of letter that Adoula should send us. (It was not wholly clear whether he would go so far as to instruct Gardiner to participate in the process of working out this letter with Adoula. But I think that one way or another we could probably get Gardiner associated with that process in Léopoldville.)

4. Timing.

Several times during the conversation, the Secretary General hinted broadly he would not be unhappy if we were to consider our military unit as a measure for consideration later if current UN plans did not work out as well as he thought they probably would. Toward the end of the conversation, he again spoke of the possibility of deferring consideration of this matter, if that could be done "without leaking".

But, apparently accepting the possibility that we would want to move right ahead along the indicated lines, he concentrated at the end on delaying for a matter of days. Adoula, he said, probably should not write his letters during the next three days or so, since a UMHK man is just now going to Léopoldville to see the Monetary Council and work out the right way of transferring the payments, as Tshombe has now agreed can be done.

At the end of the conversation, Ambassador Stevenson reiterated that we had not taken any final decisions, and that we would take the matter back to the President tomorrow with the understanding that the Secretary General could accept an American support unit in the Congo if Adoula asks us to provide it.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Top Secret; Eyes Only.

2 Stevenson had met with Thant on December 15. The meeting was not reported by cable, and no memorandum of it has been found. In a telephone conversation with Ball that day, Yost reported that Thant had expressed reservations about the idea of U.S. combat personnel in the Congo, which he felt would require him to obtain the approval of the Security Council, and had suggested that the United States instead expand its support role by supplying various items, including 10 fighter aircraft to be flown by non-American pilots, and provide ground crews, which he considered would be non-combatant technicians, to service U.N. fighter aircraft. (Memorandum of telephone conversation, December 15, 1:25 p.m.; ibid., Ball Papers, Congo)

3 Not attached to the source text. A copy is ibid., National Security Files, Brubeck Series.

4 Ball had obtained the President's approval for a renewed effort to obtain Thant's agreement to stationing a U.S. air squadron in the Congo in a telephone conversation at 6:20 p.m. on December 15. (Ibid., Ball Papers, Congo)

5 The five points were as follows: 1) the Katanga secession could be ended only if U.S. resolve and determination were impressed on Tshombe and Adoula; 2) the United States had no intention of disengaging from the Congo; 3) the Security Council resolution of July 14, 1960, did not limit the forces that the Secretary-General might use to provide military assistance to the Congolese Government; 4) Thant would be in a position to resist any similar Soviet offer because the Soviets had failed to pay their share of the costs; and 5) in the absence of practical progress, the United States would be unwilling to support the U.N. operation in the Congo after money ran out in the spring.

6 According to Stevenson's handwritten notes of the conversation, December 16, Thant said India's Representative, V.K. Krishna Menon, suggested in mid-September that if Belgium and the United States were not cooperative, he should call on the Russians. Thant replied that it was better to avoid big-power involvement. (Princeton University, Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library, Stevenson Papers, Embargoed Files, Box 3, U Thant)

362. Memorandum for President Kennedy 362. Memorandum for President Kennedy1

Washington, undated.

OPERATING PLAN FOR THE CONGO

I

General Rationale

1. The State of Affairs

The UN Reconciliation Plan has not resulted in the necessary progress toward reintegration of the Katanga into the Congo. Although some forward movement has resulted, the latest being Tshombe's proposal regarding change in UMHK payments to the Central Government, even this proposal appears to involve certain conditions which may delay or prevent its being carried out. There still remain, moreover, other difficult aspects of the Plan as yet unresolved—standstill, amnesty, cease-fire, the Constitution, and integration of forces—on which there is no assurance of either the desire or ability of the two parties to reach early agreement.

We wish to give Tshombe's latest proposal every benefit of the doubt. We are therefore urging all concerned that it be accepted at face value and that UMHK cease payments to the GOK, initiate payments to the GOC, and that the GOC, perhaps with assistance of the IMF, work out practical arrangements both with UMHK and Tshombe. We are at the same time urging both Tshombe and the Central Government to resume negotiations on the other aspects of the Plan. But if our approach to parties concerned is limited to the kinds of arguments and leverage we have used in the past, success is not at all likely within the time limits required by the state of affairs in the Congo and in the UN.

For there is growing evidence of serious deterioration in the Congo—the danger of flare-ups in local fighting, the growing Afro-Asian pressure for forceful UN measures, the Secretary-General's strong desire for a minerals embargo, the continuing financial drain on the UN, the almost certain withdrawal of a big Indian contingent at the end of March, the instability and administrative flabbiness of the Adoula Government, and the latent threat of Soviet bloc military assistance to the Central Government if a continuation of Katanga's secession were to make moderate politics impossible in Léopoldville.

These factors all underline the urgency of injecting a new element into the Congo situation to avert the failure and withdrawal of the UN—which would result in either a massive US unilateral effort, or failing that, the emergence of an extremist or Communist-dominated government in Léopoldville.

2. New Proposals: US and SYG's

We believe, therefore, that a new element should be injected into the situation. There are two possibilities: (a) We have indicated on a most confidential basis to the Secretary-General our willingness to consider dispatching to the Congo an American squadron of fighter aircraft, with accompanying reconnaissance aircraft and ground support personnel;

(b) The Secretary-General has suggested as an alternative that the United States help the UN in a show of force in order to bring about reintegration by supplying the UN with six US armored cars airlifted by US transport to Elisabethville; by providing thirty-two US half-ton trucks airlifted by the United States to Elisabethville; by providing ten US fighters (6 F–86's, 4 Mustangs) to be flown to Léopoldville or Kamina by US personnel and turned over to the UN thereafter, to be flown by non-American pilots (Swedes, Ethiopians and others); and that the US provide US ground crews which would be considered by the UN as technicians; that the US provide a small engineering unit for bridging operations which would also be considered technical rather than combat; that the US airlift in US transports UK bridging material; and that the US transport six Philippine aircraft from Manila to the Congo.

Our objectives in either case would be: to show US determination to do whatever necessary to secure integration, bolster Adoula and get him to negotiate seriously with Tshombe, to preempt the present fighter aircraft vacuum in the Congo, and to convince Tshombe of our resolve to use more forceful measures if necessary to get him to carry out the UN Plan and reintegrate.

3. Mission of the US Force Elements in Support of UNOC

The basic mission of the US forces would be to exploit their own psychological and deterrent value: (a) As a symbol of support for the Adoula Government and for the United Nations in carrying out its mandate in the UN Reconciliation Plan;

(b) As a symbol to Tshombe of our determination to see that the Plan is carried out, and as a deterrent to the use of the Katanga Air Force and to the initiation of hostilities by the GOK as well as to any other elements of the population who might initiate retaliation against European personnel or damage to plants.

The more direct US involvement, and the strengthened UN position which it makes possible, should be adjusted to a rapidly graduated scale of possible pressure. For example:

The first step taken would be an announcement by the UN that the UN will not tolerate Tshombe's use of his Air Force. It would be made very clear that if any such aggression occurs, Katanga planes will be attacked not only in the air but on the ground wherever they are. Once a US air squadron was in Kamina Base, the Katanga Air Force would either be pinned down or, if it attempted to fly, would be destroyed. This in itself would have a strong psychological effect on Tshombe, since either result would achieve a major shift in the balance of military power in the Congo.

If this action did not bring about sufficient progress toward ending the secession, the UN would stop all rail traffic within the Elisabethville perimeter. It would be made clear that any attacks against the UN action would be supported both by the UNOC Air Force and the US squadron.

If this did not achieve the desired result, the UN would, in accordance with its mandate covering freedom of movement, move to extend its perimeter to include Jadotville and Kolwezi so as to bring about control of Katangese exports so payments required under Congolese law would be paid to the GOC. It would be made clear that, in the event the UN encountered road blocks or other obstacles in taking Jadotville and Kolwezi, the UNOC Air Force and the US squadron would clear the way.

If any local actions of retaliation occurred in the Katanga against Belgians or others, or damage or destruction of plants, the UNOC Air Force, and the US squadron, would over-fly such areas. If this did not assure the necessary results, they would attack, seeking to minimize the loss of life, particularly of those threatened.

For details of the US military unit proposed to be placed in the Congo in support of the UN operation there, see the Department of Defense annex at Tab A.2

4. Preconditions

The following necessary preconditions will be complied with: (a) A clear request or approval on the part of the Adoula Government;

(b) Approval or acceptance by the UN, and a clear understanding that our squadron remains under US control, but will be used only on missions requested by the UN;

(c) A clear public indication that we do not have in mind the initiation of unprovoked aggressive action merely for the purpose of conquering the Katanga or of eliminating or capturing the present Katanga leaders. Indeed, the force is as much for their protection as for anyone else;

(d) A clear indication that we will withdraw US force elements if requested to do so by the Congolese Government or the UN or when the end of the Katangese secession is assured.

5. Command Relationships

Under our proposal to supply US aircraft, we would do so under existing State –JCS arrangements for USAF transport aircraft flying internally in support of UNOC. Under this arrangement, the CINCEUR Representative retains operational control, air missions are flown at the request of UNOC, but the United States (CINCEUR Representative) decides whether to fly each mission and has the authority to suspend operations if necessary.

Under the proposal of the Secretary-General, the units we are supplying are considered to be in a support category. We presently have ground crews servicing our transports which are not under UNOC but under CINCEUR. The only part of the Secretary-General's request that directly involves the question of operational control might be the engineering unit which would be expected to undertake bridge-building functions. We assume such an engineering unit should be considered technical and, therefore, be in the Congo on the basis of the same arrangements as the US transport planes and servicing ground crews. It would be clearly understood that these units could not and would not be ordered into combat, though they have obviously the right of self-defense in the event of attack. This would help the Secretary-General defend the UN against charges of accepting offers from outside powers.

[Here follows Part II, "Congo Scenario," which set forth the consultations and arrangements that would be made before the President ordered a U.S. military unit into the Congo in response to a request by the Secretary-General, as proposed in Part I.]

1 Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Congo Security, 1962(B). Top Secret; Eyes Only. The memorandum bears no drafting information. Bundy's copy of this memorandum bears a notation that it was received from the Department of State on December 17. (Ibid., National Security Files, Congo)

2 Tab A was not attached to the source text. It consisted of a paper headed "Military Implementation of the U.S. Plan," with an annex headed "Composite Air Strike Unit in Support of UNOC," and three technical appendices. A copy is ibid. with Bundy's copy of the "Operating Plan for the Congo." Another copy of the "Operating Plan for the Congo" including Tab A is also in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 533, CF 2215.

363. Editorial Note 363. Editorial Note

The Executive Committee of the National Security Council, at its Meeting No. 36 at 10 a.m. on December 17, discussed the Congo. The Summary Record of the meeting prepared by Bromley Smith states that Director of Central Intelligence John McCone presented intelligence summaries on Cuba and the Congo, summarizes the discussion of Cuba that followed, and concludes: "The remainder of the meeting was taken up with the discussion of a Congo plan and policy recommendations of the Subcommittee on South Asia." (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda, Executive Committee Meetings) The Record of Actions at the meeting, prepared by Bundy and dated December 17, includes the following paragraph concerning the Congo: "4. Following a discussion of the 'Operating Plan for the Congo,' the President asked that several specific revisions be made in the Plan for further discussion later in the day. The President requested a new estimate of the military capability of UN forces in the Congo." (Kennedy Library, Sorensen Papers, Classified Subject Files, NSC, 11/12/62–1/22/63)

According to handwritten notes by Kaysen, the President asked about the degree of U.S. control of U.N. military action and whether the proposed U.S. squadron would be sufficient. Rusk asked what would happen if the proposed actions did not have any effect on Tshombe: "Would we go in further with whatever force is needed? Or how do we get out?" Kennedy approved provision of the military equipment Secretary-General Thant had requested and discussion of the proposed air squadron with Spaak, Adoula, and the U.N. leadership. He was "willing to go ahead if adds any substantial chance of success." (Ibid., National Security Files, Brubeck Series)

According to the agenda for the meeting, Stevenson and Yost were to be present; those present for the discussion on the Congo were to include Williams, Cleveland, McGhee, Kaysen, and Bowles. (Ibid., Meetings and Memoranda Series, Executive Committee Meetings) The regular membership of the NSC Executive Committee included the President; the Vice President; the Secretaries of State, Defense, and the Treasury; the Attorney General; the Director of Central Intelligence; the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Ambassador at Large; the Special Counsel; and the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs. (Smith, Organizational History of the National Security Council During the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, page 46)

364. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy 364. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy1

Washington, December 17, 1962.

SUBJECT

Congo Issues

1. You have heard all the positive arguments for going in to the Congo along the lines of the Department's proposal this morning. It is perhaps useful to re-state the purpose for which we would put force in; namely, to back up the UN force in its mission to prevent Katanga from blocking the application of the UN reconciliation plan by force.

2. However, this morning's discussion did not bring out clearly the alternatives to the proposed course of action. The real question is whether any of them is less likely to result in an unacceptable situation in the Congo which will call for U.S. intervention on a larger scale at a later date.

3. The first alternative is to continue as we have in support of the UN, including giving U Thant some of the assistance he asked for, but without attempting to assert a strong influence on the course of events directly. The likely result of this course of action is UN action in January that will lead to an outbreak of fighting. Such fighting runs a high risk of involving the Europeans in the Katanga. It is much more likely to be inconclusive, than conclusive. It would have serious domestic political repercussions, especially with the Congress in session. It would further run down UN finances, and probably lead to force withdrawals.

4. The second alternative is UN withdrawal, forced by our refusal to continue to support the operation. This would have as its immediate result a serious defeat for the prestige of the UN, and for our policy in Africa. Further, it would almost certainly lead to the fall of the Adoula Government in Léopoldville, and the accession to power of a more radical government. The new government would seek military aid directly from all sources that would assist it, including the Soviet Union. While the intelligence community estimates that the likelihood of a quick Soviet response to such a request is low, there may well be responses from the Algerians, the Ghanaians and others, and some indirect assistance by the Soviets through these countries. The result would be a long drawn-out but probably still inconclusive struggle in the Congo. The changed government in Léopoldville would be certain to throw the Belgians fully on the side of the Katanga and might well cause the defeat of Spaak because of his support for the reconciliation policy. It is unlikely that the Léopoldville Government could get enough help in these circumstances to end the Katanga secession. What we could expect is a situation of intermittent fighting with an increasing temptation for the Soviets to get in as time went on.

5. The same situation might well come about at a somewhat later date as a result of an unsuccessful UN effort to clean up the Katanga problem by UN military action next month. After failing in this attempt, the UN might find it impossible to hold on to its forces, and we might well find it impossible to continue supporting the UN operation. Spaak's continuance in power would also be threatened by this course of events.

6. The alternatives can be summed up then as follows: We can take a risky step now which, by general agreement, has the best chance of moving the Congo problem from its present posture as a Congo-Katanga war to an internal political problem within a nominally unified federal Congo. However, that chance is probably not much better than 50–50. The other alternative is immediate voluntary, or later, involuntary withdrawal of the UN and the U.S. from the operation. This involves immediate losses of UN and U.S. prestige and may require at some future date, a year or so from now, renewed U.S. intervention, because of the danger of Soviet involvement in a continuing Congo-Katanga struggle. It will certainly result in a change from the present moderate to a radical Léopoldville Government, and the loss of all European support for the Central Government.

C.K.2

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Secret.

2 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

365. Memorandum by the President's Special Counsel (Sorensen) 365. Memorandum by the President's Special Counsel (Sorensen)1

Washington, December 17, 1962.

While those of us who were hearing the problem for the first time were reluctant to speak out this morning, I believe Secretary Dillon and Director Bell share my doubts about the wisdom of sending American combat forces to the Congo: (1) American forces can rarely be sent into combat successfully for reasons not fully understood and endorsed by the American people; and I think it would be difficult to explain to most Americans why American forces must intervene against non-communist Katanga. The use of our forces with respect to Cuba, Vietnam and even Laos was more clear cut—and, even in Lebanon, Eisenhower could point out the dangers of a communist or leftist government. I am fearful that this move will dissipate the wide-spread support and confidence engendered in this country and Western Europe by the more careful approach in Cuba.

(2) Instead of expending our energies twisting U-Thant's arm to secure his agreement to our military intervention, could we not be pressuring him instead to improve the UN military plan of operations, to line up pilots from other countries to fly American planes, etc.?

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Sorensen Papers, Classified Subject File, Congo. No classification marking. The document is headed "TCS–12/17/62" and bears a handwritten notation "NSC." There is no indication that this memorandum was sent to anyone. For Sorensen's recollection of the discussion that prompted this memorandum, see Kennedy, p. 638.

366. Editorial Note 366. Editorial Note

The Executive Committee of the National Security Council, at its Meeting No. 37 at 3:45 p.m. on December 17, discussed the Congo. The Summary Record of the meeting prepared by Bromley Smith states that the meeting discussed the "Operating Plan for the Congo" and the President authorized the actions listed in the Record of Action. The meeting concluded with discussion of Cuba. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda, Executive Committee Meetings)

A document entitled "Congo Scenario," prepared in the Department of State, was apparently the document under discussion. A copy in Department of State files bears the notation "Prepared for NSC Meeting, 3:45"; Kaysen's copy is marked "Mon 17th, PM version." It proposed clearing the following program with Secretary-General Thant the next day: "A. We would provide as soon as possible the following equipment: six US armored cars airlifted to Elisabethville; thirty two-and-one-half ton trucks airlifted by the United States to Elisabethville; some aircraft suitable for UN use and US ground crews for servicing them; a small US engineering unit for bridging operations and necessary supplies; and US would transport six Philippine aircraft from Manila to Congo. This quick US response would demonstrate US determination to do whatever necessary to secure reintegration.

"B. In the same response we would also say that if Tshombe initiated fighting or failed to cooperate on prompt reintegration of the Katanga into the Congo, the US would be prepared to dispatch an American squadron of fighter aircraft, with accompanying reconnaissance aircraft and ground support and service personnel. These US units would be made available under existing State-JCS arrangements for USAF transported aircraft flying internally in support of UNOC." (Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2215, and Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Series, Congo, December 1962, Subfolder: 12/17/62)

Kaysen's handwritten notes of the morning meeting, cited in Document 363, continue with more handwritten notes headed "PM meeting." According to these notes, Rusk recommended providing Thant with support but not an air squadron, discussing U.S. plans, including the proposed air squadron, with Spaak, and consultation along broad lines with Macmillan. The President responded that this would not make much impact but might be a useful interim step. Ball argued that consultations with Spaak and Adoula were necessary; if neither was forthcoming, "we might as well quit." Kennedy declared that he did not want to get into a fight unless it could be won; the notes read, "No fight if we can't win." He wanted a military appraisal to provide fresh input. The discussion continued. Rusk again urged talking to Thant and Spaak. Kennedy asked about the plan to bring Adoula to New York; McGhee explained that that was not possible.

Finally Kennedy decided on the following steps: tell Thant the United States would provide the items he had requested but would wait to take action on the air squadron, talk to Spaak and Macmillan, have a military appraisal made in Léopoldville, talk to Adoula, and if the military appraisal and consultations were favorable, go ahead with the air squadron. If the consultations were unfavorable and if it was estimated that a military solution would not succeed, it would be necessary to "think how we get out." He was willing to send in an air squadron and use it if it would be politically or militarily effective; the notes read: "Ready to use squadron if political or military effect."

The Record of Actions at the meeting, prepared by Bundy and dated December 17, includes the following paragraphs concerning the Congo: "1. Following further discussion of the 'Operating Plan for the Congo,' the President authorized: "a. Informing U Thant (1) that we are willing to supply the military equipment, including planes, which he has requested; (2) that we are going to talk to Spaak and others about our Congo plan and (3) that we will be in touch with him again in the next few days;

"b. Informing Spaak of what we plan to do, including our willingness to consider sending a U.S. fighter squadron to the Congo in support of the UN if necessary and if invited to do so by Adoula;

"c. Informing Adoula of our plans, if these plans are acceptable to Spaak;

"d. Sending a military mission to the Congo immediately (1) to determine the feasibility of basing and protecting a U.S. air squadron there and (2) to estimate the capability of the UN forces there to undertake successful military action;

"e. Informing the British at Nassau of our plans in general.

"2. The President made clear that if Tshombe was not cowed by the new UN effort, including the introduction of a U.S. air squadron, we would then decide on further actions in the light of the requested military appraisal." (Kennedy Library, Sorensen Papers, Classified Subject Files, NSC, 11/12/62–1/22/63)

367. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 367. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, December 17, 1962, 8:34 p.m.

899. For Ambassador only. In view of deterioration in Congo situation, USG determined to support UN reconciliation plan, bolster Adoula and get him to negotiate seriously with Tshombe, pre-empt situation before bloc intervention becomes reality and convince Tshombe of our resolve to secure reintegration.

USG will advise U Thant we are prepared to respond favorably to his request for six armored cars or best substitute US can give airlifted to Elisabethville; thirty trucks airlifted to Elisabethville; and other military equipment and necessary supplies if readily available.

The US is prepared to transport the six Philippine aircraft from Manila to the Congo.

US prepared to consider favorably if U Thant requests further beefing up fighter strength.

USG considering possibility of supplying further military support to UN if advisable.

DOD has secured four million dollar Presidential determination to facilitate rapid build up along lines of Greene plan and military officers will be in Leo early January to promote same. Equipment could begin arriving possibly end of January.

JCS sending senior officer who arriving soonest in order to examine (a) what is necessary to protect American military units operating in Congo and (b) to make firmer estimate of capabilities of UN to carry out program of securing freedom of movement involving Kipushi, Jadotville and possibly later on Kolwezi. Details later.2

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1762. Top Secret; Niact; Eyes Only. Drafted and approved by Williams and cleared in draft by Cleveland, Burdett, Greene, and McGhee. Repeated to USUN and Brussels for Stevenson and MacArthur.

2 Telegram 908 to Léopoldville, December 18, instructed Gullion to see Adoula and request permission for Lieutenant General L.W. Truman and a small party to visit the Congo to survey the U.N. forces' needs and ability to deal with the tensions over Congo unification. He was to tell Adoula that the mission was a further indication of U.S. determination that the U Thant plan should succeed and that it would assess U.S. ability to help the United Nations in this cause. (Ibid., 770G.5811/12–1862)

368. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 368. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, December 18, 1962, 5:14 p.m.

1690. For Stevenson. Following is confirmation of telephonic instructions2 for your meeting with U Thant today: 1. As SYG knows, we are determined that early practical reintegration of the Katanga into the Congo will take place. As Stevenson and Cleveland stated to the SYG on Sunday evening, the US is fully committed to the success of the UN Plan and we want, before the UN runs out of money, a quick resolution of this question and to close off the alternative of maintaining Katanga's secession by military resistance.

2. Last Sunday we discussed how much military support is required in order to bulwark the UN and create conditions conducive to immediate steps being taken on key elements of the Thant Plan (for example, standstill, amnesty, cease-fire, practical arrangements on division of power, integration of forces, immediate payments to GOC in accordance with UMHK payments plan). The UN buildup is proceeding. The Saabs are moving in, there are the Italian fighters which we hope to get in before the end of the year, the Indonesian troops are already at Dar-es-Salaam, our internal airlift of vehicles and supplies is proceeding expeditiously.

3. The SYG's assessment is that, with the added help he has asked us for, he can "dispose of the problem" by end of February and that, with such a force, it should be possible to immobilize Katanga's forces and make military resistance seem very unwise to Tshombe.

4. We are therefore ready to respond soonest to UN request for additional equipment and supporting assistance to UNOC. Since there will naturally be technical problems in each of the categories SYG has mentioned (armored personnel carriers, heavy trucks, combat aircraft, and bridging materials), the Department of Defense will be available for immediate technical discussions with UN Secretariat to see just what is required and what we can provide on what schedule. FYI. While question of a US air unit is pending we will probably not proceed with provision of US aircraft to be flown by non-US crews; in any case, F–86's and Mustangs are probably unavailable. On bridging operations, we are dubious about inserting an American engineering unit, which would typically be partly composed of combat troops; this would raise all the same problems, for UN and US, that are raised by proposal for US air unit, without having the dramatic effect. End FYI. We will move as rapidly as possible in getting the six Philippine aircraft from Manila to Congo.

5. This should help show Tshombe we mean business and, in the meantime, we are going to make a further military assessment of our own. The President is dispatching a Major-General and a small group to make a quick military appreciation as to what additionally would be necessary in order to make the US and UN resolve credible. We would wish to determine as precisely as possible what would be needed to protect a US air squadron and to make our own estimate of the present capabilities of UN forces. Please ask SYG to arrange full cooperation with this survey team.

6. We are also apprising Spaak of the steps we are taking in concert with Thant and we will discuss with him also our willingness to consider sending a US fighter squadron to the Congo in support of the UN if necessary and if invited to do so by Adoula.

7. The President intends to inform the British in general of our plans at Nassau.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1862. Top Secret; Priority; Eyes Only. Drafted by Sisco and Cleveland, cleared in draft by Rusk and by Kaysen, and approved by Cleveland.

2 The instructions originally dictated by telephone to Stevenson's office were revised by Rusk. A paper headed "Draft tel for Amb. Stevenson from Secy," is identical to paragraphs 1–7 of telegram 1690 except paragraph 4, which states that the United States would respond immediately to Thant's request and would make available all the equipment he had requested. A paper headed "Drafted Approved by Secy with Substitution of Para 4" contains the substitute paragraph 4, identical to paragraph 4 in telegram 1690. (Princeton University, Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library, Stevenson Papers, Embargoed Files, Box 2, Congo)

369. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 369. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, December 18, 1962, 8:17 p.m.

916. For McGhee from Manning. You should know that Nassau press backgrounder today by Ball and Nitze on President's orders2 disclosed U.S. will send military mission to Congo. Group to be headed by Lt. General Truman will leave shortly for two-week survey of state of U.N. military forces in Congo. Department confirming story.

Press officers adding on background that principal purposes of mission will be to ascertain present capacity of U.N. to maintain law and order and to examine state of forces and equipment in event of possible U.N. request for additional assistance of kind U.S. has been providing in order support U.N. reconciliation plan. Also emphasizing here that mission being undertaken in cooperation with U.N. and that SYG has been informed.

Wire services stress mission will also seek to assess ability of Congo to resist any Soviet attempt to take advantage of growing tension in Congo. Department pointing out that this always a concern in deteriorating situation.

FYI, reasons given from Nassau for backgrounding this time were desire to stress urgency of Congo question on Nassau agenda and reduce Nassau focus on Skybolt question.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.5811/12–1862. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Robert J. McCloskey, Special Assistant to Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs Robert J. Manning; cleared in substance by Williams and Cleveland; and approved by Manning.

2 The President was in Nassau December 18–21 to meet with U.K. Prime Minister Macmillan.

370. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 370. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, December 19, 1962, 4 p.m.

1463. Omega I.2 As choice of index for this series implies, Léopoldville country team believes Congo crisis now finally approaching its term. UN financial resources are ebbing and its principal military contingent is being pulled back to India; Adoula government has failed to bring Katanga back into fold and is tottering; world is weary with Congo and Parliamentary countries are divided or increasingly apathetic. On Katanga side, economic realities are beginning to catch up with Tshombe; divorce between him and Belgium seems in making; and it is uncertain how much stomach his supporters have for showdown. Prize in struggle will go to side with toughest will in last quarter-hour.

Our purpose in this series is to attempt to measure relative strengths in confrontation.

We begin with political foreword and assessment of Tshombe's intentions.3

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1962. Confidential; Priority. Received at 1:18 p.m. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, Elisabethville, London, and Paris.

2 Telegram 1442 from Léopoldville, December 18, stated that the country team planned to send a series of political, economic, and military cables with this label, analyzing the situation "as we seem to be approaching showdown on Congolese-Katangan question." (Ibid., 770G.00/12–1862)

3 Telegram 1466, December 19, marked Omega I, Part II, surveyed the political developments of the preceding year and concluded that Tshombe would not move toward real integration without U.N. military action. (Ibid., 770G.00/12–1962) Telegram 1475, December 19, marked Omega III, examined the economic situation. (Ibid., 870G.00/12–2062) Telegram 1515, December 22, marked Omega V, urged that "we must be prepared for early and systematic U.N. enforcement of remaining phases of courses of action and of other U.N. rights and mandates, including freedom of movement throughout Katanga," and that in that event, "USG should leave no doubt in mind of SYG as to US determination to support UN to hilt." (Ibid., 770G.5/12–2262) No telegrams marked Omega II or Omega IV have been found.

371. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State 371. Telegram From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State1

Brussels, December 19, 1962, 7 p.m.

878. Pass Nassau for White House and Under Secretary Ball. Eyes only for the Secretary. Congo. Embassy telegrams 8752 and 876.3 Following is summary of working luncheon meeting of McGhee, Ambassador and DCM with Spaak and his senior advisers:

Spaak arrived late and somewhat shaken by two-hour grilling to which he had just been subjected by foreign affairs committee in which there had been great emotionalism and charges that United States was sabotaging peaceful Congo conciliation then by sending military mission to Congo and was preparing actively to support UN in hostilities against Katanga. Spaak said he defended our right to send military survey mission in committee debate and took position that survey mission was natural response to UN request for military equipment assistance and changed neither Belgian nor US policy to seek peaceful solution to Congo problem.

In addition to emotional outburst of foreign affairs committee Foreign Office has been swamped this morning by telephone calls protesting our military mission. While Spaak believes he has taken edge off parliamentary outburst against us, fact that he was unable to say we had discussed military mission with him before it was announced by press increased his difficulties in trying to keep Belgian reaction within manageable proportions. For example, before McGhee meeting with Spaak this morning very influential evening newspaper "Le Soir" sought Foreign Office comment on US military mission. Since neither Spaak nor Foreign Office had any news about this, they were unable to speak authoritatively. Result was streamer headlines in afternoon edition "Congo: Washington intervenes officially" followed by very unhelpful four column article saying that while up until now Americans, although supporting UN, had not intervened openly, they had now decided to engage in military action. Without criticizing us Spaak made clear his ability to guide Belgian public and parliamentary opinion in right direction depends on our letting him know what we are doing and why before news breaks in press.

As to McGhee presentation this morning (Embtel 875), Spaak gave us paper (next following message)4 which he said represented his present but still tentative thinking. He orally expanded on some points in paper as follows:

1. Before reaching any conclusions about desirability sending air squadron to Congo we must first make every effort to implement UMHK change of payments plan. Tshombe and UMHK must be induced to send representatives to Léopoldville immediately to meet with Monetary Council so that talks can open and some progress be made in next several days. Since our meeting this morning, Spaak received letter from UMHK, which infuriated him. Letter took position that because of developments including A) Gardiner letter to Tshombe asking for only UMHK representative and not GOK representative to come to Léopoldville for talks with Monetary Council; B) American Military Mission to Congo which indicated that force would be used despite Tshombe's conciliatory attitude; and C) Thant's action in asking for a boycott on Katanga minerals. Circumstances had radically changed and UMHK did not feel able to send representatives to Léopoldville. Spaak said Gardiner had committed error in sending message to Tshombe which spoke of sending only UMHK and not GOK representatives to Léopoldville for discussions with Monetary Council since this had given UMHK pretext to decline to send representatives to Léopoldville. However this beside point since UMHK letter to Spaak inadmissible. Spaak will therefore tell Robiliart this afternoon that UMHK only legitimate concern is foreign exchange and local currency needed to carry on its operations. Three points UMHK raised in letter are political and none fits business. Spaak will stress that in view of UMHK's protestations for last year that it could not intervene in politics, he finds particularly distasteful this blatant injection of political issues into UMHK position. He plans to tell UMHK that if it refuses to send someone immediately to Léopoldville for talks with Monetary Council, it will bear full responsibility for failure of reconciliation plan and perhaps eventual hostilities in Congo with all that implies. He believes UMHK will send someone but not before tomorrow in view of time element.

Spaak said several days would still be required to know whether progress on payments plan would be possible or whether plan had failed. He did not believe any final decision could or should be taken about sending US air squadron until we knew whether payments plan was moving forward or was dead. He was not in principle opposed to sending of US air squadron as means of further pressure on Tshombe but felt decision and how it should be handled could only be made in light of what happened to payments plan.

If decision reached to make air squadron proposal, Spaak inclined to favor actual introduction of squadron after obtaining commitments from Adoula rather than waiting to approach Tshombe and inform him that if he or his government did not move ahead in light of Adoula's commitments with implementation of U Thant plan, air squadron would then be brought to Katanga. Actual presence of air squadron as fait accompli when approach made to Tshombe would act as pressure on him to play ball. On other hand, if Adoula failed to carry out his commitments, he should realize squadron would be withdrawn. To avoid very serious adverse Belgian reaction, it would be much better if squadron sent as technical assistance aspect of Greene plan under UN auspices and US operational control to assure against its use for aggressive purposes, rather than as unit contributed to UN.

Spaak said that no matter what tactics we and Belgians agree on, they can be sabotaged or made unworkable unless both Adoula and UN cooperate. Adoula must do some of things suggested in paper McGhee gave him this morning5 (see Embtel 875) and Thant cannot upset applecart by taking steps against Katanga such as boycott and embargo at precise moment when Tshombe induced to cooperate by our efforts. He believes that if we send air squadron to Congo, it be only on basis of A) previous definite commitment by Adoula and that we withdraw squadron if he reneges, and B) on firm understanding with UN that they will not take further steps without full consultation with us and that if they do otherwise or we not agree with their proposals we will withdraw squadron and withhold support. Only by so doing does Spaak believe we can get essential cooperation from Adoula and UN in carrying out conciliation plan. Spaak's apprehensions stem from fact that unfortunately there are in both Adoula government and in UN those that only want to see Tshombe delivered bound and tied to Adoula and do not seek peaceful conciliation.

In any event Spaak feels strongly that US and Belgium should continue work together in closest cooperation and must consult further and in light of success or failure of payments plan before final decision reached on sending air squadron. He assumed there was agreement on this. He would also wish to give further considered thought to entire problem in light of new proposals which had been sprung on him this morning and would meet again with Ambassador tomorrow morning at 10 to bring him up to date on his further efforts with UMHK and at that time give him any additional thoughts he might feel as result of his further reflections.

Spaak concluded that in light of very adverse Belgian reaction to our military mission, any leak re possibility of sending air squadron would create difficult if not impossible public and Parliamentary relations problem for him and GOB to handle.

MacArthur

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1962. Top Secret; Niact. Received at 2:54 p.m.

2 Telegram 875, December 19, reported that McGhee had met that morning with Spaak, who had "displayed great equanimity" to McGhee's presentation of the steps approved by the President on December 17. With respect to the proposed U.S. air squadron, he thought tentatively that a delay of a few days would be advisable to permit time for the UMHK payments plan to go into effect. (Ibid., 332.70G/12–1962)

3 Sent to Elisabethville as telegram 193, December 19, it stated that Spaak felt it of utmost urgency that Tshombe send representatives to Léopoldville at once to meet with the Monetary Council concerning the payments plan. It passed on Spaak's suggestion that Mathu offer to fly Katangan representatives to Léopoldville at once in a U.N. plane in order to force Tshombe to take action. (Ibid., 770G.00/12/1962) Eliud W. Mathu was the U.N. representative in Katanga.

4 Dated December 19. (Ibid.)

5 McGhee gave Spaak papers listing the points on which commitments should be sought from Adoula and Tshombe. Copies are attached to a memorandum of the conversation drafted by McKillop. (Ibid., 611.55/12–1962)

372. Memorandum of Conversation 372. Memorandum of Conversation1

Nassau, December 19, 1962, 6 p.m.

SUBJECT

Congo

PARTICIPANTS

US The President

Secretary McNamara

Mr. Ball

Mr. Bundy

Ambassador Bruce

Mr. Tyler

UK The Prime Minister

Lord Home

Ambassador Ormsby Gore

Mr. Bligh, Private Secretary to the Prime Minister

Mr. P. de Zulueta

The President outlined the concern of the United States about the Congo and the situation Adoula was in. There was a possibility he might collapse. The UN was running out of money. The Indian forces would be leaving the Congo in March. There existed a possibility of hostilities. Should Adoula fall, chaos would ensue, thus providing an opportunity for the Soviets to get back into the Congo by supporting Adoula's successor. Tshombe would be opposed by a government supported by the Soviets, who would in turn obtain the support of local African governments. There would be lots of trouble ahead for the West and the question was: What should be done? One possibility would be to let the situation drift as it is now doing, the UN would withdraw and Adoula would collapse. Another course would be to support the UN effort as much as possible. This would mean making it clear to Tshombe that the UN stands solidly behind the reconciliation plan. This is the course that we have decided to be the right one. We realize it may bring on a military clash and we have therefore sent a military mission to the Congo to see what kind of support we might give to the UN there. Should things go wrong we would both be in an unfavorable position. The President said he was not concerned so much with the situation as it exists now in December, but rather as it might turn out to be in June, next year. He said that we do not have a vested interest in Adoula, but we feel that we must try to do something rather than sit by and see the UN destroyed. We have been working closely with Spaak to see what pressure can be effectively brought to bear on Tshombe.

The Prime Minister called on Lord Home to speak. Lord Home said that there was no easy answer to the problem before us. He did not think that either the US or the UK could be blamed. Lord Home then repeated at some length the familiar UK position which he set forth at the Bermuda Conference in December 1961,2 and more recently in Paris at dinner with the Secretary of State on December 11.3 He said he thought that the present course would lead to the US having to occupy the Katanga, it would probably involve the destruction of that province's mineral wealth. He felt that what was required was that the UN role should change from a military one to providing economic assistance and technical aid. The UN should not get involved in imposing a political pattern on a particular country. This is what Adoula was asking the UN to do. Should this work, what would the UN role be in relation to other comparable African problems? Would the UN, for example, insist on Nyasaland being kept by force in the Federation?

The President pointed out that Lord Home was invoking cases of a different nature. The situation we faced was that we were in the Congo now, and that we want to keep the Soviets out. We have no interest in the UN or ourselves extending our role further afield. Lord Home said that Tshombe had already agreed to pay revenues to the Monetary Council of the GOC. U Thant should now say that the financial aspect is now being settled, and that the other problem to be solved is that of the constitution. U Thant should take this opportunity to convert the UN's role from a military one to that of economic assistance.

Mr. Ball said that our reading of the situation is a little different. The UMHK was unwilling to move ahead without Tshombe's authorization, and Tshombe said he won't move unless his conditions are met. Mr. Ball pointed out that we have looked into the Congo problem in depth and have considered all other possible solutions. He thought the Soviets would seize the opportunity to fish in troubled waters. If Adoula were to fall, any successor government would surely turn to the Soviets for help. He thought that in order to exert any effective pressure on Tshombe and Adoula we must make it clear to Tshombe that he is dealing with the United States as well as with the UN. We are considering putting an air squadron in Kamina. We think the chances are pretty good that we can achieve this without any fighting, and the UN feels confident of this.

Lord Home inquired dryly whether the United States Government was doing all this under any UN resolution. Mr. Ball said that we were taking this action under two requests: one from the UN for military equipment, such as armed cars, jeeps, trucks, etc. The other was a request from Adoula to all the UN participating powers for air support. This would be after Adoula had met our requirements and made the necessary concessions. Mr. Ball said that this course of action would be agreeable to the UN Secretary General, who felt that this was the right way of proceeding. Adoula would then prorogue Parliament and rule by decree.

At this point Lord Home inquired with a note of incredulousness whether Mr. Ball meant to say that the United States Government would tell Adoula to dismiss the Congolese Parliament and rule by decree. Was the United States Government going to tell the world this? Personally speaking, he was all for the United States taking over a new African colony: "Best idea I have heard in years."

The Prime Minister said that it was relatively easy to make financial arrangements, but the constitutional issue was more difficult. Mr. Ball pointed out that the first constitution was a monstrosity with nearly 250 articles. There should be an agreement on a series of provisions which would give Tshombe an appropriate measure of autonomy within the framework of the Congo. Sir David Ormsby Gore asked whether Mobutu, who controls the armed forces, would support Adoula. Mr. Ball said he thought there was a chance of his doing so, if he thought things would work. Lord Home said he thought there was a good chance of reaching a basis for agreement in the financial and economic field. Tshombe had asked for additional amounts of revenues, and this request could be handled. Mr. Ball said he was more pessimistic than Lord Home about the chances of success.

The President asked Lord Home what he would do.

Lord Home said we should get Tshombe to agree with the financial arrangements, and then get the UN out within the next few months. He saw no future in military operations which would involve the destruction of the UMHK. He thought that if things went on in the present way, Tshombe might get fed up with Léopoldville and make a deal with Northern Rhodesia. Mr. Ball said that reaching agreement on financial transactions was not in itself enough.

The Prime Minister said the US should take over the Congo and "make Tshombe into some kind of a Maharajah, with US support." He was afraid that any military intervention would just get larger and larger and that the process would be difficult to reverse or to halt. Lord Home commented that it would really mean US occupation. Should things go wrong with the Spaak plan, he thought that there would be a second stage involving voluntary abstention from Katangese copper and cobalt. However, he did not feel that this would be effective, that economic pressures would not do the job.

The President asked Ambassador Thompson what his judgment was about the Soviets coming in.

Ambassador Thompson stressed the disadvantage and dangers of Soviet intervention. This would not consist of massive military action at first, but in the subversion and infiltration of the Congolese Government and administration. Mr. Ball then outlined the kind of deal which might be made with Tshombe on the basis of concessions by Adoula. Sir David Ormsby Gore asked what the United States would do should Tshombe turn such a deal down. He also asked what right the UN would have to take military action. Mr. Ball said that the UN was not proposing military action but to take the measures necessary to ensure freedom of movement throughout the Katanga. The Prime Minister said that if he were Tshombe, he certainly wouldn't give up his two main cards, economic resources plus his army.

The President said that our more limited goal was to make it possible for the UN to get out. We wanted to establish an effective relationship with the GOC. We would like to try to make the economic plan work, with Spaak's support and assistance. We were prepared to send someone to see Tshombe. Once the situation was stabilized the UN role could come to an end.

The Prime Minister repeated that Tshombe would not divest himself of both his instruments until and unless the nine points have been met.

The President said he thought the discussion had gone about as far as it could. We would do our best to get Tshombe to come to an agreement. Mr. Ball said that the UMHK would only make payments if there is full agreement between Tshombe and Adoula, because it feared the consequences for itself otherwise. The President said he would be glad if the UK Government could examine ways in which it might be helpful to us in our efforts.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 325.70G/12–1962. Secret. Drafted by Tyler and approved by the White House on December 31. The conversation was held at the Prime Minister's house. For Macmillan's recollections of the discussion of the Congo at Nassau, see At the End of the Day, 1961–1963, p. 283.

2 See Document 177.

3 Secto 6, December 13, reported Rusk's discussions with Home during and after dinner on December 11. Concerning the Congo, Home expressed essentially the same views as he had a year earlier at the Bermuda conference. He expressed opposition to any form of sanctions, arguing that they would not be effective. He said he had sent a personal message to Tshombe encouraging him to authorize payments to the Congolese Government, but he was pessimistic as to the outcome. (Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 533, CF 2197)

373. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 373. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, December 19, 1962, 10 p.m.

1470. Brussels for Ambassador and McGhee. In course conversation last night with Adoula touched on UMHK scheme as well as prospects of passage for constitution and amnesty.

Adoula appeared better disposed toward plan presumably after advice from Gardiner and especially Auguste Gerard.

Said he would take line that of course he would not refuse deposit of all foreign exchange with GOC, but that he would then ask UMHK representatives if they or someone else would explain to him exactly how it would be accomplished with benefit to GOC, unless customs and currencies were unified. He again referred to "snail's pace" efforts of IMF in spite of efforts UN and McGhee. Also said that while details of foreign exchange deposit were worked out rest of provisions of U Thant plan should be applied.

Advised he intended to negotiate just as he had with Mebeka Diamond representatives; i.e. he would start out firmly pointing out company owed him 2 years back taxes and revenues and that he had been expecting their visit for 2 years, i.e. since his invitation to [garble] conference. Adoula said this would be just his trades-union bargainers way of setting stage.

I said that I was sure UMHK scheme would be presented in good faith and that it was not intention of originators to take refuge in technicalities. Hoped, however, he would not expect UMHK men to give solution for these nor could they unify the currency and customs.

Re constitution. I asked what prospects under 2 hypotheses: A. Parliament continues and B. Parliament prorogued. Adoula again claimed he actually thought he could get it passed even "in this Parliament." Since Abako was now playing "Tshombe" and "Catholic" line and MNC playing strong Lumumbist line, on constitution, still with full atmosphere of democracy "a la De Gaulle." He would issue further call for comments of all provinces on constitution and give these widest diffusion. He would then consider whether 2 Chambers and Chief of State should form constituent assembly. Whether or not this was done, he would have a popular referendum constitution en bloc and on a selected small number of constitutional issues. He thought that provision for adoption of constitution might carry with it proposal for new general elections within 3 months.

Comment: Do not know how effective latter program of Adoula could be but if Parliament were prorogued he could play a much nimbler propaganda game on constitution, matching Tshombe.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 870G.25/12–1962. Confidential; Priority. Received at 9:20 p.m. and repeated to Brussels and USUN.

374. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 374. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of StateSource

New York, December 19, 1962, 9 p.m.

2426. Eyes only Secretary, Acting Secretary, McGhee and Ambassadors. Congo. Reference: USUN 2402.1 General Truman, accompanied by members his mission and by Yost, called on Secretary General this p.m. Also present were Bunche, Gardiner and Rikhye.2 After expressing pleasure at meeting Truman and his colleagues and gratitude for USG assistance, SYG gave Truman background on present UN military situation Congo with emphasis on shortage fighter aircraft. He explained why previous SC decision presented "difficulty in accepting outright US military aid". Said he had been surprised to learn from Stevenson yesterday that high level team going to Congo. Was further surprised by statement to press in Nassau. Said he had been asked about all this last night by Under Secretary Kiseleve who, although on his staff, was undoubtedly put up to question by Soviets. SYG informed Kiseleve US sending mission to look into UN needs. Kiseleve also indicated that USSR would like to be of help. SYG told him this not necessary.

SYG said that as result he thought say "direct US military participation in Congo", beyond furnishing equipment and transporting it, was out. He said he had been asked by other delegations whether US had political considerations in mind such as preventing release of Gizenga. He had replied in negative, saying that US was biggest financial contributor to UN operation in Congo and that he imagined President Kennedy wanted to report to next Congress that there would be no further requirement for US purchase of bonds. Further discussion showed SYG to be desirous that Truman hold up his trip, if not cancel it altogether. If Truman should go, SYG preferred he remain in Léopoldville where he could see General Kebede and where General Prem Chand3 could be brought from Elisabethville. Bunche interjected that he thought it would be awkward to have any country send a mission to look into the UN forces in Congo. Question from Bunche to Rikhye brought out point that there was no precedent for this in either UNEF or ONUC history. Only missions had been from countries wishing observe their own contingents.

Bunche said that realistically most useful place for Truman to go would be Elisabethville, "heart of operation that is projected". It was from Elisabethville, he pointed out, that UN "must move to complete our task". UN, he said, was not going to start fighting but was going to be "more aggressively defensive". However, he feared that Truman arrival in Elisabethville might result in Tshombe-instigated riots which would require UN mobilize to protect both Truman and US consulate. Gardiner too thought Truman trip to Elisabethville might set off reaction, although he was not sure that it would.

U Thant then asked what had been President Kennedy's original idea in deciding send mission. Yost replied that he thought reasons were three-fold. First, because of conflicting reports on military situation, President wanted first-hand military appraisal; secondly, President wanted on-spot appraisal of UN needs in order that we could help more effectively; thirdly, President undoubtedly had in mind psychological effect of visit on Congolese both in Léopoldville and Elisabethville. Truman said he did not believe President had specified where he should go in Congo. He had himself hoped to go to Elisabethville, even if only briefly, in order to get feeling of situation there. Yost suggested that actual movement of mission in Congo could be left to decision by Gardiner, Gullion and Truman after latter's arrival.

Bunche posed problem of timing. Said UN had held off many times on "military moves" in view of other events which taking place. Truman trip could coincide with efforts get UMHK make direct payments to GOC. Yost thought this was not problem in this instance since Spaak had been consulted by McGhee and agreed personally to value of trip.

Bunche said UN should, in that case, be able to go ahead with some of its own steps in which it had fallen behind. It would make firm demand for freedom of movement. It could also move to Kipushi. Yost said he had thought UN wanted to wait for build-up before taking these steps. Bunche said on contrary, UN ready now. Build-up was for move to Jadotville and Kolwezi. Prem Chand had been ready for long time on freedom movement in Elisabethville area (removal roadblocks) and move to Kipushi. UN had held up in order permit economic measures to work. Yost said we had favored hold-up of these steps. Our hope was that build-up would reduce chances of fighting. Hoped build-up convince Tshombe of uselessness of resistance.

Bunche wondered whether steps to carry out US promised assistance would be deferred until mission completed. Yost said not at all, that we would be moving ahead with all items on which agreement reached. Mission might result, however, in suggestion of new things which could be done or substitution of one item for another.

Bunche stressed necessity for getting additional planes, preferably F–86s to Congo. Said if US would get planes, UN would find pilots. Iranian Ambassador had indicated it would be helpful to him if planes were available, since he might more easily obtain pilots. Also Pakistanis might send pilots if UN had planes. Main point was to get planes first, then it easier to convince others to send pilots.

Yost then asked when Gardiner was going back to Léopoldville. Said we anxious get Truman mission on way and it might precede Gardiner by day. SYG said Gardiner could leave Friday, December 21, arriving Saturday. Truman then suggested he himself leave tomorrow, arriving Friday. Yost said Truman could spend Friday talking to Gullion while waiting Gardiner arrival. Upshot was agreement that Truman and aides would return New York tomorrow morning, meet with Bunche, Gardiner and Rikhye at 10:30 a.m., leaving for Congo evening same day.

Comment: Yesterday's publicity emphasizing that despatch US military mission to Congo is in part provoked by potential Soviet and local left-wing threat there has revived and confirmed SYG's earlier uneasiness about further US military presence in Congo. Suggestion by Soviets they should be cut in on any military aid program open to US and opinion expressed by other delegations US is moving in to keep Gizenga out have contributed to his fear that neutral posture of UN operation might be destroyed. Result is that he has firmly backed away from position he took over weekend and today stated categorically to us that there could be no great power military participation in Congo operation. This certainly rules out in his mind despatch, say, US combat personnel, though its application to "technicians" is not clear.

Stevenson

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–1962. Top Secret; Priority. Received at 10:35 p.m. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, and Nassau.

1 Telegram 2402, December 18, reported Stevenson's meeting with Thant to inform him of the decisions taken in Washington the previous day. During the meeting, Thant was given a press report on the statements made in Nassau concerning the military mission to the Congo. According to the telegram, "SYG was much concerned over mention of Sov peril in connection with despatch of mission. He said it was one thing to arrive at such a decision but quite another to put out a press release on it. He did not consider it very helpful." (Ibid., 770G.00/12–1862)

2 The conversation is recorded in a memorandum for the record by Truman, dated December 20, and summarized in a memorandum of that date from Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs Frank K. Sloan to Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell L. Gilpatric. (Both in Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Congo 381)

3 Major General Dewan Prem Chand, U.N. military governor in Katanga.

375. Memorandum for the Record 375. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, December 20, 1962.

SUBJECT

Daily White House Staff Meeting, 20 December 1962

[Here follows discussion of other matters.]

4. There then ensued a discussion of the Congo prompted by Bromley Smith's remark that he thought it was most unfortunate that some of the newspaper accounts were beginning to compare the Congo situation with the pre-crisis situation in Cuba. Arthur Schlesinger wondered aloud who was doing the "backgrounding" on this subject for the press people, and Kaysen straightforwardly answered: John F. Kennedy. To depart from chronological order a little, I will mention here that several of those around the table, and most especially Mr. Ralph Dungan, continued expressing their doubts and even opposition concerning any US military venture or presence into the Congo. So it was necessary on at least two more occasions for Kaysen to explain patiently that, while he himself tended to share those misgivings, the decision— risks, logical gaps, and everything else—was a highest-level decision which everyone should now support (see paragraph 3 of my staff meeting memorandum of yesterday, Wednesday, 19 December).2 Kaysen did say that the mission departing for the Congo tonight would not be permitted to go into the field, but would be required to remain in Léopoldville; the people in the field whom the mission wishes to see will therefore have to come to Léopoldville. Kaysen expressed once again, mostly for Dungan's benefit, that the primary purpose of the mission was to execute a military assessment of the situation, with emphasis on the easiest and safest way to intrude a small US presence for political reasons, if necessary. The final note on the Congo was the announcement from Kaysen that the Soviets had approached U Thant up at the United Nations yesterday with an offer to help him out if UN forces in the Congo needed any materiel assistance; this has apparently shaken up U Thant rather badly and he is therefore asking us Americans to go slowly in the development of our projected plans and actions. I think it is fair to say that at the end of this discussion, all the Doubting Thomases, whatever their personal misgivings, understood that the President had chosen to overrule or at least temporarily overlook the same general kinds of misgivings as expressed by the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

LJL

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Box 25, Chairman's Staff Group. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Colonel Legere for General Taylor.

2 It reads as follows:"The subject shifted swiftly to the Congo. Kaysen, with Clifton supporting him, stated that the bald fact of the matter is that the President's mind is definitely made up on making some kind of a U.S. military move in the Congo for the purposes of political demonstration only; he has certainly, however, not made up his mind on the wisdom of actual involvement of U.S. forces. I am aware of the logical gaps which this leaves, but there it is." (Ibid.)

376. Telegram From the Department of State to the Delegation at Nassau 376. Telegram From the Department of State to the Delegation at Nassau1

Washington, December 20, 1962, 8:02 p.m.

31. For President from Secretary.

1. On Tuesday, you decided that we should consult U Thant, Spaak, and Macmillan regarding our plans for next steps on the Congo. The returns are now in. Thant agrees with our assessment that time is running out, and he has asked for and wants military equipment, including planes, which we have already informed him, pursuant to your decision, that we are prepared to supply. Our military people discussed the details yesterday and we should within the next 24 hours have a clear picture regarding the specifics of military equipment which we can and should provide to the SYG in support of the UN Mandate and Reconciliation Plan.

2. However, it is clear that, with the Soviet Union in the wings and already having indicated to SYG its desire to make a military contribution to the UN operation, that Thant is unlikely to accept, for the time being at least, direct US military involvement in the form of a US air squadron and a small engineering unit. As indicated in USUN's 2426,2 Thant clearly is sensitive on this question of Big-Power involvement, and I believe that he will remain firm against direct US participation.

3. Spaak, who has been cooperative, is running into difficulty at home. His major concern is that nothing be done over the next few days at least to upset the UMHK payments plan. He has, therefore, asked us to defer any final decision regarding the US air squadron. He is continuing to press the UMHK in a forthright and constructive manner.

4. While we have not heard whether you have had opportunity to discuss this matter with Macmillan, we are fully aware of the reservations that the British have regarding the UN operation in Congo.

5. It is clear, also, from yesterday's conversation that the SYG is cool, to say the least, to the idea of a US military mission to the Congo and he hopes that it will be limited in duration as well as in scope.

6. Moreover, the French and a number of our other allies are unclear as to the steps we are contemplating, and there is need for full consultations with them very soon. In talk with McGhee this afternoon, French Counsellor said GOF welcomed UMHK payments plan, deplored publicity given Truman Mission and felt emphasis on possible Soviet involvement would lead to very situation we are attempting avoid.

7. Finally, the press has played our decision to give additional support to the UN in a variety of ways, some of which have already stimulated the USSR to a counteroffer to the SYG and to open up a propaganda campaign tabbing the latest move as another "American Imperialist" attempt to take over the Congo. While it was probably inevitable that the press, so shortly after Cuba, would begin to draw unhelpful comparisons, I believe there is need to provide some guidance which will put our present decision in a balanced perspective.

8. In light of the above developments, I wish to proceed on the following steps subject to your approval.3 A. We should press ahead within the next 24 hours and come to an agreement with the SYG on the list of hardware and other military equipment which he has requested in support of the UN operation. I would include in this list not only the armored cars, trucks and other equipment which Thant has included, but also a certain number of American military aircraft with American ground crews on same basis as US internal airlift, which would be flown by a small number of non-American pilots. I believe this will help to build up the kind of psychological deterrent which we are after and which will be conducive to negotiations between Adoula and Tshombe which, hopefully, will bring about practical reintegration of the Katanga into the Congo by about February of next year.

B. We should also inform the SYG that we have agreed to defer any decision regarding participation of an American air squadron for the time being. We are also now in a position to suggest to SYG a suggested change in Rules of Engagement for UN aircraft which would neutralize Katanga air capabilities by permitting UN aircraft to eliminate Katanga air force in air or on ground after appropriate notification and if Katanga aircraft continue hostile action.

C. We should inform Spaak that we support him fully in his continuing efforts to get the UMHK to make payments directly to GOC and that we are prepared to press Adoula to negotiate reasonably on the question of division of foreign exchange and taxes. We should also inform Spaak that we have deferred any decision on the US air squadron. This should help him with his difficulties back home.

D. We should proceed expeditiously with Truman Mission to the Congo but it should be of a few days in duration and we should decide on what additional military help, if any, we should provide to the UN in light of Lt. Gen. Truman's recommendations and SYG's further views. As you know, SYG feels he can wind up this matter by February without direct US military participation and on the assumption that we will provide the equipment that he has already asked for. While we have believed that this is an optimistic assessment, we should for at least the next several weeks make every effort to get this equipment into the Congo.

E. We should instruct Gullion to see Adoula soonest to give him present appraisal of the situation and the reasons why we believe that time is running out and that we are trying to inject new elements in situation designed to bring quick progress on reintegration of the Katanga and significant bolstering of Adoula. We should not get into the question of an American air squadron or more direct US military involvement in the Congo with Adoula at this time. At the same time, we must not pull any punches with Adoula. While reaffirming strongly our confidence in this continuing leadership, he must realize that our willingness to make further major military contributions in support of the UN effort will depend on his willingness to show considerably more flexibility in reaching a peaceful agreement with Tshombe than he has demonstrated in the past months. In short, the US cannot justify any of the additional military help which we intend to make available to the UN and which is designed to bring about early practical reintegration unless we have a clear-cut commitment from Adoula on main elements of agreement with Tshombe. There are two principal elements of leverage we have with Adoula which we should use: (a) all unfulfilled promises of economic and other assistance for which we should get something in return; and (b) our willingness to provide additional military support of UN so that Katanga secession can be terminated soon.

F. We would assure Tshombe that we do not wish to destroy the Katanga but wish to bring his province back into the Congo under his own leadership. But we would expect him to take important specific steps which would: recognize Congo sovereignty, abandon those elements of control which permit him to maintain secession (e.g., military planes and mercenaries), agree to fair division of tax revenues and foreign exchange with the GOC, and to take meaningful steps of economic and military integration.

G. We should expand our consultations with our NATO allies and other friends to explain our positions. Consultations with a number of Africans in Washington have already been held and reflect full understanding and sympathy for our current approach.

H. We should make a major effort over the next 48 hours to straighten out the press. Our US support should be characterized primarily in terms of support for the UN and the UN Reconciliation Plan. We should avoid any impression that we believe there is an imminent Communist takeover in the Congo, but rather the emphasis should be that, as long as Katanga's secession continues, conditions will exist in the Congo conducive to extremism and possible increase in Communist influence.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2062. Top Secret; Priority; Eyes Only. Drafted by Sisco; cleared by Cleveland, Williams, Andrews, and McGhee; and approved by Rusk. An attached note from the Department of State duty officer to Brubeck states that Rusk had directed that the telegram should not be repeated to USUN for Stevenson and to Léopoldville for Gullion, as the telegram had indicated.

2 Document 374.

3 The President's approval was apparently given by telephone. Telegram 934 to Léopoldville, December 21, also sent to USUN, Brussels, London, and Elisabethville, listed the steps that he had approved in language identical to paragraphs A–H, except for changes in a few pronouns and removal of the last two sentences in paragraph D. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2162)

377. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 377. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, December 20, 1962, 9 p.m.

2446. Congo. Yost saw Gardiner separately after this morning's meeting between Bunche and Gen. Truman.2 Gardiner said he was very concerned about what would happen in Congo and particularly Katanga. Even if present plans to reintegrate Katanga were apparently successful he foresaw period after February in which UN forces would be weak with Indians and Tunisians gone. After this time UN forces would never again reach present strength and might be gone entirely by end June. Gardiner thought it important that real effort be initiated now to build up ANC and to help reorganize it, particularly in north Katanga, against day when it might have to face Katangan forces returning from bush with arms they had cached there. ANC in north Katanga must be assisted to reassemble its forces. Lines of communication for ANC would have to be established in north Katanga. Air transport was needed and for this Air Panama not sufficient. At same time roads and bridges in north Katanga must be built. Particularly important are bridges at Kongolo and bridges on Albertville-Eville rail line.

Gardiner believes that U.S. assistance is needed for accomplishment these things, although Belgian companies could and should help. He has in mind U.S. civilian or military engineers. Envisages something like Wheeler operation which restored Suez Canal. Believes this must be started now, even though efforts to bring Tshombe to terminate secession are still in progress.

Yost said he agreed necessity look ahead. Gardiner could discuss possible use U.S. military engineers this purpose with Truman and Gullion at Leoville. Gardiner said he would do so, but hoped Dept of State would also begin consider problem. Yost said he would report Gardiner's views to Dept which he was sure would consider them with great interest.

Yost then asked Gardiner how he now estimated Adoula's present political position in Leoville. Gardiner said recent events had no doubt strengthened him and that news of Truman's mission would certainly have encouraged him greatly. Gardiner said that Parliament had become a farce and that Adoula must be prepared to have it prorogued if necessary. Gardiner left no doubt that he had discussed this thoroughly with Adoula and indicated that he had left with Adoula a draft proroguing Parliament if necessary. Gardiner admitted that Kasavubu's position was questionable but said Adoula should be prepared to move without him if Kasavubu balked.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2062. Confidential. Received at 11:15 p.m. and repeated to Brussels, London, Léopoldville, and Elisabethville.

2 Telegram 2444 from USUN, December 20, reported that Bunche had opened the meeting with a political-military explanation of the U.N. Congo operation, closing with the statement that the U.N. forces had a clear mandate from the Security Council and would now proceed to carry it out. Truman had asked a series of military questions that seemed to the reporting USUN officer to point up either a lack of U.N. contingency planning or ignorance of it by those present. (Ibid.)

378. Memorandum of Conversation 378. Memorandum of Conversation1

Nassau, December 21, 1962, noon.

SUBJECT

The Congo

PARTICIPANTS

Great Britain: The Prime Minister

Lord Home

Mr. Thorneycroft

Mr. Duncan Sandys

Lord Hood

Sir Robert Scott

United States: The President

Under Secretary Ball

Ambassador Bruce

Mr. McGeorge Bundy

Ambassador Thompson

Mr. Paul H. Nitze

Mr. William R. Tyler

The President said that we were giving full support to Spaak's plan. On the other hand, if the UN were militarily unable to carry out any additional action which might be required, the question was how we could get the UN out without this being a defeat. Mr. Ball said that we were putting additional military equipment into the Congo in support of the UN forces.

Lord Home restated the British position (see Memorandum of Conversation of December 20).2 Perhaps progress could be made by joint approach to the UMHK to get agreement for six months. A basis for this would be agreement on the division of revenue. Mr. Ball said the latter would not be enough. Lord Home said the problem was how to "bump Tshombe off his request for additional revenues". Mr. Ball pointed out that the problem of secession was a major one. Until the GOC gets satisfied, it will turn anywhere it can for support.

Lord Home discounted the likelihood of Soviet intervention in the Congo. Mr. Ball reminded him of the recent Soviet demarche to U Thant.

In answer to a question by the President, Mr. Ball said that the UMHK will move only if there is agreement between Tshombe and Adoula.

Lord Home suggested that if Tshombe was told the UN would leave in six months time, he might play along. He said the UN had never paid attention to the main issue, which was to achieve an acceptable basis for reconciliation on the constitutional point.

The President said that the purpose of the Truman Mission to the Congo was to obtain military information. He said we would not want either to get into a fight or to have the UN run out of the Congo.

Lord Home said that to get the UN out would be the lesser of two evils. Mr. Ball expressed concern about the creation of a vacuum in the Congo, without the secession issue having been settled.

After some further inconclusive discussion, Lord Home said that the UK would send a message to Tshombe, after checking with Spaak, so as not to cross wires with anything that Spaak and McGhee might have worked out. He reiterated his worry about the US Military Mission.

Mr. Ball said we would tell Tshombe we were not out to destroy him. He said we are already sending a message to Adoula to bring pressure to bear on him.

Lord Home said that if Adoula were to dismiss the Parliament, perhaps this would be a good time for him to come to New York. He added that he now had an idea of what the US Government was trying to achieve, and repeated that the UK would send a message to Tshombe to try to get him to come along and to reassure him that the US is not trying to drive him out. He added that the UK could keep quiet until and unless a new resolution was introduced into the UN authorizing the use of force. He said the UK would have to vote against such a resolution. He suggested that a way might be found to give Tshombe some kind of substitute for six months, which would be equivalent to the 30% of the revenues which Tshombe would otherwise forfeit under the proposed arrangement.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 325.70G/12–1962. Secret. Drafted by Tyler. According to Kennedy's appointment book, the conversation took place at the Prime Minister's residence between 11:07 a.m. and 12:05 p.m. (Kennedy Library)

2 Reference is apparently to Document 372. No record of any discussion of the Congo at Nassau on December 20 has been found.

379. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 379. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, December 21, 1962, 5 p.m.

1495. Saw Adoula to find out what he was prepared to do to prevent liberation of Gizenga or to cope with consequences. Adoula's only positive statement was that government would ignore order of Parliament (this was before it was known that vote was unanimous with even GOC Ministers in favor).2

I asked Adoula if he would not see fit to take action before Gizenga was released. He would only say that Kasavubu was not ready and seemed unconscious of the situation. "We", he said, "were entirely ready." He then said musingly that there would probably be armed conflict here in Léopoldville.

Adoula said he would like to ask USG for advice as to what he should do if he were not able to restore working majority. I replied foreign government could hardly give him advice on such questions as proroguing Parliament. He said he realized that but what he intended to ask about was his own resignation. I asked whether there was anyone to whom he could conscientiously turn over government at this point. Adoula said there was no reliable person but nevertheless there was no lack of candidates. I remarked that we seemed to be reverting to post-independence period with military takeover best of several bad solutions. Adoula answered that military takeover might take place but said no one could foresee where such a development might lead. I said this was so, but it was only too clear where the present course was leading.3

Adoula then reiterated that his government was "prepared to take action". Adoula's attitude was neither despairing nor determined; merely detached.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.2/12–2162. Secret; Niact. Received at 1:25 p.m. and repeated to USUN and Brussels.

2 The Chamber of Deputies passed a motion on December 21 calling for Gizenga's release.

3 Gullion commented in telegram 1498 from Léopoldville, December 21, "I believe that unless government takes action to prorogue Parliament, it will go down the drain along with Congo unification, U Thant plan, anti-communist front and U.S. aid committed thus far." (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2162)

380. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 380. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, December 21, 1962, 7:02 p.m.

1733. For Stevenson. As you have already been informed President has approved a number of specific next steps to be taken on Congo. Separate tel2 deals with military assistance which we are prepared to make available immediately to UN pursuant to its request.

We have now consulted with U Thant and Spaak regarding the question of more direct military involvement of the US in the Congo operation. It is clear that with USSR in wings and already having indicated to SYG its desire to make military contribution to UN operation, Thant is unlikely to accept for the time being at least direct US military involvement in form of US air squadron and small engineering unit. Moreover, Spaak, who has been cooperative, is running into difficulty at home. His major concern is that nothing be done over next few days at least to upset UMHK payments plan. He, therefore, has asked us to defer any final decision regarding US air squadron while he continues to press UMHK to send its representative to Léopoldville.

In light of the above you are requested see SYG soonest and inform him that we have agreed in deference to his view, to defer any decision regarding participation of an American air squadron for the time being. In doing so, however, we believe it is important that SYG not be given the impression that we have necessarily abandoned this idea and that we are keeping this matter under continuing review in light of developments and recommendations of Truman mission. At the same time you should urge SYG to have UN adopt suggested changes in rules of engagement for UN aircraft which are contained in separate tel.3

You should express our deep concern that UN appears to have abandoned its efforts at conciliation as means of solving Congo problem.4 UN must understand that military buildup of UN to which we are making major contribution is designed to bring about a peaceful reintegration of the Katanga and not use of force. We are not pursuing a policy of forced capitulation and unconditional surrender of Tshombe nor is our policy directed to the destruction of Tshombe. Our policy is directed towards getting serious and meaningful negotiations going again with a view to bringing about the completion of the UN mandate before the UN runs out of money. In this connection, we are developing concrete suggestions of ways in which we and the UN, while military buildup is going on, can restart negotiations, in addition to the UMHK payments plan, on other elements of Thant plan. In short, Thant must understand that our willingness to provide maximum help to the UN to build up its military deterrent is posited on the assumption that Thant will at the appropriate time reactivate conciliation aspects of the plan while pressures are being applied.5

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/12–2162. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, Paris, and Elisabethville.

2 Telegram 1740 to USUN, December 22. (Ibid., 332.70G/12–2262)

3 Telegram 1727 to USUN, December 21, recommended that the United Nations announce publicly that identified hostile actions by Katangan planes would not only lead to pursuit by U.N. planes but would serve as a signal for U.N. forces to attempt to destroy on the ground all Katangan planes with combat capability. (Ibid., 770G.5622/12–2162)

4 Telegram 2454 from USUN, December 21, reported that Yost had asked Bunche that morning what steps he anticipated next in the Congo. Bunche replied that before the end of the month, the United Nations would assist the Congolese Government to establish customs and immigration officials in Elisabethville and would begin to exercise its right of freedom of movement in that area, including removal of gendarmerie roadblocks. Yost declared that it was "imperative" to have discussions between U.N. and U.S. officials before these steps were taken and warned Bunche that premature action without U.S. agreement would risk the loss of U.S. support. Bunche assured him that no steps would be taken without such discussion. (Ibid., 770G.00/12– 2162)

5 Telegram 2469 from USUN, December 22, reported that in a meeting with Bunche that morning, Yost had urged the importance of pursuing the track of negotiation and conciliation and had put forward the views in telegram 1727 (see footnote 2 above). Bunche had expressed agreement on both counts. (Ibid., 770G.5622/12–2262)

381. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Williams) to Secretary of State Rusk 381. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Williams) to Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, December 21, 1962.

SUBJECT

Congo

We have just received the following message which Ambassador Gullion sent via CIA channels after he was informed that Parliament had unanimously requested the release of Mr. Gizenga.

"Although fully aware of proprieties in so delicate a matter, would appreciate any kind of guidance or indication of tolerable margins which USG can give me with respect to influencing GOC crisis now that Gizenga release has been directed by unanimous vote Chamber.

"If Govt stands by its guns and disobeys order; showdown can be expected. I do not believe, however, that Govt will stand firm without encouragement from outside which I am inclined to give unless dissuaded. I have never said nor will I say now more than that my Govt would not change its attitude toward GOC if it felt obliged to take such measures. I have also informed GOC that almost all diplomatic missions Leo would favor GOC assertion of authority. Preferably this would take form immediate proroguing Parliament minimum 30 days including Christmas holiday period. This might be accompanied by showdown on austerity laws, demand for constituent assembly, declaration of program with respect to Katanga. Essential fact is that if we continue on this course Leftist coalition will come into power even though right-wing Belgian-backed element may appear momentarily as facade.

"We are heading for return of Lumumba era.

"Presence Truman mission at this time may turn out to be source of embarrassment. At same time may be able to use it to stiffen backbone Kasavubu whom I am seeing at 1300 today."

We believe we should inform Ambassador Gullion to proceed in an effort to influence men around Adoula to permit Adoula to rule by extra-Parliamentary means.

Although such action will forestall Gizenga's release and increase Adoula's liberty of action, we should have no illusion that it would bring about a more conciliatory immediate attitude by Léopoldville authorities in negotiating with Tshombe. While moderate leadership will have been assured and over the long run it will be more amenable to Western influences, we will also have created a situation where we will be wedded to those whom we have supported.

This support may well become more onerous in the future. We undoubtedly will be able to continue to guide the government but at the same time we anticipate the government may be more demanding on us.

Finally, I might add that if we approve the Ambassador moving forward on this matter the CIA would proceed to implement the covert annex2 to the National Security Council paper, that was approved over this last weekend.

Notwithstanding the drawbacks to extra-legal action, I believe that Ambassador Gullion should proceed at this time to endeavor to forestall the fall of the moderate government in Léopoldville.3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 750G.00/12– 2162. Top Secret. Drafted by Godley.

2 Not found.

3 No reply to Gullion's message has been found.

382. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 382. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara1

Washington, December 21, 1962.

JCSM–1017–62

SUBJECT

Review of Congo Developments (U)

1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have reviewed their two previous memoranda to you, JCSM–983–62, dated 11 December 1962, subject: "Congo Developments"2 and JCSM–1000–62, dated 15 December 1962, subject: "Congo",3 both in response to OSD (ISA) requests, in the light of the "Operating Plan for the Congo" proposed by the State Department.

2. Before addressing specific actions, the Joint Chiefs of Staff note that: a. There are at present more than 17,000 UN troops in the Congo. Sufficient aircraft have been available to the UNOC to have permitted successful operations against the Katanga air force. However, the UN has neither conducted ground operations of any scope against Katanga ground forces nor utilized available aircraft to counter Katanga air attacks on forces of the Congolese Central Government.

b. The US is supporting the UN Congo effort regularly with airlift, sealift, and equipment. Approximately 65,000 UN personnel have been airlifted in and out of the Congo, and 33,000 have been sealifted. Over 8,000 tons of equipment have been airlifted, including Swedish jet aircraft, and 30,000 tons sealifted. US equipment furnished includes communications gear, munitions, transport aircraft, and helicopters.

c. In August 1962 the United States provided a modest expedited shipment of military equipment for the Congolese National Forces in order to provide assurance of US intention for the long-range reorganization and training of the ANC. The cost of this shipment was about $150,000.

3. The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe the lack of forceful action by the UN forces in the Congo could be attributed to the mandate, or its execution, or to poor leadership and management. Troop morale has declined, doubts as to the effectiveness of the Congolese Central Government have arisen, and the Katangan will to resist has been strengthened. This situation reacts to the disadvantage of the Congolese Central Government and favors bolder and more independent action by the Tshombe Katangan regime and its supporters.

4. The concept in the "Operating Plan for the Congo" is based on a series of measures, including threat or use of US forces, to force solution of the integration of the Congo. This appears to be an enlargement of and goes beyond the scope of the original problem addressed in JCSM–983–62. Though the main issue stems from secession of Katanga, there is no guarantee that strong visible military support from the US will overcome the inherent instability of the Adoula government.

5. Accordingly, to proceed with timely phased actions in regard to the Congo without unnecessarily expanding the problem cited in paragraph 4 above, the Joint Chiefs of Staff wish to emphasize the sequence of their recommended actions and to clarify their recommendations contained in JCSM–983–62 as follows: a. The United States undertake, as a matter of priority, to exert pressure to revitalize present UN political and military efforts in the Congo.

b. Simultaneously with the action in subparagraph 5a above, the United States should, as soon as possible, implement the approved military assistance program for the Congo.

c. Since submission of the two previous memoranda mentioned in paragraph 1 above and in the light of subsequent developments in the Congo, the decision has been made that the Joint Chiefs of Staff will send a team of officers to the Congo to make an on-the-scene assessment of the military situation in compliance with Terms of Reference in which the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Secretary of Defense, and the Secretary of State have concurred. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that no decisions be taken with respect to the very important issue as to whether or not US forces will be introduced into the Congo until the report of the Congo Military Mission has been fully considered.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Maxwell D. Taylor
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Congo 381. Top Secret. The source text bears a notation that it was seen by Gilpatric.

2 Enclosure to Document 353.

3 It enclosed a military annex for the "Operating Plan for the Congo" (Document 362), identical to the annex and appendices cited in footnote 1 thereto. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Congo 381)

383. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 383. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, December 24, 1962, 3:03 p.m.

949. For General Truman.2 As indicated from number of our previous messages, we planning to go to Adoula at appropriate time, after consultation with Spaak and UN giving him our appraisal of the present situation, and indicating our willingness to make further major military contributions in support of the UN effort on the condition that Adoula will show considerably more flexibility in reaching a peaceful agreement with Tshombe than he has demonstrated in the past months.

We would expect that Adoula would take certain conciliatory steps in return for which we would agree to support the UN in its efforts to bring about earliest possible reintegration of the Katanga into the Congo. We intend at the appropriate time, in concert with the UN, to outline specific steps which we would expect Adoula to take and assuming his agreement, Tshombe would then be approached. It would be indicated to Tshombe that if he had not taken certain steps, certain measures would ensue. This represents our tentative thinking at moment.

For decision that will have to be made at highest level, we would like to have your judgment as to whether the UN has the capabilities to achieve the following or what steps would be required in order to develop such UN military capability. Our assumption is that if such a UN capability is either present or can be developed, that it would make military resistance on the part of Tshombe undesirable and therefore help achieve our objective: reintegration of the Katanga into the Congo by peaceful means. Request your judgment therefore on military capability required for UN to get Katanga authorities to do the following: a. Tshombe should immediately authorize the commencement of UMHK payments of all foreign exchange and appropriate customs revenues to the Monetary Council and both Tshombe and UMHK would immediately send representatives to Léopoldville to work out satisfactory arrangements with the Monetary Council. In the event that Tshombe does not comply with the foregoing within seven days of being advised of this program, the UN will introduce and assist GOC Customs officials to make such collections and if necessary stop railroad cars moving within the Elisabethville perimeter;

b. Tshombe should agree to an immediate standstill of all Katangan military forces in the north Katanga and no forces shall be moved to the north Katanga border. If Katanga does not comply with this point within 24 hours of notification the UN aircraft will harass Katangan troop movements in north Katanga except as they withdraw to south Katanga.

c. All Katangan aircraft capable of military use should be grounded under UN observation either in Kamina, Albertville, or Elisabethville. Any such aircraft not grounded under these arrangements which in fact undertake flight missions will subject all Katangan military aircraft to destruction wherever they are by UN aircraft (rationale: these Katangan aircraft were introduced into the Congo contrary to UN resolutions).

d. Within 48 hours after the reissuance of an amnesty by the GOC, General Muke and several other top gendarmerie officers should go to Léopoldville to take an oath of allegiance to the President of the Republic. Other senior officers of the Katangan forces will take an oath where they are located. The UN will transport Muke and the other officers to Léopoldville and will assure them security.

e. Tshombe should terminate the services of mercenaries and effectuate their departure from Katanga within 14 days. All such mercenaries will be permitted to depart the Katanga freely and without any penalty if they do so within these 14 days, following which those caught will be turned over to Congolese Government.

f. After 14 days the UN will exercise its right to freedom of movement in order to assure itself that all the provisions set forth above have been carried out.

In connection with the foregoing, hope you will be prepared to advise Secretary on UN capability and military feasibility various means move to occupy, isolate, or neutralize Jadotville, Kolwezi, Kipushi. Also possibility cutting Eville-Dilolo railroad either by destruction bridges by air or ground action or by "locomotive busting" west of Kolwezi.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/12–2462. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Sisco, cleared by Beaudry and Cleveland, and approved by Williams. Repeated to USUN for Stevenson and Brussels.

2 According to a note from Cleveland to Kaysen, this telegram was intended to provide "political input for the Truman Mission report." Cleveland's note, dated December 24, transmitted a paper of the same date, entitled "Congo Operation Plan," used as a basis for a meeting with Rusk that morning, but with subsequent handwritten revisions. It called for assuring the United Nations and Adoula of U.S. support for U.N. implementation of Phase IV of the U.N. plan, provided that U.N. officials agreed to take no coercive action without U.S. agreement and that Adoula took certain steps. Tshombe would then be required to take action or face consequences along the lines of paragraphs a-f of this telegram. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Series, Congo, December 1962) A later draft of the paper, dated December 24 but with a drafting date of December 28, is in Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2462.

384. Telegram From the Army Attache in the Congo to the Joint Chiefs of Staff 384. Telegram From the Army Attache in the Congo to the Joint Chiefs of Staff1

Léopoldville, December 24, 1962, 2:35 p.m.

C–412–62. For Admiral Riley2 from Lt General Truman.

1. General Truman and mission accompanied by Ambassador met with Adoula, Anany and Mobutu morning 23 December. Despite Adoula irritation with reporters, who attempted to cover meeting, party extremely well received and warmly welcomed by Adoula, who repeatedly stressed his appreciation for support given by USG to UN and GOC.

2. Truman explained purpose of his mission, noting that modernizing of ANC not within his terms of reference as this question separate and distinct from equipment needs of UNOC. Truman reviewed itinerary of mission to date, including meeting with UN officials in New York prior to departure, and expressed desire to visit Kamina and Elisabethville in furtherance of his mission. He inquired whether GOC would permit him to stop at Albertville in order to meet ANC officers there. Although Mobutu attempted demur, Adoula subsequently approved this visit.

3. Adoula stated goal of mission coincided with his objectives and that GOC should assist and further mission. He noted that there had been a great deal of political agitation on subject on General Truman's mission, but that he considered visit indispensable. Visit was a visible demonstration of USA desire to help resolve Congo problems. "Certain countries" and "some" Congolese interpreting mission as U.S. takeover of Congo, but he was most grateful to U.S. for help in Congo's hour of need. Congo had been for two years on brink of indescribable chaos. UN had been brought in, but only U.S. had been steadfast in its assistance.

4. Adoula noted "Greene plan" approved by him and forwarded to UN and moral obligation on U.S. to aid both UN and Congo in view of great importance to GOC of disposing of strength necessary to maintain its authority. Expressed hope plan would be promptly implemented. If Tshombe knew GOC could strike at heart of Katanga, he would become more reasonable. Adoula said GOC did not wish to destroy Tshombe or Katanga but was determined see Katanga problem solved.

5. General Truman explained his mission not connected with "Greene plan", but he had received general info on ANC needs from Mobutu which he would report. His mission was to ascertain equipment needs of UNOC which U.S. could meet. He assured Adoula U.S. determined see peace brought to Congo, and Katanga reintegrated. "Greene plan" was long term project, but his mission to find out requirements of UN so U.S. could help quickly bring peace to Congo.

6. Ambassador noted that General Truman visit coincided with U.S. decision implement "Greene plan" and he hoped some material would be provided ANC shortly.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.5811/12–2962. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to the Department of State for McNeil (McGhee?) and to the White House. Received at the Department of State at 12:40 p.m. on December 27. The source text is the Department copy.

2 Vice Admiral Herbert D. Riley, USN, Director of the Joint Staff.

385. Telegram From the Army Attache in the Congo to the Joint Chiefs of Staff 385. Telegram From the Army Attache in the Congo to the Joint Chiefs of Staff1

Léopoldville, December 24, 1962, 3:15 p.m.

C–413–62. Reference—USARMA msg cite C–411–62 dtd 22074Z.2

1. Consultation with officials here tends to confirm information received in New York and indicated to you in ref message regarding U.S. emphasis on negotiated settlement.

2. Furnishing additional equipment and airlift to UN forces will be meaningless unless there is a clear indication to the UN that the US Government is prepared to permit this equipment to be used.

3. Desirability of reaching a peaceful solution to situation is recognized. Threat of force is desirable to make negotiation meaningful. However, continued recalcitrance on the part of Tshombe is liable to cause outbreak of hostilities. If this occurs U.S. Government must be prepared to accept situation and support UN military action against Katanga as long as necessary to achieve U.S. and UN objectives.

4. Urge prompt arrival of at least one other air contingent to overcome Swedish air contingent reluctance to act alone. Artificial restrictions on use of aircraft must be lifted.

5. Present instructions of UNOC force commander from UN are that his air can attack KAF in the air only when positive KAF attack in north Katanga. Also can follow attacking plane to base and destroy on ground. Also can shoot down any KAF plane in north Katanga which refuses to land on direction. Force commander indicated that upon receipt of additional aircraft he expects to receive instructions from UN that UNMCAF will be permitted to attack all KAF bases in event of further KAF attack. However, there is no definite indication here that such instruction will be forthcoming.

1 Source: Department of Defense, OSD Historical Office, Secretary of Defense Cable Files, Congo. Secret.

2 Telegram C–411–62 stated that Truman had gained the impression in Washington that U.N. inaction in forcing the Katanga issue was due to the U.N. mandate and its execution or to poor leadership and management. Thant and Bunche had told him, and Yost had confirmed, that the United Nations had been restrained from taking action by the U.S., Belgian, and U.K. Governments, which hoped to bring about reunification through negotiation and economic pressures. (Ibid.)

386. Memorandum for the Record 386. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, December 28, 1962.

SUBJECT

Daily White House Staff Meeting, 28 December 1962

[Here follows discussion of other matters. Bundy presided throughout the meeting.]

3. Kaysen then summarized General Truman's informal briefing at the State Department late yesterday afternoon2 (which I attended with Kaysen at his invitation). Obviously there is no point in summarizing here General Truman's presentation as relayed by Kaysen. Bundy, Kaysen, and all concerned, agreed that it was necessary for the United States to obtain political control over any military operations which developed; in other words, if the United States is going to furnish critical materiel and perhaps civilian technical personnel, the United Nations should not expect merely to say, "Thank you very much," and then ignore us. Mr. Harlan Cleveland and Mr. George McGhee of the State Department are working up a "political scenario" today, and Kaysen proposes to forward this scenario to the President with a covering memorandum which I assume would include some degree of summarizing General Truman's informal presentation. As I sense it, both Bundy and Kaysen wish that the President would reconsider his basic approach to this Congo problem. They feel that his initial OK was in terms of a US fighter squadron going to the Congo, but that the reinforcing operation as conceived by the UN and General Truman is so enormously complex as to approach the adjective Bundy used: "feckless". Bundy and Kaysen—perhaps somewhat nostalgically—expressed the wish or half-wish that the United States and the United Nations could both somehow disengage from the whole messy Congo business. Toward the end of the discussion, Bundy and Kaysen agreed that we should tell the United Nations that they must have a political plan (or "scenario") to parallel their military plan as presented to General Truman, on the ground in the Congo. In other words, and as mentioned above, the United States will not furnish critical materiel and personnel under a political carte blanche to the United Nations.

[Here follows discussion of other matters.]

LJL

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Box 25, Chairman's Staff Group. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Colonel Legere for General Taylor.

2 An unsigned record of the meeting, headed "December 27, 1962 Meeting, Comments of General Truman," is in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2216. A December 28 memorandum from Sloan to Gilpatric states that Truman had briefed the Department of State and the Joint Chiefs on the mission's preliminary recommendations. The mission had found the U.N. forces capable of handling the situation without additional forces if they received promptly the equipment they had requested, and the Joint Chiefs had informally approved the recommendations of equipment to be supplied, including some items not on the U.N. list. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, 092 Congo) A December 31 memorandum from Truman to the Joint Chiefs of Staff with the mission's final report is ibid., 381 Congo.

387. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) 387. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen)1

Washington, December 28, 1962.

SUBJECT

Recent Developments in Elisabethville

This memorandum recapitulates recent developments in Elisabethville which Mr. Cleveland and Mr. Godley have already related to you informally. As of mid-afternoon we still have only sketchy information based largely on telephone calls from Léopoldville and USUN.2 Apparently a partial interruption of communications has occurred because last night the Katangan gendarmerie cut off the electric supply. Unless otherwise noted, all times given are in Elisabethville time, i.e. six hours in advance of Washington time.

1. The evening of December 27 Kimba, Tshombe's deputy and one of the worst extremists in Katanga, gave an inflammatory press conference at which he charged the United Nations and the United States with working out a "vast plan" to start a war in Katanga. Kimba also asserted that the UN planned to arrest the Tshombe cabinet and thus leave Katanga in chaos. Tshombe followed the same line in a note to the UN3 which he read at the press conference.

2. Subsequently at 11 p.m. the uneasy truce in the city of the last five days was broken by the resumption of sporadic rifle fire plus some use of mortars by Katangan gendarmerie all around the UNOC perimeter. The chronology of events is well described in today's UN press release which is attached as Tab A.4 This clearly indicates that UNOC showed considerable restraint in the face of repeated Katangan provocations. While this firing might have been the result of the Katangan gendarmerie getting out of control, we are inclined to believe it was a deliberate decision by Tshombe and his cabinet. They now have good reason to know that there is widespread support around the world for quick completion of the U Thant Reconciliation Plan and hence they may have decided to attack before the military balance shifted further to their disadvantage.

3. Then Mathu and Prem Chand with authorization from U Thant issued an ultimatum to Tshombe. He was to bring the Katangan gendarmerie under control. If he did not or could not, the Indian Gurkhas would remove the road blocks and would attack the gendarmerie camp outside the city to the northwest. If all went smoothly, the troops would then turn south toward the Kipushi Road leading to the south to link up with Ethiopian troops. If this were successful the UN would have control of the Elisabethville water supply.

4. This ultimatum apparently expired at 3 p.m., and before this time Mathu and his subordinates seemed to have tried for four hours to persuade Tshombe to observe the cease fire and to evacuate the road blocks. Then the ONUC forces jumped off. We understand that they have cleared the road blocks, occupied the gendarmerie camp to the northwest of the city, and seized the main Katangan radio transmitter. Ambassador Gullion further reports that the Katangan gendarmerie are in "full flight" and that casualties of this operation have been light. A cordon of ONUC troops are in position outside the Katangan troops guarding Tshombe's palace. Mathu has assured Tshombe of his personal safety providing he remains in the palace and his bodyguard does not join in the fighting.

5. ONUC is sending armored cars with loudspeakers through the town exhorting the population to keep quiet and attempting to reassure them.

6. The news on the ticker is still sketchy, but since the main news source is Reuters, which can be expected to take the Tshombe line, we anticipate distorted version of events. (These may include atrocities, civilian casualties and damage to property.) The Katangan mission in Brussels has already put out a story to the effect that the UN started the present firing and is destroying African villages.

7. In summary, it appears at first glance that the UN has handled this delicate situation very well. We shall now have to ascertain urgently U Thant's future plans for Katanga, both political and military. There is at least a fair possibility that Tshombe's position has been weakened significantly as a result of the ONUC military measures today.

William H. Brubeck5

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2862. Confidential. The source text was initialed by Cleveland but bears no drafting information. A somewhat condensed version of the memorandum was cabled to the President in Palm Beach, Florida, from the White House. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

2 Reports from Léopoldville and Elisabethville on the day's events are in Department of State, Central Files 770G.00 and 332.70G.

3 Reference is to a letter of December 27 from Tshombe to Mathu. (U.N. doc. S/5053/Add.14/Annex XXV)

4 Not printed.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this stamped signature with an indication that Little signed for Brubeck.

388. Memorandum of Conversation 388. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, December 28, 1962, 6:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Secretary, McGhee, Cleveland, Kaysen, Fredericks, Godley, Weiner

Secretary thought it would be worthwhile get word to Kaunda regarding impounding of planes in Northern Rhodesia and role as mediator. AF preparing telegram.

Secretary thought it would be advantageous for us to be out of touch with UN so that we could be in more flexible diplomatic position.

Secretary asked McGhee to call MacArthur and have the following message passed to Spaak from Rusk: That we believe incident started by gendarmeries; that this not part of UN plan; that we, nevertheless, should be alert to possible advantages in present situation. (McGhee made this call.)

Cleveland commented on phone call from Yost, who had met with UN officials merely for informational purposes. UN told him that three roadblocks were overrun and four remaining ones will be eliminated tomorrow. Also Tunisian, Ethiopian and Irish will be put into action tomorrow—until now only Indians involved. Also UN will move to high ground along Kipushi road. One commune rescued. Gardiner going to Elisabethville to see Tshombe and tell him he has come for implementation of plan for free UN action and for grounding of Katanga planes. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Katangans intend to fly tomorrow and if they do so, UN will retaliate. UN did not mention intention to destroy airfield. Bunche also requested of Yost a letter from us confirming F–84's would be available. Brief discussion followed as to whether we should give letter but no decision made.

Some discussion on what we should do with Adoula.

Secretary emphasized strongly his concern that Tshombe might decide to pull the walls down around him, i.e., go on a rampage and kill all Europeans. Secretary wanted thought given as to what steps Tshombe would take, if any, along these lines and what we could do. Kaysen mentioned someone in UN should tell Tshombe and/or Katangans left in power that UN objectives are limited. Gardiner's attitude must be positive toward settlement.2 Secretary asked Fredericks give thought to [the steps?] Tshombe would take and come up with analysis.

Secretary asked if worthwhile for him go to New York to see U Thant Sunday with perhaps advance guard going Saturday.

Secretary said he spoke to President and told him we would not interfere from military viewpoint. Cleveland said someone should meet with U Thant tomorrow.

Secretary said U Thant should call all parties to agree to plan and show faith by certain concrete steps. He emphasized importance that UN must have political steps parallel to military steps. This should be done by tomorrow. If U Thant is reluctant, President should say something.

Secretary aware we could not afford loss of morale of UN forces by stalemate situation developing. Secretary said we should have something in writing tonight for U Thant to say tomorrow regarding conciliatory efforts. (Cleveland drafting in the morning.)

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2216. No classification marking. No drafting information appears on the source text. The meeting was held in the Secretary's office.

2 Telegram 976 to Léopoldville, December 28, 8:59 p.m., declared that the Congolese Government and United Nations had a unique opportunity for "effective psychological action to take advantage current actions to further Katangan reintegration." It suggested that it was time for a political-psychological initiative, such as a statement by Kasavubu or Adoula that they were not seeking unconditional surrender, and requested that the Embassy discuss this with Adoula or Kasavubu and with Gardiner. (Ibid., Central Files, 770G.00/12– 2862)

389. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Sloan) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) 389. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Sloan) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric)1

Washington, December 29, 1962.

SUBJECT

Additional Support for UN Operations Congo

In furtherance of my memorandum on this subject yesterday,2 Colonel Greene, OASD/ISA, was in New York yesterday for discussion of this subject with Brigadier Rikhye, Military Advisor to the Secretary General. Brigadier Rikhye was informed that we are proceeding expeditiously to supply the trucks, personnel carriers, transport aircraft, tanker aircraft, mine removal equipment and necessary spares for trucks and aircraft. The other items on my list of yesterday; i.e., 50,000 gal. POL field storage system, 6 H–19 helicopters and pilots and 37 mine detection sets, have not been requested by the UN. Brigadier Rikhye was told that if the UN would request these, we would be prepared to provide them. Therefore, on these items, we are awaiting UN action.

This morning, Dr. Bunche, Undersecretary General, called Mr. Harlan Cleveland to request 10 F–84 aircraft. At a subsequent meeting with Secretary Rusk today,3 it was decided to withhold action on these aircraft until the situation in Katanga is clarified and until the UN has the necessary pilots and ground support personnel in hand (they have approached the Turkish Government for these personnel). We will request the JCS to alert CINCEUR of the possible requirement of positioning 10 F–84 aircraft at Kamina Air Field. At the same time, Secretary Rusk decided that he would keep the President informed on a continuing basis of the developments in this situation.

At the meeting earlier today, Secretary Rusk also decided that we would not instigate a public announcement of the equipment that we have now agreed to provide the UN. It was his feeling that it would be inadvisable to do this at this time.

Frank K. Sloan

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RD 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Congo 381. Top Secret.

2 See footnote 1, Document 386.

3 Records of meetings in the Secretary's Conference Room at 12:10 and 4:55 p.m. are in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2216.

390. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 390. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, December 29, 1962, 8:38 p.m.

1770. For Stevenson. We have two somewhat separable problems to solve in next discussion with SYG.

1. We need to be clear just how far UN Force presently intends to move, assuming Katanga resistance continues to be unimpressive. Our impression from your contacts in New York and fragmentary reports from Leo and Eville is that local commanders have discretion to take as much advantage of situation as they readily and safely can. Thus, although UNNY speaks of completing only Phase One of preexisting military plan, AmConsul Eville reports UN senior officer as predicting substantial move all the way to Jadotville.2 Similarly, yesterday we had indication from field of air strike on Kolwezi while UNNY was still telling USUN that strike was only contingency plan in event of hostile action by Katangan air force.

We can understand a certain amount of confusion and contradiction, given the fast-moving situation on the ground. But SYG, who has direct and personal responsibility for whatever is actually done by UN Force, must have clear idea from hour to hour under what instructions his Force Commander is operating, and degree of discretion he has delegated to them. Our commitment to and participation in this enterprise is so large, and so crucial to its success or failure, that UNNY must regard it as high priority assignment to keep us fully and currently informed, and to "come clean" with USUN on the probable military developments. They should not worry, as Bunche may perhaps be worried, that we will balk at reasonable action designed to secure freedom of movement and protection for UN troops.

Beyond these general considerations, we now need, urgently and in detail, guidance from SYG on how the timing and nature of current military developments affect the logistical arrangements that are in train or have been contemplated.

You should ask SYG what UN's military intentions are after enlarged Elisabethville perimeter has been secured. Without clearer picture of what sort of operation we are being asked to support, we are having difficulty in reaching decision on supply US fighter aircraft, although of course we are going ahead with preparations to airlift the APC's, the trucks, the de-mining equipment and with the stationing in Leo of the transport and tanker aircraft. Here again, however, the degree of urgency of these deliveries can be affected by the new situation.

2. Reports from USUN indicate that U Thant's instinct is not to make until Monday any statement on political content of current operation, and that meanwhile Gardiner will make a preliminary appeal for restarting action under the UN reconciliation plan.

It seems to us that the United Nations cannot be in the position of prosecuting for several days a military operation, for which much of world opinion is unprepared, without a rather explicit public statement of what the UN is trying to do and what its political objectives are. We have therefore drafted the kind of statement we believe it would be useful for U Thant to make, on Sunday if possible, stressing the reconciliation objectives while completing the military operation along present lines.

Text of draft statement contained in next following cable.3

We believe it essential that SYG make statement along these lines soonest. It would put UN action in perspective and within political framework acceptable to broad majority of UN. It is particularly important to US since it would provide us with the opportunity to relate our continuing support of UN to clearly defined political aim of peaceful reintegration of the Katanga into the Congo. SYG should understand that importance we attach to statement such that it would probably be necessary for us to make similar statement on our own in the event SYG should delay issuance. We would hope that SYG statement would also be circulated to SC members for their information.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2962. Secret; Priority. Drafted and approved by Cleveland and cleared in draft by Williams, Davis, McGhee, Stevenson, and Rusk. Kaysen sent the text to the President in Palm Beach in a telegram stating that Rusk and Stevenson had talked to Bunche and received assurances that U.N. military plans were limited and that Thant was willing to make a statement of political objectives. (Telegram CAP 5676–62, December 29; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

2 Reported in telegram 1020 from Elisabethville, December 29. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–2962)

3 Telegram 1771 to USUN, December 29. The draft statement declared that the U.N. purpose was not to destroy Tshombe or his provincial government but to give the Congolese people the opportunity to maintain the Congo's territorial integrity and political independence. It appealed to Tshombe to initiate the UMHK payments plan, deport all foreign mercenaries, order a cease-fire, turn all Katangan planes over to the United Nations, and instruct the gendarmerie's senior officers to take an oath of allegiance to Kasavubu. It also urged Adoula to take various steps in response. (Ibid.)

391. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 391. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, December 30, 1962, 6 p.m.

2530. Congo. Bunche assured Stevenson today that entry of UN forces into Kipushi had not been approved in advance by UNNY. Moreover, UN does not plan move to Jadotville at this time.

Bunche showed Stevenson message sent Gardiner today, saying UNNY had understood Kipushi not to be entered and demanding explanation. Situation with regard to airstrike by UN aircraft was different. There has been no misunderstanding here between UNNY and UNOC. UN had been leisurely considering draft of letter to Tshombe demanding removal road-blocks and grounding of aircraft when events overtook them. Letter would have demanded end offensive air activity on terms to be agreed upon between Gardiner and Tshombe. However, UNOC had acted perfectly within its understanding with UNNY in attacking Katanga aircraft on morning December 29 long after ANC had started firing evening December 27 in Eville. On morning 29th first plane encountered by UN aircraft was Katanga Harvard in air. UN aircraft had attacked this plane and then continued on to attack Kolwezi.

In response Stevenson question what were next military steps, Bunche said phase one, in effect, over. U Thant would now try again to get reconciliation plan implemented, especially with regard to gendarmerie oath, integration of armed forces, UMHK payment talks in Leoville, and talks in Leoville on constitution, although latter might have to await reconvening Parliament. Amnesty was already in effect. If within reasonable time, say fortnight, no progress with Tshombe on talks and gendarmerie oath, UN would tell Tshombe it demanding freedom of movement to Jadotville and Kolwezi. Would tell him if he did not agree, UN would march on Jadotville and Kolwezi.

When Stevenson again asked especially whether UN going to Jadotville now, Bunche showed him short cable of Dec 30 addressed to Gardiner and General Kebede. Text this cable follows: "Now that phase one completed, further military action in Katanga, other than required by immediate self-defense, will, as matter of course, be undertaken only after consultation with and clearance by UN headquarters."

When Stevenson sought ascertain whether above message meant there would be no further air strikes by UN, Bunche said UN had destroyed six of forty planes known to be in Katanga before fighting began. There were apparently no more targets. Thought Katanga planes might have taken refuge in Angola and Rhodesia. However, UN would attack any Katanga aircraft which it saw on ground at Kolwezi.

While meeting in progress Bunche received press report that UN forces moving out from Kamina air-base. He knew nothing of this and said he would immediately query UNOC.2

Plimpton

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–3062. Confidential; Priority. Received at 6:30 p.m. and repeated to Léopoldville, Elisabethville, Brussels, and London.

2 Telegram 2531 from USUN, December 30, reported on Stevenson's efforts to persuade Bunche to include as much as possible of the text in telegram 1771 (see footnote 2, Document 390) in the statement that Thant planned to issue the next day. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–3062)

392. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 392. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, December 30, 1962, 6:42 p.m.

1779. For Stevenson. Now that limited UN military operation has been successful and Tshombe in Rhodesia,2 we believe it timely for UN through UK to contact Tshombe with a view to establishing basis for Tshombe cooperation in immediate practical steps designed to bring about reintegration of Katanga into the Congo. We believe UN at this point might well seek to assure Tshombe that objective of UN exercise continues to be effective implementation of SC mandate, not the destruction of Mr. Tshombe or his provincial government, nor to impose upon them an unconditional surrender. As prelude to important basic actions which Mr. Tshombe would be expected to take soonest to achieve practical reintegration, believe UN should send message to him through UK suggesting that Tshombe and any principal assistants with him return to Elisabethville. UN, as bona fides that its objective is to achieve peaceful reintegration of Katanga on basis of Thant plan, which Tshombe himself has already agreed to in principle, would guarantee personal security of Tshombe and his provincial authorities in transit as well as in Elisabethville.

We believe such a move by UN, at this particularly advantageous psychological moment, would assure world opinion that recent military actions have not been aimed at destroying Tshombe or provincial government. Moreover, it would afford UN opportunity to seize "reconciliation initiative" at time when UN military operation has been demonstrably effective and successful. It would make much more difficult any attempt by Tshombe to justify further delays in bringing about genuine reintegration of Katanga into Congo.

At same time Tshombe should understand that he is not getting free ride back to Katanga power. He should realize that UN would continue to regard him and deal with him as provincial leader of Katanga provided he cooperates promptly and effectively after his arrival in Elisabethville in immediate steps toward reintegration, viz. facilitating UN freedom of movement, urging UMHK to make payments immediately to GOC, removal of mercenaries, agreeing to cessation of firing and standstill, grounding and impounding of Katanga air capability, practical steps of military reintegration including oath of allegiance by Katanga gendarmerie to President Kasavubu, and other steps to end Katanga secession.

Request you discuss this matter with Thant soonest.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–3062. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Sisco; cleared in substance by Williams, Kaysen, McGhee, and Ball; and approved by Cleveland. Repeated to London, Léopoldville, Brussels, and Elisabethville.

2 Tshombe reportedly arrived in Salisbury on December 30.

393. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 393. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, December 31, 1962, 5 p.m.

1610. For the President, the Secretary, Stevenson and JCS. Reference: Deptel 988.2 I urge that action proposed reference telegram be urgently reconsidered.

UN is about to achieve complete and well nigh bloodless disintegration of gendarmerie after which integration can be achieved with more lasting assurance of its stability and justice than if it were bargained for with Tshombe. At very least, Tshombe should not be brought back until operations are complete; nor should these be suspended.

Proposed action seems predicated on view A) that Tshombe will have continuing influence, and B) that his influence is necessarily for the good, neither of which is established. It also seems a peculiarly insensitive error to deal with Tshombe through UK channels at this time just after representatives from British African Commonwealth and colonial countries assembled in conference at Léopoldville have rebuked British policy. The proposal seems to be predicated on idea, contrary to record, that Tshombe will be reasonable and that his word in negotiations can be trusted. Also that some means can be found to prevent Tshombe from stringing out these talks and weakening the negotiations.

Perhaps biggest mistake is that such action is taken without authorization or consultation with Central Government (and here I do not mean Adoula alone, but any GOC; as for Adoula, this action will probably finish him).

We have dealt with Tshombe in past because we had to. He might still be the man to sign the peace but there is no reason apparent here for any precipitated decision about it. Nor is there really any reason to think Tshombe is the man to bring secession to end or that it would not recur under his leadership, as soon as UN is gone. He is after all secession itself, root and branch. Cannot understand by what right UN would unilaterally decide Tshombe is provincial leader. We now in entirely new situation in which Katangese and we might well want a different leader.

Adoula is now writing, at our request, a New Year's speech featuring quote from Lincoln's second inaugural. As soon as he gets word of this action, his reaction will be understandably bitter and it and much else will land in waste basket.

Do not know what UNNY will say about this proposal, but can only say it will be devastating to UN morale here. Believe Gardiner and force commander will quit and Indian forces will go home soonest.

As I write this we informed Tshombe has taken off from Salisbury in British plane. Hope this does not mean plan already being put into effect without consultation of this Embassy, ONUC or GOC.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–3162. Secret; Niact. Received at 1:12 p.m. and repeated to USUN, Brussels, Elisabethville, and London. Passed to the White House and JCS.

2 Telegram 1779 (Document 392) was repeated to Léopoldville as telegram 988.

394. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 394. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom1

Washington, December 31, 1962, 6:49 p.m.

3393. Following based on an uncleared memcon:2

UK Charge Greenhill requested meeting with Secretary today to discuss Congo situation. Greenhill expressed HMG view that important next step will be to bring Tshombe back to Elisabethville under UN guarantees.3 Greenhill anxious to know whether US envisages Tshombe's future participation in political settlement as result recent events. Greenhill said he had seen reports from Salisbury that Tshombe's tough talk was merely histrionics and that Tshombe worried for his own safety.

Secretary told Greenhill that US had been pressing UN to get on with political settlement. In our view, UN must not try destroy political establishment in Katanga. Secretary mentioned U Thant's statement on these lines issued today.4 Greenhill had read summary of statement which he termed "very good."

Secretary pointed out that if Tshombe returns to Elisabethville, he cannot revert to status quo ante, but must indicate willingness move promptly toward reconciliation. Tshombe must respond to any conciliatory gestures or statements by UN or Adoula. In this connection we have info that Adoula may make conciliatory speech very soon. Secretary remarked that Tshombe must understand that he cannot achieve military solution.

Greenhill wondered how we could achieve solution constitutional problem quickly. Secretary suggested that Tshombe should indicate privately which specific modifications of constitutional draft he needed. Greenhill expressed hope that UN would do everything possible to avoid incidents in Elisabethville which might create bad impression abroad. Secretary noted that outbreak of shooting caught everyone by surprise, but remarked that since it had happened we should try to get the Congo question settled quickly.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/12–3162. Secret. Drafted by Beaudry and approved by Davis. Repeated to Brussels, Léopoldville, USUN, Elisabethville, and Salisbury.

2 Drafted by Beaudry. (Ibid., 332.70G/12–3162)

3 A December 30 message from Lord Home to Rusk reads in part: "The only constructive course now is for the U.N. to bring Tshombe back to Elisabethville with absolute guarantees of safety for himself and his ministers and an understanding of fair treatment for the gendarmerie provided they do not engage in hostilities pending agreement on their integration. I am in touch with U Thant urging him to give such guarantees immediately and I hope I shall have your full support." (Ibid., Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204, UK Officials Correspondence with Secretary Rusk, 1962)

4 Thant's statement declared that he intended to continue to try to secure the implementation of the Plan of National Reconciliation, and it urged all parties to take steps toward that end. (U.N. doc. S/5053/Add.14/Annex XXIX; printed in part in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 916–918)

395. Telegram From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy 395. Telegram From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy1

Washington, January 1, 1963, 10:05 p.m.

CAP 63006. 1) Try to show this to President soonest, before he calls Ball if possible.

2) Present military situation in Congo is that UN column on way to Jadotville held up at blown bridge about fifteen miles out. UNNY surprised at this operation and has expressed shock to our mission.

3) Tshombe either at Jadotville or Elisabethville and has opened negotiations with UN through British. In Léopoldville Adoula has prorogued parliament and made speech,2 initial reports of which are good. It extends opportunity for negotiations and reconciliation to Tshombe.

4) Harlan Cleveland going to Congo tomorrow evening. Rusk and Ball think this excellent idea. Public explanation is senior officer dealing with UN affairs going to see this important UN operation at critical time. Privately Cleveland will convey to Gullion Washington picture of the situation, try to convince Adoula of need for flexibility on his part. Problem now seems to be desire of Gullion, Adoula and Gardiner (UN rep Léopoldville) to push military operations UN. Cleveland knows Gardiner well and has dealt with Adoula before. Appears to all best choice for mission of convincing them of unwisdom of attempt at complete military victory and need for political negotiations. We think Cleveland should have letter from you to Adoula making this point. Draft to be based on text of Adoula speech, just being received, and will be sent down tomorrow noon.3

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Secret; Operational Immediate. The message was sent to the President's Air Force Aide, Brigadier General Godfrey T. McHugh, for the President.

2 In his January 1 speech, Adoula announced that Kasavubu had promulgated an ordinance under Article 69 of the Loi Fondamentale closing the fifth session of Parliament as of January 1. The text was transmitted in telegram 1639 from Léopoldville, January 2. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.13/1– 263)

3 Evidently not sent; see Document 396.

396. Telegram From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy 396. Telegram From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy1

Washington, January 2, 1963.

Congo Situation Report.

1. U Thant strongly objects to Cleveland's going to the Congo now.2 From what he told Stevenson most confidentially the basis of his objection seems to be his desire to set straight the internal difficulties between UNNY and UN Congo in private before Cleveland gets here. On the same confidential basis U Thant told Stevenson that Bunche is leaving for Léopoldville tonight. Accordingly we are holding off on Cleveland for a day or two to see just how the situation develops.

2. U Thant has agreed to a standstill in UN military operations. This leaves the UN forces in complete control of Elisabethville area, the surroundings of the Kamina airfield and with a force well down the road to Jadotville and holding the last major river crossing between Elisabethville and Jadotville. To the best of our present knowledge Tshombe is operating out of Jadotville or Kolwezi where he still has considerable forces. At last report he was on his way to Elisabethville under UN promise not to hurt him. We do not know whether this is still the case.

3. UMHK has three officers from Brussels on the way down to Léopoldville to discuss payments and taxes with Adoula government.

4. U Thant made strong public statement this morning saying that he has no need to negotiate with Tshombe.3 This was made under pressure from Adoula and African members of Congo Advisory Committee. Stevenson is going back to U Thant to make the point that statements of this sort make our position difficult and it would be more helpful for us for U Thant to return to the tone of his longer public statement of Monday.4

5. At this moment letter from President to Adoula seems inappropriate.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files Congo. Secret; Operational Immediate. The message was sent to General McHugh for the President. The source text doesnot indicate the message number or transmission time, but it bears a handwritten note stating that the copy as received was destroyed on January 9; thus the message was evidently sent.

2 Stevenson and Cleveland met with Thant on January 2. Ball told Rusk in a telephone conversation that afternoon that Thant was "hitting the roof" at the idea of Cleveland going to the Congo at that time. Ball told Rusk that it would be "just as well" to delay Cleveland's trip by 2 or 3 days. (Memorandum of telephone conversation, January 2, 3 p.m.; ibid., Ball Papers, Congo; also notes by Phyllis Bernau of the conversation; Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Calls) Telegram 2563 from USUN, January 2, reported the meeting with Thant. (Ibid., Central Files, 332.70G/1–263)

3 For text of the statement issued by U.N. headquarters on January 2, see U.N. doc. S/5053/Add.14/Annex XXXII. Also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, p. 918.

4 December 31. For text of the statement, see U.N. doc. S/5053/Add.14/Annex XXXI. Also printed in Public Papers of the Secretaries-General, vol. VI, pp. 274–280.

397. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate in Elisabethville 397. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate in Elisabethville1

Washington, January 2, 1963, 9:01 p.m.

563. Re Deptel 556 to Eville2 and Leo's 1638.3 After further review possible situations in which three Consuls might be called on to facilitate return of Tshombe and his ministers (Eville's 1069),4 which appear to be constantly changing, following conditions are added to authorization contained in Deptel 556.

Although we understand Tshombe's reluctance rely solely on UN for security and wish facilitate his return through provision adequate assurances re security if this otherwise desirable, we have in mind problem created in Léopoldville as indicated in Embtel 1638 and other factors such as psychological impact on Tshombe to return to situation existing prior to recent hostilities and possible demand that Consuls become, in a sense, permanent bodyguards.

No initiative should be taken in this matter either in NY or E'ville. If UN should so request, Consul would consent be present along with other Consuls at airport or other logical entry point and perhaps follow to Palace in motor cavalcade, if required by Tshombe. In no circumstances, however, would he participate in what would amount to bodyguard for Tshombe. If such bodyguard is required by Tshombe, over and above that which UN would normally provide, UN should take own measures to arrange, perhaps through combination of local Europeans known to be loyal to Tshombe, members of GOK government available or gendarmerie. Problem of bodyguard would, of course, remain after Tshombe's initial reception.

If in fact such an arrangement should come about, this should make a little lighter Leo's task of explaining to Adoula.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–263. Confidential; Niact. Drafted and approved by McGhee and cleared in substance by Fredericks, Ball, and Rusk. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, Paris, and USUN.

2 Telegram 556 to Elisabethville, January 1, authorized Dean at his discretion to assist in facilitating Tshombe's return, including being present himself if necessary, but only under U.N. initiative, auspices, and arrangements. It noted that the United States was probably not in a position to act as a direct guarantor of Tshombe's safety and that no action along those lines should be taken without the Department's specific approval. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–163)

3 Telegram 1638 from Léopoldville, January 2, requested authority to "issue low key denial that US Consul going anywhere to pick up Tshombe." (Ibid., 770G.00/1–263) Telegram 1636 of the same date stated that Adoula had just telephoned Gullion in agitation to query a radio report that the U.S., U.K., and Belgian Consuls in Elisabethville were going to fetch Tshombe. (Ibid.)

4 Telegram 1069 from Elisabethville, January 1, reported a public message from Tshombe that he would go to Elisabethville under certain conditions, one of which was that his freedom should be guaranteed and that the U.S., U.K., and Belgian Consuls should escort him to Elisabethville from the Lufira River. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–163)

398. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Ball) 398. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Ball)1

Washington, January 2, 1963.

SUBJECT

The Congo

1. While it is difficult to look ahead in the present chaos when we don't really know what is happening from day to day, it is also necessary. It seems to me that the situation we must deal with in about two or three days will be as follows. Tshombe will be well dug in at Jadotville and Kolwezi with no intention of giving himself up. There may be some progress on the part of the UMHK in dealing with the Central Government, but it will be far from conclusive. Tshombe will be making conditions, and Adoula and the UN will be refusing to talk to him.

2. From our point of view, it is worth taking large risks in order to settle the situation in an acceptable manner in the next two weeks.

3. The best prospect I can see for doing this at the moment is to try for the next week to maintain heavy pressure on all parties. This will require us to emphasize different things to each of them. This in turn may require more control and security than is inherently compatible with the nature of the situation, but it still looks like our best bet. We would ask the UN to maintain the public position of last Monday offering Tshombe something like the guarantees contained in our instruction to Stevenson, at the same time requiring specific performance on a concrete list of items within two weeks. Privately we would try to convey to Tshombe through diplomatic and clandestine channels the proposition that if he did not negotiate, the UN would resume the war with all-out U.S. support. This calls for the continued flow of our equipment to the UN amidst continuing publicity. In New York we would also say privately that as long as the UN followed the proposed line, we would give them maximum support and, if necessary, direct military assistance required to succeed in whatever renewed fighting occurred. However, if they or Adoula definitely closed the door in Tshombe's face, we would be forced to withdraw from the operation. In any event, we would make clear that the military phase must be liquidated before the end of the month.

In Léopoldville we would say something similar, emphasizing that this was Adoula's last chance, that if Adoula and the people around him want to succeed in bringing off a deal, they would need to show flexibility on their part. We could not go on assisting the Central Government indefinitely, if war with Katanga continued; but if they succeeded in bringing about a deal on re-integration, we would be in a good position to provide economic and military assistance in the future.

In Brussels and London we would point out to the UMHK and the governments that this was essentially their last chance. If they didn't join with the Central Government and use their influence on Tshombe to make him negotiate, we could not answer for the next step the UN would inevitably take; we were bound to support their fight by our commitments to the UN, and the result might well be a total loss for them.

4. I think if we followed this program intensively for a week, we could succeed. The gravest obstacle in the way of its successful execution is the lack of the people we need for the job in every place but Brussels. However, if we get Cleveland off to Léopoldville, perhaps then George McGhee directly to Elisabethville and handle U Thant by a visit from you early next week, we might just bring it off.

5. The alternative I see is further obduracy on all sides, followed by renewed fighting in two weeks or so, under circumstances guaranteeing the maximum of bloodshed and the minimum probability of success.

Carl Kaysen2

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Secret.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

399. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 399. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, January 3, 1963, 2:25 p.m.

976. Eyes only Ambassador from Secretary. Please see or telephone Spaak with this personal message from me:

"Dear Mr. Minister: I want you to know how distressed I am over the great difficulties which the events of the last day or two in the Katanga, particularly the reported slaying of two Belgian women by Indian troops advancing into Jadotville, have caused you.2 I also want you to know that we did not approve the move to Jadotville and had, along with you, obtained the most categorical assurances from UN New York that such a move would not be made. It is clear that there has been a serious problem of discipline as between UN New York and UN authorities in the Congo and I personally have made the strongest representations to UN New York on this matter. Bunche leaves New York tonight for the Congo to assure either strict discipline or the dismissal of those who refuse to obey orders.

I have personally insisted to UN New York that Tshombe be given every opportunity for a prompt peaceful political settlement along the lines on which you and we have agreed.3 UN New York accepts this but the problem remains to get it carried out in the Congo.

I can understand that you may find it necessary to disassociate yourself from this latest move to Jadotville. We will not say anything to cut across your statement of concern but we hope you can stop short of what might be interpreted as a complete breach between you and U Thant. Under all the circumstances, we do not anticipate a public protest of the move to Jadotville partly because of our strong private pressures upon the UN and partly because we feel we should be in a position to help pick up the pieces and see what ought now to be done. I do hope that Tshombe and his backers will now see that there is no political or military solution available to them along the lines of secession and that common prudence requires them to accept the reasonable and minimum steps involved in the Thant reconciliation plan. We will do our best to ensure that the UN and Adoula keep this path open in order that Katanga can be a part of a federal Congo as a going concern.

With personal regards, Dean Rusk."4

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–363. Secret; Niact. Drafted and approved by Rusk and cleared by McGhee and Ball.

2 In a telephone conversation with Ball earlier that afternoon, McGhee stated that MacArthur had telephoned to tell him that two Belgian women had been killed by U.N. troops moving into Jadotville and that Spaak was "going to blast the UN in the morning." McGhee told Ball that he was going to inform Rusk, because Spaak wanted him to know. (Record of telephone conversation on January 3, 12:45 p.m.; Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Congo) MacArthur reported Spaak's views in more detail in telegram 952 from Brussels, January 3. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–363)

3 In a telephone conversation with Bunche that morning, Rusk stated that he had talked to the President by telephone and that "it continues to be very important for it to be known if Tshombe is ready to talk business everybody else is ready to talk business with him." (Record of telephone conversation by Phyllis D. Bernau, January 3, 9:52 a.m.; ibid., Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Calls)

4 Telegram 959 from Brussels, January 4, transmitted a message from Spaak to Rusk stating that Thant's latest communique had clarified the situation and that Spaak would be able to avoid a break with him. (Ibid., Central Files, 770G.00/1–463) A U.N. statement issued on January 3 stated that there had occurred in the Jadotville operation "a serious breakdown in effective communication and co-ordination" between U.N. Headquarters and Léopoldville. For text, see U.N. doc. S/5053/Add.14/Annex XXXIII; also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 918–919.

400. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 400. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom1

Washington, January 3, 1963, 4:29 p.m.

3434. Under Secretary Ball called in Greenhill, Charge British Embassy, this morning to review Congo situation.2 After reviewing present situation, including info we had that UN forces now in Jadotville, Ball recounted his Nassau discussion with Home on Congo.3 We recognized that withdrawal of UN from Congo without resolution of integration problem would mean prolonged civil war with practical certainty USSR would be invited to intervene on one side or the other. At the same time we knew of no way to seal off Congo. Ball anxious Home understand present developments not of our making. We had not wanted a military, but a political solution and had been fearful of an outbreak of fighting that could lead to prolonged conflict in which UN role would appear progressively more ambiguous. Once UN undertook military operations which on the available evidence appeared to have occurred in response Katanga provocation US believed action must be tightly controlled with the limited objective of depriving Tshombe of any other course of action but carrying out reconciliation plan. US "horrified" when UN forces moved towards Jadotville and had made strong representation to Thant. Ball indicated we had planned send Cleveland to Congo to appraise situation but had "postponed" trip when Thant raised objections and indicated he was sending Bunche. Ball said that info on Bunche visit was closely held at present and stressed that UK knowledge of his trip should not be divulged. Our impression is that UN is in "disarray" and that Thant wishes time to put his house in order. We have made clear to UN that we will support SYG but only if he gets his house in order. We believe Bunche may fire Kebede who appears to be ignoring New York instructions. We unclear on Gardiner role.

Greenhill welcomed this news and said UK view is that UN personnel in Congo regarded themselves individually as Nelsons turning blind eye to New York instructions.

Greenhill asked if US felt getting Tshombe to E'ville was "constructive". He said UK felt that Tshombe's presence was imperative since no substitute leader was in prospect. He indicated UK view that Tshombe in E'ville would make less mischief than elsewhere. He had no knowledge of Tshombe's present whereabouts but believed he could be reached. (Earlier Greenhill indicated to Dept officer that Tshombe in Kolwezi.) Greenhill stated that UK would not permit Tshombe to return again to Northern Rhodesia.

Ball said US Government position is that Tshombe's presence in Katanga is "necessary" to solution of situation since we likewise knew of no effective alternative leader with prestige necessary to maintain Katanga as going concern within a federated Congo. Said we favored ultimately constitutional arrangement giving some measure of local autonomy to Katanga within Congo federation. Greenhill asked if he could repeat to London US view that we favored return of Tshombe and Ball replied affirmatively. However this should be on basis that would assure no repetition of previous filibusters.

Ball did indicate we had one problem with Tshombe's return to E'ville relating to his use of the three Consuls. We had instructed Dean that we did not approve Tshombe using Consuls as "bodyguards" but had no objection that if requested by UN Dean might be present at airport with other Consuls provided UN arranged protection satisfactory to Tshombe. Greenhill said their man not to be present at airport unless other Consuls there. He noted that UK had cooled considerably on idea of having its Consul escort Tshombe.

Ball informed Greenhill that we had offered to assist Belgians in draining flooded mines and getting other UMHK installations back into operation.

In conclusion, Greenhill said that the UK Government would welcome having UN operations brought under control and would be reassured at Under Secretary's remarks regarding return of Tshombe.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–363. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Beaudry, Ball's Special Assistant George S. Springsteen, Jr., and Ball and approved by Ball. Also sent to Léopoldville and Elisabethville and repeated to Brussels and USUN.

2 A memorandum of conversation by Beaudry is ibid., 332.70G/1–363.

3 See Documents 372 and 378.

401. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 401. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, January 3, 1963, 6:10 p.m.

1020. Eyes only for Ambassadors from Secretary. Following comments are for your information and guidance on several points connected with your heavy responsibilities in this moment of flux and crisis in Congo.

1. As you may have sensed, we may be faced with major constitutional issue within UN as between UNSYG and UN civilian and military representatives in Congo. Bunche's imminent arrival is related to this issue. Nothing could discredit or destroy UN role in Congo more completely than refusal UN representatives to carry out loyally directives from SYG. It is one thing for such representatives to give SYG full benefit their views but quite another for them to fail to respond in letter and spirit to directives received from him. On this issue USG will fully support SYG by every possible means, otherwise responsibility UN and member governments vanishes and events are given over to those who represent no one. If SYG cannot control UN operations in Congo, we would have to review entire question US support for UN presence. If you are consulted by anyone on this point your advice should be that SYG's directives are to be absolutely obeyed and that no UN representative has any authority to do otherwise.

2. Regarding threat of GOC breach of relations with United Kingdom, you should continue to put full weight of USG against any such petulant and irresponsible move. As you know we are closer to UK insistence upon prompt peaceful settlement than GOC apparently aware. I am concerned lest this gap in their understanding put us in bad faith position with respect both to London and Léopoldville, but perhaps next few days will clarify. In any event, a breach of relations with UK cannot be accepted by us without a basic review of our own attitude toward Adoula. It is not in his interest to force us to choose between himself and Britain over a senseless gesture on his part which would deeply embarrass those of us who have been trying to support him. You should not hesitate to be as rough as necessary to prevent any such move by Adoula, making it quite clear to him that such a step would seriously affect attitude of USG toward maturity of GOC and its ability to carry out its responsibilities for governing the Congo. We do not ask Adoula to agree in every respect with UK but a show of contempt for a great power which has contributed a great deal to the Congo (and has been and remains second largest financial contributor to UN Congo operation) is not acceptable. If necessary to invoke, you should inform Adoula that you have been instructed, in the event of GOC breach of relations with UK, to return to Washington pending a reconsideration by the USG of its own position.

3. Regarding our main objectives in Congo, they remain the accomplishment of a political settlement in framework of SYG's reconciliation plan. We fully realize this requires major actions from the Katangan side but it also requires readiness GOC and UN to bring about same result. Prolonged UN military occupation and administration of Katanga is not possible, for many reasons. Nor can we look upon an attempted GOC administration of a hostile South Katanga as a feasible solution. Bomboko revealed part of the reasons in urging that an ANC battalion be brigaded with UN forces and be introduced to Katangans gradually over a period of time. Preferred solution still seems to us to be incorporation of South Katanga under its own leadership into a federal Congo. This is the Lincolnesque solution, a preferred alternative to the two decades of "reconstruction" which followed his death. Adoula's New Year statement was most encouraging, if he means it as we assume he does. Burden is now on Tshombe to perform immediately if he expects to salvage any serious role in the Congo.

4. I appreciate your vigorous efforts to move the UMHK payments scheme along, and your success in getting Adoula to make statement with just the right statesmanlike tone—and the right Lincoln quote.2 These are trying days of great difficulty for you and your staff. We are heavily depending on your continued capacity to keep your shirts on, your perspective broad, and your spirits high despite the frustrations which no doubt still lie ahead.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–363. Secret; Niact; No Other Distribution. Drafted and approved by Rusk and cleared by Cleveland, who also initialed for Williams. Repeated to USUN, London, and Brussels.

2 See footnote 1, Document 395. Telegram 1639 from Léopoldville reported that Adoula had quoted from Lincoln's second inaugural address, beginning, "With malice toward none".

402. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 402. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, January 4, 1963, 10 p.m.

1681. Eyes only Secretary. Your 10202 understood and appreciated. Re paragraph 1, Embassy of course has only limited picture from one end of UNOC exchange with UNNY but it may be useful to Department to know that from beginning of his tour here, Gardiner has been almost obsessed with idea that record must show his acts within specific authority of UNNY. I have frequently had occasion over several months to ask him or caution him about making sure he was covered. He always answered that file will show he fully within his authority. I last asked him about this only yesterday morning with references to ONUC movements. He said with wave of hand, he had it "all there (in files), every bit". At same time he read Godley and me his message to SYG saying he was halting column outside Jadotville.

Gardiner has horror of O'Brien period and the round about means then used by UNOC to justify its action. For this reason he insisted on his ultimative letter to Tshombe telling him what UN requiring of him.

I do not know whether there was any specific message from UNNY telling Gardiner to break off movement. If so I believe he would have told me. I am confident all movements except possibly actual occupation Kipushi made known to UNNY ahead of time. The movements conform pretty well to contingency plan we obtained and communicated to Department in August.

In any case, circumstances of move into Jadotville likely remain confused. After Gardiner's stop order, a military decision (Elisabethville's 1104 to Department)3 was made to go ahead because force was spread out at night straddling river with no bridge and under fire. Moreover, some reports reaching us show entry was sought by town's occupants and was necessary to restore order. All reports concur entry was unopposed and applauded. Death of Belgian women was horrible incident (or accident) but fortunately no other casualties. (See ARMA evaluation Elisabethville's 1120 to Department.)4

We and all Embassies here except communist bloc not excluding British and Canadian believe the occupation of Jadotville and early exercise of freedom of movement throughout Katanga indispensable key to achievement of U Thant plan objectives. I say this realizing USG may have to choose between West-oriented, integrated Congo on one hand and, on the other, some damage to UMHK and relations with our allies.

Reference paragraph 2, believe degree of emphasis in my representation to GOC against breaking with UK was appropriate to level of their resolution but I can get tougher as required. Happily we hope British seem to have veered away from taking excessively visible responsibility for premature replanting of Tshombe. Can only urge we avoid tar by association.

Reference 3, do not seem to have made self clear on some points. In past planning we never envisaged situation when we might not be dealing with Tshombe. Suddenly possibility has arisen this might actually hinder integration and that he might not be able exert much influence and this needs time to assess.

I think UN and GOC would let him back in if he presents himself at border. If, however, we get out in front urging or accomplishing such action it would be counterproductive, might well prevent his return and would severely damage our position here. If he came back his role in any case can hardly be that originally contemplated because he has been cut down in size, now it would probably be more administrating and less negotiating. Also concur with Dean that there should be conditions on his return.5 At very least we should not be in position of ramming him down anyone's throat.

We concur South Katanga should be under its own leadership but we would only be sowing sure seeds of future conflict if we have all KATS on one side of line and all ANC on other. This would be like turning Mason-Dixon line into frontier after civil war. It would represent that partition which Soviet Ambassador here preaches is our policy for Congo.

I think we should start now merging Gendarmerie and KATS, as per U Thant plan starting with small numbers in staff and schools, and under Greene plan. In meantime we might, for example, put small unit of KATS in far north at Sudanese border and GOC units or customs guards under UN supervision on southern border, and the ANC Band and Color Guard in Elisabethville.

If there is to be any GOC it has to have at least some participation in Katanga at early stage and if we manage it this way we can control, limit, and isolate it. The UN will certainly squeeze it to minimum. Bomboko's own proposals were sincerely intended to be moderate and would avoid the much more massive and dangerous intrusions on which the mass insisting. I do not believe the Katangese would oppose this kind of intermingling and controlled introduction of ANC under UN control and Dean apparently agrees.

Reference paragraph 4, all here in serene spirit and encouraged by prospects for end to Katanga problem at long last.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–463. Secret; Niact. Repeated to USUN, Brussels, and London.

2 Document 401.

3 Dated January 3. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–363)

4 Dated January 3. (Ibid.)

5 Dean had recommended in telegram 1070 from Elisabethville, January 1, that if the Consuls were to facilitate Tshombe's return, he should be required to agree to allow U.N. forces into Jadotville and to any other U.N. conditions. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–163)

403. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 403. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, January 5, 1963, 4:26 p.m.

1038. USUN's 26102 and Elisabethville's 1134,3 11354 and 1136.5 Believe Dean's unofficial contact with Van Weyenbergh is useful as channel to assure that Tshombe understands USG position as stated in Department press statement of January 4 (Cir 1169).6 However we believe it important that we not be connected with current Belgian effort return Tshombe to Elisabethville. Guidance contained in Deptel 5637 still stands.

You will have seen from New York's 2610 that Belgians have obtained SYG's agreement to a proposal whose objective is to get Tshombe to return to Elisabethville. While on basis of present reports we are not sanguine that Belgians will succeed, we believe it is important to play out this string for time being.

Nevertheless, suggestion made by Dean in his penultimate paragraph of Elisabethville's 1135 has merit. If in fact Tshombe fearful of gendarmerie, as Dean's report indicates, procedure contained in 1135 has advantage of giving Tshombe a face-saver while at the same time affording UN opportunity to exercise freedom of movement and to get into Kolwezi without use of military force. Proposal also has advantage of giving UN opportunity to protect UMHK facilities and Delcommune Bridge.

Since for the time being we wish to play out present Belgian track, we believe Gullion should explore Dean's suggestion strictly on a contingency basis with Bunche and Gardiner. USUN authorized similarly to explore idea with SYG on contingency basis. While probably less feasible, both Léopoldville and USUN authorized also discuss on contingency basis Dean's suggestion contained in 1136.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–563. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Sisco and Whitehouse; cleared by Cleveland, Williams, and Beaudry; and approved by Ball. Also sent to Elisabethville and USUN and repeated to London and Brussels.

2 Dated January 4. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–463)

3 Telegram 1134, January 3, transmitted the text of a message from Union Miniere Director Van Weyenbergh to Tshombe urging him to cease all destruction, carry out the Thant plan, and authorize liberty of movement for the U.N. forces. It also transmitted the text of Tshombe's reply, which stated that he was "disposed to cease further destruction" but "circumstances independent of my desire have forced me carry out these acts," that he was "desirous to negotiate execution of Thant plan" and would be glad to have "certain guarantees in order to permit me to pass into action." (Ibid., 770G.00/1–363)

4 In telegram 1135, January 4, Dean suggested that Gardiner send a message to Tshombe through Van Weyenbergh proposing to meet Tshombe between Jadotville and Kolwezi so that Tshombe could guide Gardiner with three companies of U.N. troops into Kolwezi, thus demonstrating his acceptance of U.N. freedom of movement. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–463)

5 In telegram 1136, January 5, Dean suggested as an alternative to his proposal in telegram 1135 that Gardiner or Mathu fly to Kolwezi, meet Tshombe at the airport, and ask him if he was willing to open the airport to U.N. forces and assist them to maintain law and order by securing Union Miniere facilities. The U.N. representative would leave if Tshombe's response was negative. (Ibid. 770G.00/1–563)

6 Dated January 4. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–463) For text of the statement, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 919–920.

7 Document 397.

404. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 404. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, January 6, 1963, 4:11 p.m.

1841. While Tshombe's military capability by all evidence very small, he may still retain ability control destruction industrial properties, bridges, railroads, power stations in Kolwezi area. With delay, this ability may grow stronger.

Department concludes UN must be encouraged to resume promptly movement to Kolwezi (either with or without Tshombe consent) to establish full freedom of movement and protect population, industry, transportation and power installations. Before movement resumed two steps appear necessary: 1. Approach to Tshombe requesting him to aid and cooperate in UN movement should be made by UN by both civilian and military. Think presence of UMHK would also be helpful.

2. UNSYG should issue public statement announcing approach to Tshombe and decision to resume movement. We will have some suggestions on this tomorrow.

Approach to Tshombe would somewhat differ according to whether he in Kolwezi or in Elizabethville: (a) In Kolwezi: High level civilian and military representatives, possibly General Noronha would communicate with Tshombe and announce publicly their willingness meet Tshombe promptly in Kolwezi going there by helicopter accompanied by UMHK officials, press representatives, etc., to work out details of UN advance of Kolwezi. They would reaffirm UN readiness guarantee Tshombe's personal security and freedom of movement if he returns to Elizabethville to cooperate on implementation of U Thant plan and discuss political questions with GOC representatives.

(b) In Elizabethville: Tshombe might well be in Elizabethville and attempt to enter into negotiations with Gardiner and Bunche. UN approach would then be made by any civilian representative UN would choose supported by General Prem Chand but UN should again explain Tshombe's political future depends on himself and Congolese people and is not responsibility of UN and refuse getting drawn into discussions or negotiations on Tshombe's political future.

To make above approach more effective, would be desirable for Adoula announce he willing to send emissary to Elizabethville to work out with Tshombe any unsettled details U Thant plan in order to facilitate rapid and peaceful integration Katanga.

If Tshombe should refuse to give UN freedom of movement into Kolwezi area or even to meet with Noronha, UN would within 48 hours announce they will resume advance at speed dictated by military considerations.

Request USUN discuss the above with SYG and Dean explore with Bunche and Gardiner.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–663. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Eisenberg, cleared in substance by Cleveland and McGhee and in draft by Ball and Kaysen, and approved by Williams. Also sent to Elisabethville and repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, London, and Paris.

405. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 405. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, January 8, 1963, 6:59 p.m.

1054. Re: USUN's 2632.2 We have been unable persuade SYG to instruct his representatives in the Congo to take initiative in talking to Tshombe in Elisabethville unless latter has previously made a statement giving up his scorched earth policy and permitting the UN freedom of movement. However, after representations we and Belgians made to him this morning, he has now urged Bunche to find formula whereby UN would contact Tshombe after receiving assurances from him via third party that he would cooperate with UN. Our view, energetically and repeatedly expressed to U Thant (most recently this morning by Ambassador Stevenson over the telephone from Washington) has been that UN should assume that Tshombe came to Elisabethville of his own accord in order to capitulate, Gardiner, Bunche or Mathu should immediately seek him out and tell him that first item on agenda was his renunciation of his scorched earth policy and willingness to permit freedom of movement for UNOC. After he had done this, the talks would proceed with technical questions of UN occupation of Kolwezi and other key points and then, presumably with addition of representatives of GOC, to the integration steps contained in U Thant's reconciliation plan. Main purpose of talks is to seek acceptance by Tshombe of UN freedom of movement. If this acceptance is not forthcoming, UN would be able to demonstrate to world that it had used Tshombe's return to impress on him need for cooperation and to obtain from him assent to advance into Kolwezi and other key points. Should such advance become necessary without Tshombe's cooperation, UN's record of pursuing peaceful road to last moment would be established beyond doubt.

In our view basic UN philosophy, grounded in Charter, calls for parties to dispute to enter into discussions for peaceful settlement; it seems untenable to us and most harmful to UN public posture that UN, when itself a party to a dispute, should turn its back on this basic tenet.

Such a posture, doctrinally so at variance with the public image of the UN, can also cause great practical difficulties. Whether or not Tshombe is in effective control of his province, he is still accepted as Provincial President. It seems to us that the most effective way of building up his prestige is to refuse to treat with him. This is all the more true when UN apparently is unable at present to move militarily to Kolwezi and Tshombe may control detonator switches whose activation can bring destruction to installations vital to continued prosperity of a reunited Congo. Far more important, the lives of African and European civilians and UN soldiers may be jeopardized by refusal to treat with the so far unchallenged leader of the Katanga. The UN bears a heavy responsibility in placing protocol above dialogue.

We also continue to be disturbed by relationship between SYG and his representatives in the field. SYG told us frankly that his major problem in arranging talks between UN and Tshombe was Gardiner's threat to resign if ordered to engage in negotiations with Tshombe. It behooves UN Reps not to let any personal animosities color their political judgment. It seems intolerable situation to us if basic UN policy is to be dictated by resignation threat of field representative. This can cause very serious problems for us in our continued support of UN.

Gullion should therefore seek out Bunche at once and express with great frankness difficulties our continued support will face if UN does not contrive to establish communication with Tshombe.

Dean should acquaint Mathu with our views.

Plimpton should continue press SYG as circumstances dictate.

Since foregoing drafted, Dept informed by UK Embassy Tshombe has promised make following statement: "I have come back to Eville for the sole purpose of bringing back as early as possible calm and peace to the Katanga and all its people. This consists essentially in rapidly applying the U Thant Plan without new effusion of blood and useless destruction. It follows from this that I should abstain in these circumstances from any declaration hostile to the UN."3

If Tshombe makes some such statement, addressees should urge UN Reps to seize on it as basis for dealing with Tshombe as suggested above.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–763. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Wallner, cleared by Williams and in draft by Beaudry and Kaysen, and approved by McGhee. Also sent to Elisabethville and USUN and repeated to Brussels and London.

2 Telegram 2632 from USUN, January 7, reported conversations between USUN officers and U.N. officials concerning the U.S. proposal that U.N. representatives talk to Tshombe about assisting the U.N. entry into Kolwezi. It reported that Thant was opposed to any discussion with Tshombe unless the latter publicly accepted U.N. freedom of movement in Katanga, renounced the scorched earth policy, and agreed to implement the U.N. plan. (Ibid.)

3 Tshombe returned to Elisabethville on January 8. Telegram 1157 from Elisabethville, January 8, transmitted another translation of this statement, which had been issued that day as a communique. (Ibid., 770G.00/1–863)

406. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Consulate in Elisabethville 406. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Consulate in Elisabethville1

Léopoldville, January 9, 1963, 8 p.m.

931. Policy—Congo. Re: Eville's 1160.2

1. I think your absence in Jadotville during return of Tshombe was prudent and is windfall for us.

2. Strongly concur that Tshombe's press statement is merely warmed over Tshombe.

3. Tshombe's intentions including his desire "to establish administration", cope with refugees, consider UN "terms" and return to Kolwezi for Cabinet meeting, are completely unrealistic and fall short of the categoric and immediate renunciation of sabotage, resistance to UN movement, and support of mercenaries which might save Tshombe. There is nothing in Tshombe's remarks which will detain the UN and GOC an instant in execution of next stage of their movements.

4. Re your draft statement, concur that these are just the things on which assurance from Tshombe is needed. Dept may decide to instruct us differently, but I would vastly prefer that American Consul make no communication to Tshombe and that these assurances be extorted by the GOC, "a third party" or volunteered by Tshombe as a result of hitherto unproductive counseling of a Frenkiel.

5. We have so far walked a difficult tight rope with our NATO allies, UN and GOC and may get home free without getting in bad faith position with any. GOC does not connect us with Tshombe save and allies do not seem to grudge fact that GOC makes a distinction in spite of efforts paralleling theirs. On basis my conversation today with Bunche there seems at least a meager possibility that such declarations from Tshombe could be secured by Belgians or British and I think this would be better for us.

6. Would like to note, however, my concern that any approaches to Tshombe at the present time may play his game. Although in accordance with Dept's instructions I have vigorously urged on Bunche a "third party formula",3 UN thinks even this tends to set up Tshombe as an "interlocuteur valuable", a position which he does not deserve and for which he may no longer qualify by being able to do what is expected of him, i.e. stop sabotage and control his men. (Bunche said he thought UMHK had at least as much influence over mercenaries as Tshombe. Would be interested in what you think.)

7. The situation is one in which I hope thinking men may differ but if the price of preventing damage to Kolwezi installations were to turn out to be return to Tshombe of his power to do harm, to frustrate will of legal govt, and Govt. of Belgium and of all nations in UN, to humiliate and defeat the UN; and to make the center of Africa ripe for radical leadership, then I think I would prefer to see Kolwezi damaged. (I hope that the alternatives are not exclusive.)

8. Finally, I have no reason to doubt GOB which says that UMHK reports gendarmes are in control of Kolwezi, but would point out that sabotage of UMHK installations does not so far seem to be on the announced scale. Would be interested in your continuing reports on sabotage possibilities and proportion of UMHK output and investment located at Kolwezi.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–963. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to the Department of State as telegram 1764, received at 5:03 p.m., which is the source text.

2 In telegram 1160, January 9, Dean reported that he had been in Jadotville the previous day and had played no role in Tshombe's return to Elisabethville. He commented that Tshombe's press statement issued the previous day (see footnote 2, Document 405) fell short of U.N. requirements and reported that according to Tshombe's Belgian advisers, Tshombe intended to "reestablish administrative services," to wait for a few days to receive U.N. "terms," and then return to Kolwezi to discuss them with his ministers. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–963)

3 In telegram 1160, Dean suggested the outline of a letter that he might send to Tshombe if the Department wanted him to obtain assurances from Tshombe that he was abandoning his earlier threats of sabotage and resistance to U.N. freedom of movement. Dean indicated, however, that he thought a U.N. letter would be preferable.

407. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and Secretary-General Thant 407. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and Secretary-General Thant1

January 9, 1963, 7:16 p.m.

TELEPHONE CALL OF U THANT

Sec said he called to express to him our deep concern over any posture on the part of the UN that they would not be willing to talk to Tshombe under any circumstances here in this present situation.2 It seems the UN in the very nature of its organization has to be in a position to talk to anyone involved in disputes or threats to the peace and Sec does not understand how the UN could be in the position of not talking to people.

Thant replied they never said they will not talk to Tshombe. If Tshombe would make a statement that he has renounced his "scorched earth" policy and would grant freedom of movement to the UN, the UN would be willing to talk with him. Tshombe's statement of last evening, although conciliatory, was not clear. He had asked that clarification be obtained from Tshombe which, if satisfactory, would have resulted in discussions. However, Tshombe had today, in a press conference, issued a very inflammatory statement calling for the destruction of the plants in Kolwezi in the event the United Nations moved on Kolwezi to assert its freedom of movement.3 As a result he had had to cancel his previous instructions and order Tshombe's house arrest.

Sec said Tshombe's statement of noon today was not entirely unexpected in view of the fact Bunche and others made it clear they would not talk to him. Sec said he does not know why someone can't go to Tshombe to get the statement they want. Thant said no one wants to see him. Sec asked if that has anything to do with the great issues involved. Thant said Tshombe will go back on any piece of paper. That is the evaluation of all the UN people who have dealt with Tshombe. No one has faith in him. Thant said that his personal policy had been for the United Nations to talk to Tshombe, even though everyone else was opposed to it. He had issued his instructions to this effect at 10:30; however, after Tshombe made his statement at 12:00, he had had to cancel his previous statement and arrest Tshombe. Everyone (apparently including himself) agreed that this was the best policy. He had made it very clear to the British and Belgians that Tshombe had been arrested in order to protect Union Miniere property. As long as Tshombe was in custody, he thought it much less likely that the property would be destroyed.

Sec said he supposes Thant takes it into account that the press release and action could lead to the demolition of everything. Thant said he will ask Tshombe, if he is under detention tomorrow, to make a public statement asking his people not to do this—these installations must remain untouched.

Sec asked if Thant is certain these factors that are operating locally in the Congo don't turn heavily on people whose personal feelings have become involved. Thant said that this is certainly not his own personal motivation, that he has consistently been in favor of dealing with Tshombe; however, he admitted that this was the mood of the UN people in the Congo. They did not want to see or negotiate with Tshombe in any way. Thant said the chief UN motivation was to prevent further destruction of property. Sec does not understand why if all this is so important it was not worth 30 minutes of talk with Tshombe.

Thant said that Tshombe has not yet renounced his "scorched earth" policy; in fact, some bridges were blown up yesterday. Sec said he is sure that did not come as a surprise.

Sec said he is sure Thant is doing his duty as he sees it under a difficult situation but Sec does not know whether we can follow him down this trail or not because we feel it important that the door be kept open by the UN to solve problems without destruction and bloodshed. Sec does not think door has been left open even for him to surrender. Thant said he greatly regretted that we were not in agreement with the actions he had taken; however, he felt that they were the best under the circumstances. Sec repeated this last. Said he hoped our paths do not diverge but if they do, he wants Thant to know there is nothing personal about it.

1 Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Calls. No classification marking. Drafted by McGhee based on attached notes by Bernau. Secretary Rusk was in Washington; Secretary-General Thant was in New York.

2 At a meeting with Thant that afternoon, Plimpton had urged that the United Nations open a dialog with Tshombe and request his renunciation of the scorched earth policy and his assistance in entering Kolwezi. (Telegram 2668 from USUN, January 9; ibid., Central Files, 770G.00/1–963)

3 Telegram 1169 from Elisabethville, January 9, reported that, at a press conference that day, Tshombe had declared that the Katangan government had made a firm decision to execute the scorched earth policy if the U.N. forces advanced toward Kolwezi but that U.N. freedom of action was a "question which can be negotiated on." (Ibid.)

408. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 408. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, January 9, 1963, 7 p.m.

1756. Policy. Congo. Deptel 1054.2

1. Immediately upon receipt of reference telegram I called upon Bunche and had two hours with him, during which Gardiner was intermittently present. I went over all points in reference telegram privately with Bunche and also left with him aide-memoire based on reference telegram.

2. In summary, I report that: A) UNOC does not intend to seek contact with Tshombe, at least until his role is confirmed by Central Government, nor had it as of noon received any instructions to do so.

B) It considers that any support Tshombe had is rapidly dissolving and that UNOC should do nothing to restore his prestige.

C) UNOC says it has nothing to discuss with Tshombe. It has already asked and notified Tshombe to provide UN freedom of movement in letters from the Secretary General. If Tshombe indicates his acceptance so much the better, but UN would proceed anyhow.

D) Bunche did, however, agree that it might be helpful if the "people who arranged for Tshombe return", i.e. Belgians and British, got from Tshombe a letter addressed to Secretary General confirming freedom of movement; or a certified interpretation of Tshombe's latest statement indicating categorically that he concurred in freedom of movement. UNOC does not, however, consider Tshombe's word good and, even if it were, does not believe he has control over gendarmerie and mercenaries.

E) UNOC considers that negotiations between Tshombe and it on its initiative would be gross interference with prerogatives of Central Government. There may become possibility of getting ball rolling if Tshombe approaches GOC.

3. In addition to points in reference telegram, I developed following: A) Situation with respect to public and Congressional opinion and its importance for US support of UN, and the indispensable character of that support.

B) UNOC ought not to be in position of victor who had his assailant down but refused to let him give up and kept on pummelling him.

C) Further variants of so-called third party formula.

4. Bunche replied in detail to points drawn from reference telegram. He said that he had just received telegram from U Thant instructing UNOC not to take initiative in talking to Tshombe.

5. Bunche denied he had received (as of about 1100 local) any instructions urging him to find a formula whereby UN would contact Tshombe after receiving assurances via a third party that he would cooperate with UN.

6. Re Tshombe's arrival at Elisabethville "of his own accord," Bunche remarked that Tshombe had also left of his own accord—his return was managed by our side powers, and UN did not oppose, despite all complications it would cause, because it had pledged itself not to interfere.

7. What the Department seemed to contemplate, according to Bunche, was a new negotiation with Tshombe. Tshombe could not be trusted, as any record showed. More recently on night of December 27 and 28, while Tshombe was trying to impress Prem Chand and Mathu with his efforts to halt gendarmerie fire, he had telephoned from adjacent room to Kolwezi asking mercenary planes to attack. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Moreover, Tshombe no longer had any power to deliver on his word even if it were good. Tshombe bound to play for time and UN could not fall into trap. If UNOC started talking with Tshombe about how and when its force could move freely, that whole force would be demoralized and dispersed.

8. Department's suggested "agenda" was not subject to discussion, but negotiation on a series of points. UN could not commit GOC to any such negotiation. In fact, glaring omission, he said, from my presentation was any reference at all to role of Central Government except to indicate it might be brought in on a negotiation in which it had pledged itself not to engage. There was no suggestion of seeking Tshombe acceptance to freedom of movement which the Secretary General had repeatedly notified Tshombe would be exercised. If Tshombe stated he would not oppose—well and good—but Secretary General was not going to bargain for it nor share that authority.

9. Whether or not Tshombe controlled "detonator switches" was problematical. In any case, it was blackmail, which should not be rewarded.

10. Bunche found completely unrealistic assumption that Tshombe was "unchallenged leader of Katanga" and preposterous that his prestige would be built up by refusing to deal with him. Tshombe only sought negotiations to salvage something. Gendarmerie defecting in quantities; Katangese officials in Elisabethville were cooperating well with those from Léopoldville; Tshombe power was dissolving.

11. Bunche rejected idea that UN was standing on protocol. It was, in fact, placing principle before protocol. It should not anticipate decisions of Central Government nor take steps which would reverse progress.

12. Bunche denied vehemently that threatened resignation of Gardiner had anything to do with UN rejection of US's course of action which he said he and U Thant had endlessly considered. He thought Department's apparent view of situation now existing in Congo was unrealistic and out of touch with facts. He had, however, always made it a principle that if USG thought he was giving bad advice to the Secretary General, he would withdraw immediately.

13. The Secretary General had already had difficulty with delegations in NY over permitting Tshombe's return at all. All UNOC officials, civil and military, as well as all of GOC had thought return a great mistake, but Bunche had insisted UN could not prevent his coming and that he be treated with correctness. He had, for example, insisted that he be allowed to occupy palace.

14. Already, however, admission of Tshombe had created great difficulties with Central Government and complicated its international relations. He and Gardiner had done their best throughout last night, he hoped successfully, to head off these complications (which I describe in my immediately following telegram).3

15. I said it was my duty to avert deterioration of relations between US and UN. Bunche said that also his goal. I asked what would happen if US decided not to supply equipment now being requested and en route. Bunche said this would be highly regrettable but UN would proceed anyway with mission which has now become of utmost importance for protection of life and property, although it would take somewhat longer.

16. During meeting with Bunche, he received text of Tshombe communique on basis of which I tried to find some formula for an entente. Bunche agreed that it would be helpful if the "people who brought Tshombe back" would get from Tshombe clearcut statement he would not oppose UN freedom of movement and would halt sabotage. I got impression that this might be letter to Secretary General, or some other certified interpretation by Tshombe of the statement he had made. Bunche thought that statement itself was ambiguous and inadequate. I also got impression, not categorically confirmed, that an approach by Tshombe to the Central Government might be a way to get the ball rolling. The British Ambassador has told me that Gardiner had said that this was move which was now up to Tshombe.

So far as Bunche is concerned he would still regard such statement at less than face value and of merely collateral value to course of action UN intends to pursue.

17. Bunche's attitude was firm, calm and confident. Gardiner was more relaxed [than] in some weeks.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–963. Secret; Niact. Received at 8:25 a.m. on January 10 and repeated to Elisabethville, USUN, Brussels, London, Lagos, and New Delhi.

2 Document 405.

3 In telegram 1757 from Léopoldville, January 9, Gullion reported that when Adoula heard of Tshombe's return to Elisabethville, he had protested vigorously to Gardiner and Bunche. They had told Gullion that they had persuaded Adoula not to denounce the operation publicly at least for 24 hours. Gullion had not been able to see Adoula and he thought the Congolese were becoming suspicious of the U.S. role. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–963)

409. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 409. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, January 10, 1963, 9 p.m.

2684. Congo. USUN 26732 and 2676.3 Mission officers saw Rikhye 6:00 p.m. today to be brought up to date on latest developments. Rikhye said Ethiopian battalion accompanied by six APCs had arrived at Mokambo and were camped for night two kilometers beyond town. Tshombe had returned to Eville and UN had report from unofficial source that he was saying that any UN advance beyond Mokambo was subject to negotiation with him. Rikhye did not know whether this was authentic report. In any event orders had been given to troops to take off at dawn for Sakania.

Rikhye said that in telex talk with Gardiner this pm SYG had made clear his view that there was no present basis on which to restrict Tshombe. He had directed that ONUC take no further steps with respect Tshombe which might confuse situation. Rikhye said that both Prem Chand and Mathu were of opinion that there was no reason to restrict Tshombe. Gave Mission officers copy of press release just being issued which gives UN position this point. Release fol by septel.

Rikhye said SYG had made very clear in his telex with Gardiner that he wants arrangements similar to those which assisted UN to proceed to Mokambo to be made with Tshombe through some intermediary for UN entry into Kolwezi. Gardiner commented that he thought use of Consuls had been overdone. SYG replied that he did not care who made arrangements but Gardiner must find some intermediary. Said that since Gardiner had refused contact with Tshombe, Gardiner must get someone else to do job.

When Mission officer asked why Gardiner objected to employment of Consuls as intermediaries, Rikhye said that Gardiner charged they were acting in their own interests. SYG had retorted to this that he did not care why Consuls had acted, point was that Kolwezi must be entered without destruction of facilities and properties.

At this point, Kebede had intervened on telex to say that only obstacles facing his men on march on Kolwezi were demolition and light fire. SYG again said that demolition was exactly what he wanted prevent. All he wanted do was get to Kolwezi without destruction being carried out. Tshombe appeared somewhat helpful and UN must take advantage of this.

SYG also said that Tshombe should be persuaded to go by air or road with UN into Kolwezi. He instructed that anything useful Tshombe said should be put out over radio. Gardiner terminated conversation by saying he understood SYG's policy and would do his best to carry it out.

Rikhye explained he proposed that first plane into Kolwezi, if that method adopted, should carry Tshombe and perhaps one of Consuls, together with senior UN military officer. Second plane, which would land immediately after, would carry company of soldiers who would assure safety of first group.

Rikhye said that controls on Kolwezi road still operating on "probe and edge" orders. SYG had pointed out in cable, however, that probing and edging operation thus far, even though it had met little resistance, appeared have resulted in demolition of bridges. Despite this he had not called operations off.

Comment: There appears to be some ambiguity in UNNY instructions to field on this point but apparently SYG, while leaving considerable local option, is depending on his instructions prevent demolition to curb advances which would cause unnecessary damage.

Plimpton

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1063. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Elisabethville, Brussels, London, and Paris.

2 Telegram 2673, January 10, reported that Rikhye had told USUN officers that the British and Belgian Consuls in Elisabethville had persuaded Tshombe to make a public statement that the principal purpose of his presence in Elisabethville was the total application of the Thant plan and that he would assist U.N. forces to proceed to Sakania on the Rhodesian border. He had so stated at his January 9 press conference but under questioning had made other statements which the press had highlighted. See footnote 2, Document 407. Nevertheless, Prem Chand and Mathu had arranged for him to precede a U.N. column to Sakania and instruct the gendarmes to cooperate. U Thant had accordingly instructed Gardiner not to arrest Tshombe unless he made further inflammatory statements. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1063)

3 Telegram 2676, January 10, reported that Rikhye had expressed optimism that U.N. forces might reach Kolwezi within 2 days, with or without Tshombe's cooperation. (Ibid.)

410. Memorandum of Conversation 410. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, January 11, 1963, 2:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

EUR—Beaudry, Andrews; INR—Good, Streator; CIA—Patterson; White House—Kaysen; AF—Harrop, Whitehouse, Fredericks, Godley, Rives; AFC—Carlucci; S/S–O—Connet; SR—Merrill; IO—Wallner, Sisco, Buffum, Rutter; DOD—Col. Junkemann; O—Grove; The Secretary; M—McGhee; AF—Eisenberg; S—Mr. Knepper; S/S—Mr. Nobbe; AFP—Mr. Schmertz

Godley noted that the most outstanding aspect of the political scene in Katanga was the Katangans had momentarily become fed up with Tshombe. The Katangans also are anti-Munongo. Godley was unable to establish just exactly how much political power [Tshombe] still exercised but Katangans seem to be becoming more and more pro-UN chiefly because this organization was identified in their eyes with bringing in food and supplies and relief. He noted further that Adoula was willing to play ball with Tshombe if Tshombe was reelected by the Katangan Provincial Assembly. If not, Adoula would refuse to deal with him in the future. Godley also had the impression that Adoula had favorably accepted Adoula's assurances about respecting private property. Godley also noted that communications between the Secretary-General and the UN people in the field had improved. Generally, Godley noted that there had been some progress made on the transfer of payments problem to the Central Government. He specifically mentioned that reunification of the currency had been for all practical purposes achieved and that the negotiators were now commencing to work out the technical aspects of this problem.

Commenting on the military situation in and around Elisabethville, Godley noted that casualties had been held down to a minimum. Tshombe's mercenaries had disappeared into the bush and seemed no longer to be under Tshombe's control. Bridge repairing was going on at a slow pace but reinforcement supplies were being brought in by the UN. The Katangan Air Force has just about been eliminated, although estimates of damage to it have been greatly exaggerated. Godley thinks there are still some Katangan planes camouflaged in the bush. Godley thought that our sending fighter planes to the Congo had now become a dead issue in view of steady UN military penetration into Jadotville and other places.

The discussion following the debriefing centered almost exclusively on what role the US could play in minimizing physical damage to power plants and dams in Katanga. It was decided that our efforts in this respect should center around Union Miniere since the latter had the equipment and facilities to help achieve this objective. In this connection, Robert Beaudry of EUR was instructed to draft a message to Spaak requesting his assistance in trying to win over Union Miniere to our cause. It was also noted that as a fallback position, the UN military forces in the Congo had received an increase in supplies and that there was a possibility of a parachute drop of UN forces into Kolwezi.

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2216. No classification marking. The source text, which is headed "Mac Godley's debriefing—Secretary's Conference Room," does not indicate the drafter. Godley had just returned from an information-gathering trip to the Congo. Participants in the meeting not previously identified include Robert C. Good, Director of the Office of Research and Analysis for Africa in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research; Edward Streator of that office; Philip Merrill, Special Assistant to the President's Special Representative and Adviser on African, Asian, and Latin American Affairs; and the Secretary's Staff Assistant William E. Knepper.

411. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo. 411. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo.1

Washington, January 14, 1963, 7:59 p.m.

1095. We believe Tshombe letters to Adoula and to U Thant and governments of Belgium, US, UK, France2 can, if exploited properly, provide basis for decisive break-through on Katanga problem, bringing about early end of secession and prompt implementation Thant plan. We believe therefore it essential that both UN and Adoula interpret Tshombe letter as irrevocable acceptance by Tshombe of end of Katanga secession.

From UN point of view there can be no serious question re desirability interpreting Tshombe letter as acceptance and complete justification for beginning "technical discussions" referred to by Thant in December 31 statement. If Tshombe cooperates in these technical discussions UN will have achieved fulfillment of its mandate by peaceful means. By discussions we mean merely quick dialogue to make technical arrangements providing for entry of UN troops into Kolwezi and we do not mean that UN should engage in negotiations with Tshombe in which it would be expected to give any quid for this quo except an amnesty.

We note Tshombe makes two separable statements. He is ready, he says, (a) to give UN troops freedom of movement throughout Katanga and (b) to "return to Elizabethville" to arrange modalities for application of Thant Plan.

We suggest therefore that SYG despatch Noronha immediately to Kolwezi after reaffirmation of amnesty to make technical arrangements for exercise of freedom of movement by UN into Kolwezi within 48 hours.

SYG would also indicate as separate matter that UN prepared to assist GOC and Katanga in giving prompt effect to Thant Plan through discussions between GOC and provincial authorities wherever they decide to meet.

For Léopoldville:

In your talk with Adoula you should draw on the same rationale as above in describing the need for interpreting Tshombe's message as capitulation. It seems to us that GOC interests best served in making arrangements for the immediate implementation of the balance of the U Thant Plan. We note that the only demand levied on the GOC is reiteration of amnesty which Kasavubu has already proclaimed. This should not be difficult to comply with.

Believe foregoing proposal can afford Adoula great opportunity and perhaps a few difficulties. Dept believes it would be useful for him to proceed immediately after UN entry in Kolwezi and accept Tshombe's reintegration into Republic. Believe his entry into Elisabethville should be one appropriate for Prime Minister of Congo State, that he should be accorded all honors of such a personage and should be accompanied by symbolic detachment of Presidential Guard and ANC band.

If Adoula does not go to E'ville he could announce that Katangan officers will be received in Léopoldville soonest and guaranteed safe conduct for oathtaking. He could also designate a special representative in E'ville to engage in technical discussions with Katangans and UN representatives to work out remaining specific steps of integration. Once UN freedom of movement assured throughout Katanga, Tshombe's ability to maintain secession will be eliminated and GOC should be able to call the tune in negotiations. Adoula should also realize that if freedom of movement can be obtained without bloodshed it will reduce potential insecurity that might be troublesome after UNOC troops withdrawn.

Letter from President to be delivered soonest follows:

"Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

I have just been shown copies of letters to you and to the Secretary General of the United Nations from Mr. Tshombe, in which he states his willingness to terminate his secession.

You stand at a critical moment in the history of your country. You have it within your hands to so manage Mr. Tshombe's readiness to renounce secession, grant the United Nations freedom of movement throughout all Katanga and implement the U Thant Plan that you may restore your country to peace and tranquility without further loss of blood.

As the leader of your country, you have already indicated on more than one occasion your intention to act with understanding and magnanimity toward Mr. Tshombe and the Katangan people. I am confident that on the eve of the results that both you and we have been seeking that you will continue to exercise this kind of statesmanship which will win for you the respect not only of your own people but of the world.

Once you have ended the immediate problem of the political secession of Katanga, you can turn your efforts and those of your people to the peaceful tasks of reconstruction and development. In this both the United States and, I am sure, the United Nations, will continue to give you assistance within the limitations of our means and ability.

Sincerely, John F. Kennedy."3

Re public affairs handling, we intend to delay public statement US reaction to Tshombe letters until Adoula and UN have first welcomed them.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1463. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Cleveland and Sisco, cleared by Williams and Beaudry, and approved by McGhee. Also sent to USUN, Brussels, and Elisabethville and repeated to London.

2 The messages were transmitted to the addressees by the Belgian Government. The letter to Adoula stated that Tshombe and his ministers had decided to end the Katangan secession, allow U.N. freedom of movement throughout Katanga, and return to Elisabethville to arrange "modalities" for the application of the Thant Plan. It asked Adoula to sign the amnesties envisaged by the Thant Plan and to meet Tshombe at Elisabethville to "confirm the national reconciliation and to put an end to the misery of the Congolese people." (Telegram 1093 to Léopoldville, January 14; ibid.) For text of the message sent to Thant and the Belgian, U.S., U.K., and French Governments, see U.N. doc. S/5053/Add.15/Annex V; also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, p. 650.

3 Telegram 1812 from Léopoldville, January 15, reported that Gullion had delivered the letter. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1563) For text of a January 15 letter from Adoula to Thant renewing the offer of amnesty for political offenses, see U.N. doc. S/5053/Add.15/Annex VII; also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pp. 650-651.

412. Memorandum by the Director of the Office of United Nations Political Affairs (Sisco) 412. Memorandum by the Director of the Office of United Nations Political Affairs (Sisco)1

Washington, January 16, 1963, 12:15 p.m.

CURRENT SITUATION IN THE CONGO

USUN has informed us of the following information which they have just received from Bunche.2

1. Tshombe has agreed to meet the UN in Elisabethville at 11 a.m. tomorrow to discuss UN freedom of movement into Kolwezi. Tshombe plans to fly to Kipushi and then motor by road to Elisabethville. Tshombe has proposed to discuss "modalities." The Belgians have apparently informed him that the United Nations is prepared to discuss "the manner and time" of entry into Kolwezi.

2. The United Nations intends to be represented by Sherry (UN Deputy Representative in Elisabethville) and by Prem Chand's Deputy, an unnamed Irish Brigadier. Ambassador Stevenson apparently pressed Bunche to upgrade the level of military representation so that Prem Chand would be involved, but Bunche resisted.3

3. According to present plans, Tshombe intends to return to Kolwezi after his discussion with the UN Representatives in Elisabethville, with a view to discussing the freedom of movement with his own people in Kolwezi.

4. The United Nations hopes that if the discussions with Tshombe on Thursday are successful, it will be possible to make peaceful entry into Kolwezi on Friday.

The above information was also confirmed in a call from Ambassador Stevenson to George McGhee.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/1–1663. Limited Official Use. Copies were sent to Rusk, Kaysen, McGhee, Williams, and Tyler. The source text bears Rusk's initials, indicating that he saw it.

2 Telegram 2752 from USUN, January 16, provided more details. (Ibid.)

3 A communique issued by Sherry, Prem Chand, and Tshombe on January 17 sets forth the agreements they had reached for the entry into Kolwezi by U.N. forces with Tshombe's assistance, freedom of movement by U.N. forces throughout Katanga, U.N. assurance of security for members of the gendarmerie, disarmament of the gendarmerie, and removal of mines and other explosives from Kolwezi. For text, see U.N. doc. S/5053/Add.15/Annex IX; also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pp. 651–652.

413. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 413. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy1

Washington, January 24, 1963.

SUBJECT

Next Steps in the Congo

1. Now that the UN Congo force has established its freedom of movement throughout Katanga,2 plans need urgently to be worked out for reducing the UN military commitment in the Congo, for retraining and integrating the various Congolese Armies, and for establishing the further "nation-building" programs that will be necessary to get the Congo off the world's crises agenda.

2. The United States objectives in these matters are plain: to reduce the United Nations military operation in the Congo as rapidly as possible, without incurring an undue danger of renewed civil warfare: (a) To make sure that Congolese military forces, provincial and national, are very much reduced in size, while increasing the efficiency, mobility, and responsiveness to civilian control of soldiers that remain under arms.

(b) To make sure that the Congo develops rapidly the ability to manage its own government and put its own economy to work.

(c) To get all of this done with a maximum of input from Belgium and other interested countries, with the minimum necessary aid from the United States.

(d) To use the UN system in such a way as to maximize its role in coordination, planning and technical aid, but minimize costly direct operations which will aggravate the already serious UN financial problem.

3. Real progress toward these goals will of course require changes in the political, administrative and constitutional conditions in the Congo that permit the UN to work itself out of a job there and encourage the continuing presence in the Congo of European technicians and administrators.

4. As a first step in planning the next phase, I have designated Assistant Secretary Harlan Cleveland to head a small planning group to develop recommendations on these points. He will leave January 28th for discussions in New York, Brussels and the Congo. The purpose of his mission is being described to the Government of the Congo, the Belgian Government and the UN in the following terms: (a) To consult especially with the Government of the Congo, the UN, and the Belgian Government in developing authoritative assessment of the minimum needs for external assistance and support for the nation-building phase that should now begin in the Congo.

(b) To develop recommendations on the extent and nature of the involvement in economic, military and technical assistance, through the UN and directly with the Government of the Congo, in nation-building aid, and to consider with the Belgians the respective roles of Belgian, United States and other aid.

5. Mr. Cleveland will be accompanied by a representative of the Agency for International Development and a representative of the Department of Defense. Colonel Ralph Rogers, who has been named as Chief of the Military Liaison Group in the Congo will also be going to Léopoldville at the same time, and will accompany Mr. Cleveland in his discussions with the Belgians on the way.

6. In view of his responsibility for the formulation and execution of US policy in Africa, Assistant Secretary G. Mennen Williams will be visiting certain key areas in Africa during February. He will be in the Congo and will confer with Congolese leaders and Ambassador Gullion generally and review on the spot the preliminary finding of the planning group with those concerned. The Bureau of African Affairs will continue to coordinate Congo operations.

Dean Rusk

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. The source text does not indicate a drafter, but the Department of State copy indicates the memorandum was drafted by Cleveland. (Department of State, Central Files, 332.70G/1–2463)

2 A statement issued by President Kennedy on January 21 reads in part as follows: "The end of secession announced by the provincial regime in Katanga and confirmed by the peaceful entry of United Nations forces into Kolwezi today is warmly welcomed by the United States and all who are concerned with the future of the Congo and the whole of Africa." (Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 55–56)

February–December 1963: The Congo After the CrisisFebruary–December 1963: The Congo After the Crisis

414. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State

Elisabethville, February 8, 1963, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 The Congo. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, and USUN.

415. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, February 21, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo, Proposals for U.S. Policy in the Congo. Confidential. The source text does not indicate a drafter, but a draft indicates it was drafted by Cleveland. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 The Congo-US)

416. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Williams) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, March 7, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 The Congo. Confidential. Drafted by Ford. The source text bears the handwritten dates "3/7/63" and "3/8/63."

417. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, March 27, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Series, Congo, February–July 1963. Confidential. Drafted by Kaysen; his handwritten notes of the meeting are filed with the source text.

418. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, April 6, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. A handwritten note on the source text indicates the memorandum was taken from the President's weekend reading dated April 11.

419. Memorandum From the Ambassador to the Congo (Gullion) to President Kennedy

Washington, April 6, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. A handwritten note on the source text indicates the memorandum was taken from the President's weekend reading dated April 11. Filed as an attachment to a memorandum from Kaysen to the President, which was also attached to Document 418. Kaysen noted that decisions as to whether to finance 2,000 extra U.N. troops and whether to provide additional support for retraining the Congolese Army were not immediately necessary and commented that he thought Gullion was unduly pessimistic about the economic aid available to the Congo from other countries.

420. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, April 10, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 29–1 The Congo. Secret; Operational Immediate. Repeated to USUN, Conakry, Brazzaville, Elisabethville, and Stanleyville.

421. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Williams) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, May 13, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 The Congo. Confidential. Drafted by Carlucci, Officer in Charge of Congo (Léopoldville) Economic Affairs William C. Harrop, and Officer in Charge of Burundi and Rwanda Affairs Arthur T. Tienken. The source text bears a note in Williams' handwriting: "Believe you'll find this worthwhile, Sir." There is no indication, however, that Rusk read it.

422. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 29, 1963, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) 8 The Congo. Secret. Drafted by Beaudry and approved in S on June 5. The conversation was held in the Secretary's office.

423. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 31, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. Drafted by Williams. Another memorandum of the conversation by Colonel William O. Gall, Assistant for Africa in the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, is ibid., Brubeck Series, Congo, February–July 1963.

424. Memorandum From the Acting Department of State Executive Secretary (McKesson) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, August 6, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. The source text does not indicate a drafter. Filed with a covering memorandum from Brubeck (who had become a member of the NSC Staff) to Bundy, stating that he understood the President had asked General Clifton about the status of Congolese army retraining. The source text bears a handwritten note stating that it was taken from the President's weekend reading dated August 9.

425. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Williams) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, August 13, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, PER-Gullion, Edmund A. Confidential. Drafted by Whitehouse. The memorandum was apparently not sent to Rusk until August 15, according to an August 15 covering note from Williams to Rusk. The initials "DR" on the note indicate that the memorandum was seen by Rusk. (Ibid., POL 23–9 The Congo)

426. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, September 6, 1963, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–4 The Congo/UN. Confidential. Repeated to Léopoldville.

427. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, September 9, 1963, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 3 UN. Confidential. Drafted by Sisco and approved in S on September 12.

428. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, September 20, 1963, 9:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 3 The Congo/UN. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, and Lagos.

429. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 4, 1963, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Belgium. Secret. Drafted by Director of the Office of Western European Affairs Francis E. Meloy, Jr. The meeting was held at the White House.

430. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 10, 1963, noon–12:45 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. Drafted by Alec G. Toumayan of the Office of Language Services. The time of the meeting is taken from Kennedy's appointment book. (Kennedy Library) During the last part of the conversation, others were also present (see the last paragraph). According to Kennedy's appointment book, they included Williams, Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs G. Griffith Johnson, Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs Robert V. Roosa, Hutchinson, Congolese Foreign Minister Kalanda, Finance Minister Emanual Bamba, Charge Mario Cardoso, and other members of the Prime Minister's party.

431. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, October 25, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. Filed with a memorandum of October 29 from Brubeck to Bundy.

432. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo

Washington, October 28, 1963, 6:40 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) 9 The Congo. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Ford; cleared by Williams, Johnson, and in draft by Richard M. Cashin, Director of the Office of Central African Affairs in the Agency for International Development; and approved by Harriman.

433. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State

Léopoldville, November 4, 1963, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL The Congo-US. Secret; Priority. Repeated to USUN and Brussels.

434. Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated.

414. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State 414. Telegram From the Consulate in Elisabethville to the Department of State1

Elisabethville, February 8, 1963, 5 p.m.

1375. Tshombe returned Elisabethville unexpectedly yesterday evening to surprise of his own staff which not alerted. He asked see me. After informing Ileo's2 Chef de Cabinet, I went Residence.

Tshombe appeared much rested but evident since now without sunglasses that his eyes giving him real difficulty and pain. Stated had spent past two days at hotel near Kariba Dam in Rhodesia under care of eye specialist from Salisbury. He intended go Salisbury this afternoon in order place himself under care of same specialist for few days. If no improvement resulted, he intended go Switzerland for further treatment. I expressed hope Tshombe would obtain Congolese passport for this purpose. He said he had charged Kimba with this responsibility.

Tshombe said two things had brought him back Elisabethville, (1) concern that General Muke had not returned Elisabethville and started important task reassembling Gendarmerie; he did not wish be accused bad faith this subject and Gendarmerie in bush represented serious potential threat to public order even though men themselves of good quality and could be retrained for constructive use. (2) In accordance Thant plan, he wished ask GOC what Cabinet positions it desired make available to Conakat so he could make his own nominations. Tshombe said he had returned in spite medical specialist's advice to take action these two points. I expressed hope he had taken up these questions with GOC directly rather than with me. He replied he had done so, but wished keep us informed.

Tshombe then said had third important point he wished mention. He had in past two and one-half years fought to best his ability for secession against GOC and US had sent its aircraft and Indians soldiers to kill Katangans. US had won and he had lost. He now wished if possible to cooperate with the US in the development of Katanga and the Congo with same determination he had used in opposing US. Before departure to Rhodesia, he had instructed his Cabinet and received its agreement to drop all hate propaganda and to cooperate with US to extent US willing cooperate with Katangans. He hoped US would be willing to do this and would not insist on paying off old scores.

I replied that we considered his policy had been in error and had caused his people much misery but, referring to January 4 statement,3 that US not moved by rancor or desire for retribution and wished leave his political future to himself and fellow citizens. Tshombe said he wanted in future to concentrate on economic development of potentially rich Congo, in establishing public order and the necessary conditions for attracting foreign investment and hoped be able cooperate with US for this purpose. In meanwhile, as long time businessman he recognized correctness of clearing accounts as basis good relationship and wished make clear past was definitely buried as far as he concerned. I read to him paragraphs 3 and 4 of Deptel 672.4 He said he agreed this approach, had no intention reopening the secession issue in any way.

In reply to question on tribal frictions in Katanga, Tshombe said he willing enlarge his cabinet to include more representatives of tribal minorities but that this dependent on future of Katanga, whether divided or unified. He clearly indicated he favored unified Katanga as thought North Katanga Government might be incapable of dealing with tribal minority groups in Kongolo, Lubudi and Baudouinville areas and with tribal chiefs in Kamina and Kaniama and that North Katanga without balancing element of south would be economically poor area which would remain in anarchy unless reduced by outright force and repression. Said nevertheless intended stay out of dispute on size of Katanga and leave this to others and to Léopoldville. He could get along well enough in South Katanga. Tshombe noted that Ambroise Muhonga, Chokwe rep in Balubakat cartel, who now on visit to Elisabethville, had visited Chokwe groups in Elisabethville, Jadotville and Kolwezi explaining to them that he had broken with Balubakat leader Jason Sendwe because of Baluba mistreatment of tribal minorities in North Katanga. Tshombe claimed relations of majority Lundas with Chokwe minority inhabiting same areas Katanga now much improved. He said he did not wish call meeting of Katanga Assembly now because would degenerate into name-calling post mortem on who was guilty of mistakes of past and as such would only block integration process. Would be time enough for assembly after main steps of integration completed.

Tshombe gave every appearance of intention to return Elisabethville after rest and cure. Stated he deliberately avoiding publicity for own sake and because in past press had proved more of enemy than friend. Have informed Kalala, Ileo Chef de Cabinet and Sherry of UN of above.

We believe that like similar Kimba conversation few days ago (Contel 1365),5 Tshombe's views can be considered as encouraging. His efforts get back on winning side and enlist US protection for own political future are transparent but nonetheless sincere indications that he considers secession over and is willing play along with integration. It is clear given review of past that this may be temporary tactic and that Tshombe may be merely playing for time before going back to old tricks. Equally evident that current cooperative phase presents sufficient opportunity, by taking Tshombe at word, for GOC, UN and other interested parties to consolidate integration and make such hopes illusory.

Dean

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 The Congo. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, and USUN.

2 Ileo had arrived in Elisabethville as Minister Resident of the Central Government on January 23.

3 See footnote 5, Document 403.

4 Telegram 672 to Elisabethville, February 2, stated that the general objectives of the Thant plan, as opposed to the Course of Action, were still valid U.S. policy objectives in the Congo, and instructed Dean to convey to Tshombe the U.S. view that the best means of ensuring fair application of the plan was for him to collaborate sincerely and honestly with Ileo and to make clear that the U.S. Government would not be party to any effort to initiate further negotiations on the integration of Katanga. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 The Congo)

5 Telegram 1365 from Elisabethville, February 7, reported that Dean had met with Kimba in Tshombe's absence and stated the U.S. views set forth in telegram 672. Kimba declared that a Katanga Cabinet meeting before Tshombe's departure on February 5 had confirmed that the Katangan government would confine itself to provincial administration and would seek to advance integration through direct contact with the United Nations and Ileo. (Ibid.)

415. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 415. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy1

Washington, February 21, 1963.

SUBJECT

Harlan Cleveland's Report on the Congo.2

I am attaching a copy of the report made to me today by the Planning Group we established last month to visit the Congo and recommend U.S. policies and actions for the "nation-building" period ahead. The mission, headed by Harlan Cleveland, included representatives from the Department of Defense and the Agency for International Development as well as the Department of State.

The highlights of the Report are contained in a ten-page Summary entitled "A Plan of Action."

Reintegration of the Katanga will continue to present important difficulties, but should no longer be considered the central problem of concern to us in the Congo. The central problems we can do something about are the retraining of the Armee Nationale Congolaise (ANC) and the provision of technical and economic aid as part of a vigorous program of financial and economic stabilization.

A striking feature of the Cleveland Report is its stress on the willingness and ability of several other substantial nations to carry significant parts of the aid burden during this next phase. But the fact that a good many countries will be involved means that we will need a strong coordinating mechanism, which can only be the United Nations, working closely with the Congolese Government in Léopoldville.

On the military side, this would call for a (probably Canadian) Brigadier provided to the Congolese by the United Nations; he would arrange for and supervise the retraining activity by several countries (Belgium, Italy, Norway, and perhaps Israel). The United States would be part of the military aid club too, through the provision of logistical support. It appears that the funds you have already earmarked for military aid ($4,000,000 in this fiscal year and $6,000,000 in fiscal year 1964) should be adequate to cover foreseeable needs. These needs do not include weapons, of which there seems to be a plentiful supply in the Congo.

On the economic side, the danger is a runaway inflation fed by uncontrolled government deficit spending. If not checked, this inflation could quickly undermine the success achieved to date in the Congo. The remedy lies in getting control of Congolese Government expenditures and will require both courageous decisions by Adoula to carry out an austerity program and the provision by the United Nations of necessary technical personnel. We propose to get maximum leverage from our assistance and to exercise direct U.S. leadership to see that the necessary steps are taken by the Congolese and by the United Nations, but cannot guarantee success.

It will be necessary to bring the Belgians, the European Economic Community (EEC), the Federal Republic of Germany, the United Kingdom, and other smaller contributors into an aid consortium with us, again under a "UN umbrella". The report projects a need for essential imports and fixed payments of about $175 million next year. It proposes that we plan to cover up to $80 million through PL 480 food, loans, and a declining amount of grants for import assistance. Loans have not heretofore been utilized in the Congo; but the longer range prospects for a rich and prosperous Congo are so bright that, the report suggests, we should be able to initiate a transition from grants to loans in 1964.

It is not necessary to decide just now on the precise amounts and categories of our aid to the Congo next year. We do, however, propose to take vigorous measures to maximize the contributions of others to the Congo, to encourage the Belgians to do as much as they possibly can, and to encourage the United Nations to take the leadership in organizing and coordinating technical and economic aid both for ANC retraining and for economic "nation-building". Mr. Cleveland will be seeing U Thant in New York Friday and the Belgians are anxious to learn our views on these matters before the visit of Prime Minister Adoula to Brussels, which starts next Monday.

Your approval is requested for the conduct of these consultations (without commitments as to aid amounts) along the lines of the Summary portion of the attached Report.

DR

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo, Proposals for U.S. Policy in the Congo. Confidential. The source text does not indicate a drafter, but a draft indicates it was drafted by Cleveland. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 The Congo-US)

2 The Cleveland mission report, "Proposals for U.S. Policy in the Congo," February 20, consisting of 103 pages and 8 annexes, is filed with the source text. A handwritten note on the report reads: "P approved 21 Feb." A revised version of the summary, released on March 1 as a Department of State press release, is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pp. 653-657.

416. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Williams) to Secretary of State Rusk 416. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Williams) to Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, March 7, 1963.

SUBJECT

Present Problems in the Congo: Information Memorandum

Despite some encouraging results from the events of December and January in Katanga, a number of important and difficult problems relating to the Congo remain. The Cleveland Report outlined many of the long-range economic and financial problems, and this memorandum is an effort to identify some of the more important short-range problems that are now outstanding. While there has been substantial improvement on many fronts, the basic problems—public disorder, political and economic instability, the possibility of a Bloc-oriented government, and Soviet intervention—which were responsible for the original large-scale US involvement in the Congo are still threats to the unity and stability of the Congo.

1. Public Relations

The events of December–January seem to have led to a public and Congressional impression that the Congo problem is now solved. This misunderstanding is very likely to cause difficulties for us during the next several months, particularly with the Congress as some of the problems mentioned in the following paragraphs become front-page news.

2. Retraining of the Congolese Army (ANC)

The ANC is not now capable of maintaining minimum standards of internal security in the Congo. To the extent that the ANC must assume responsibility for the maintenance of public order as the result of withdrawal of UN forces, we can anticipate public disorders that will undoubtedly involve Europeans and perhaps affect the ability of European-run enterprises to continue to function normally. There have already been some incidents in Elisabethville following the introduction of the ANC into that city. Such incidents will undoubtedly be exploited by Adoula's opponents in the Congo and by the opponents of the US–UN policy outside of the Congo.

We are encouraged by the Belgian Government's readiness to send 150–200 officers to the Congo to assist in retraining of the ANC. We have hopes that arrangements for implementing the Greene Plan can be completed in the immediate future. Implementation of the Greene Plan, and the reduction in number of the total manpower of the ANC that it envisages, is important not only for the creation of a disciplined army but also to relieve the Government of the Congo of a critical financial and inflationary burden.

3. Withdrawal and Reduction of United Nations Military Forces

The importance of retraining the ANC is of course related to the withdrawal and reduction of UN military forces. If the UN force is reduced or withdrawn before the ANC can be converted into a disciplined and reliable force, lack of internal security and public disorders may become problems throughout the Congo which will be beyond the capacity of the small mobile force the UN is now planning. In addition, such a premature reduction or withdrawal of the UN force could conceivably lead to a renewed attempt at secession in Katanga. Only a small fraction of the total 19,000 Katangan gendarmes have turned in their weapons and joined the ANC. Most of the remainder are still in the bush with their weapons and remain a threat to public order and, ultimately, even to the unity of the Congo.

Against the background of this difficult and dangerous situation the Soviet Union, in a letter to the Secretary-General on March 3,2 asked for the immediate withdrawal of all UN forces from the Congo on the ground that their function there had been completed and that their further presence was an infringement on Congolese sovereignty. This theme has since been repeated by Ghana and Cairo radio's Voice of Africa is broadcasting it all over Africa. ("The new Soviet proposal provides a glimpse of hope to leave Congo to its sons, who are capable of running the Congo today.")

The Soviet initiative has been followed by Ethiopia notifying the Secretary-General that it wishes to withdraw three of its four battalions within the next ten days. Ghana has also hinted at the withdrawal of its troops, and we understand the Swedes are considering a reduction in their contribution. If these unanticipated withdrawals should take place in addition to the anticipated complete withdrawals of the Tunisian and Indian combat troops, they might well snowball into drastic withdrawals of other contingents. As the apparent threat of civil war recedes and major troop contingents are withdrawn, governments that still have troop contingents in the Congo will find it increasingly difficult to justify their continued retention for many of the same reasons that brought US troops home from Europe at the end of World War II.

The problem of the withdrawal of UN forces is of course related to the problem of financing UN peacekeeping operations, which is now being considered by the Committee of Twenty-One in New York. The UN has just advised us that it plans to cut UN forces to approximately 6,000 by July 1, 1963. Such a drastic cut is undoubtedly motivated by financial considerations and the Secretary-General's skepticism about being able to pay for a larger force during FY '64. Another factor that is relevant to this financial problem is the concern that is being expressed by Afro-Asian representatives in New York about continuing large UN expenditures in the Congo which are not matched by similar expenditures in other parts of Afro-Asia.

4. Soviet and Related Initiatives

The Soviet Union's efforts to achieve withdrawal of UN military forces from the Congo will probably be pursued through established propaganda channels, as Cairo radio's broadcasts indicate.

The Soviet Union has also undoubtedly encouraged Ghana in its call for a Security Council meeting to discuss the report of the UN Commission that was appointed to investigate Lumumba's murder.3 As you will recall, the report suggests the possible implication of members of the central government, as well as the Katanga government, in Lumumba's death. Such a discussion in the Security Council at this time could only serve to embarrass the Adoula government (and its Western supporters) and to strengthen the Gizenga-led left-wing opposition in the Congo.

5. Reconvening of the Congolese Parliament

Parliament was scheduled to reconvene on March 4. Insufficient numbers of Parliamentarians have as yet arrived in Léopoldville to constitute a quorum, but a quorum will undoubtedly be obtained within the next week or so. It is anticipated that the opposition will quickly obtain a simple majority. The efforts of the Soviet Union and Ghana, described in the preceding paragraph, to effect withdrawal of UN military forces in the Congo will undoubtedly be used by the opposition in Parliament for a renewed attack on the Adoula government. The opposition will argue that the ANC is capable of maintaining order in Katanga and preventing new secession, that the UN's job in the Congo has been completed, and that the further presence of UN troops is an infringement on Congolese sovereignty. It will also argue that the central government's amnesty to Katangans should be extended to Gizenga, since Gizenga did nothing worse or different than Tshombe. Such arguments will no doubt strike a responsive chord with many Congolese.

The Parliament will also reflect the distress among the Congolese people which results from the financial crisis (which is described at length in the Cleveland Report), the current shortage of food and consumer goods in many parts of the Congo, and the disappointed expectation that independence would bring prosperity. The Adoula government which has until now been preoccupied with the Katanga problem will have to bear the brunt of the criticism that these economic ills are generating. Hopefully, the Government will be able, with the help of the UN, the US, Belgium, and others, to mount crash programs that will relieve the situation and give promise of long-range solutions to these problems. Meantime, however, we should expect that Adoula's Parliamentary opposition will exploit this situation.

The record of the Congolese Parliament is one of dangerous irresponsibility and incompetence. In order to be able to deal with it and control its more extreme adventures, Adoula needs to broaden the base of his government and, if possible, shunt Parliament off onto some special task (e.g., drafting a constitution). Unless such temporary palliatives are achieved, so long as Parliament remains in session, the continuation of moderate government and Western presence in the Congo is constantly endangered.

6. Situation in Katanga

It is impossible to predict whether another attempt at secession will or will not be made in Katanga. We do know that virtually all of the Katanga gendarmerie have disappeared into the bush, and we have reports that they remain in organized units and some apparently do not lack for weapons or money. We also have unconfirmed reports of the storage of numbers of aircraft (30) and other weapons across the border in Angola. On the other hand, many mercenaries have departed and, it is fair to assume, many gendarmes have dispersed and returned to their villages.

It is difficult to say what military adventures may be possible if the UN troops are reduced to such an extent that they no longer represent a clearly superior fighting force in Katanga. Contrary to the great concern expressed by our military attaches in the Congo, the UN military does not seem greatly concerned over the possible threat posed by the large numbers of Katangan gendarmes in the bush. Our attaches believe this lack of concern is related to the fact that General Prem Chand has been primarily concerned with the orderly departure of his Indian troops and that the UN has no other qualified military observer on the scene.

It is likely, however, that Tshombe (who is reportedly returning to the Congo this week) will be able to challenge the central government effectively on a number of issues. Further, if the ANC is involved in any incidents of public disorder, such incidents will be exploited by Tshombe's propaganda apparatus in order to weaken the central government. (It is interesting to note, parenthetically, that Struelens has told the Board of Immigration Appeals that he does not intend to close his office before the end of March, that is, not before the withdrawal of the Indian and Tunisian troops.)

Tshombe may again make an alliance with the opposition (which includes the left tribal elements that advocate confederalism, etc.) for the purpose of attacking the Adoula government. If Adoula's authority in Katanga can be successfully challenged, his government may well fall, and in the chaos that follows Katanga may make another attempt at secession just as it did during the chaos following independence.

Other political problems in Katanga pose a real dilemma for the central government. If Katanga remains divided into two provinces, Tshombe will undoubtedly be able to remain in power in South Katanga since it is populated almost entirely by his Lunda tribe. On the other hand, if the two provinces are reunited into the old province of Katanga it is not at all certain that the Lundas and the Lubas will remain in opposition to each other and thus it is not certain that Tshombe would be ousted in even this event. Moreover, if the two provinces are reunited, Katanga would become the most powerful province in the Congo.

7. Congo-Belgian Relations

We welcome the rapprochement that appears to have occurred between the Congolese and Belgian Governments and the spirit of close cooperation that is reflected in the recent Spaak-Adoula communique.4 Adoula's visit to Brussels and our information as to what transpired there reflect once again that Adoula is our best hope for a moderate leader in the Congo and one who is committed to running his government in ways that are consistent with the basic objectives of the West. Nevertheless, the appearance of overly close cooperation by Adoula with the Belgians could be politically disadvantageous to Adoula at home, but Prime Minister Spaak is aware of this problem and the dangers to Adoula that can come from embracing him too tightly.

8. Aid Problems

As the Cleveland Report makes clear, the Congo is a potentially rich country and, given massive aid and technical assistance for the next two years or so, can become self-sustaining. We are making every effort to get Belgium and other countries to increase their share of this aid. Our own contribution must, nevertheless, be substantial. We anticipate difficulty in the Congress on this issue, not only from those whose primary concern is with aid programs generally, but also from those Congressmen who evidenced a great interest in the Katanga issue and who considered Tshombe the most reliable bastion against communism in central Africa. Because of their views on the Katanga issue, many of them can be expected to oppose appropriations for support of UN operations in the Congo or for aid to the central government. By so doing they will place us in a dilemma for, if from the US, Belgium and others aid is not forthcoming in substantial quantities, Adoula's government may not be able to stand the strain and the door to intervention by the Soviet Union may thus be opened, thereby proving the arguments of those who have opposed our policy toward the Congo.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 The Congo. Confidential. Drafted by Ford. The source text bears the handwritten dates "3/7/63" and "3/8/63."

2 For text of the letter, dated March 2, see U.N. doc. S/5249; also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pp. 659–661.

3 For text of Ghana's March 4 letter, see U.N. doc. S/5253.

4 Transmitted in telegram 1324 from Brussels, February 28. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 The Congo)

417. Memorandum for the Record 417. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, March 27, 1963.

SUBJECT

Meeting with the President on The Congo, Monday, March 25, 1963, 4:00 p.m., Cabinet Room

PRESENT

The President; Mr. George McGhee, Mr. Harlan Cleveland, Ambassador Edmund A. Gullion, Mr. Robert West, Chief, U.S. AID Mission, Léopoldville, Gov. G. Mennen Williams, Mr. Edmond Hutchinson, Mr. Bronson Tweedy; Mr. Paul Nitze, Lt. Colonel Don P. Bolton; Mr. Carl Kaysen

Ambassador Gullion reviewed our achievements and problems in the Congo. We ended Katangese secession at a surprisingly low cost in lives, property damage and our relations with Belgium and Britain. If we compare our present position with the prospects in December on all these scores, it looks good indeed. On the other hand, the victory has not been complete. Tshombe is still hankering after secession. There are 8,000 armed gendarmerie still on the loose who have been paid for some months in advance. There is the problem of keeping the UN troops in the Congo in sufficient force to hold the country together. Adoula's political position is weak, and he has been unable to capitalize on our victory. Local pocketbook issues have been much more important in working against Adoula than the end of secession has been in working for him. The situation has improved in the last week, but the question of whether Adoula can make the necessary accommodations with his opposition to survive remains open. It is very important that the U.S. give aid rapidly now in order to help overcome the economic problems, and thus save Adoula. There are no alternatives to keeping Adoula or someone close to him in power. We have examined them all, and none are appealing.

Ambassador Gullion suggested that Generals Prem Chand and Noronha, the Indian troop leaders who won the Katangese victory be received by the President since they will be returning to India via the United States. (The President indicated no reaction.)

Governor Williams reported on the talks with the Belgians over this weekend.2 They agree with our basic political assessment and our desire that aid be conducted under UN cover, but be sufficiently bilateral in substance so that we can be sure it is effective.

Mr. Cleveland talked about the problems of the UN troops in the Congo. Rikhye at UN New York wants to move down to 6,000 troops by 1 July. Our own estimate, on which both Léopoldville and the JCS agree, is that a minimum of 8,000 are needed to maintain order. The cost difference would amount to some $3 million over the remaining six months of the year.

Mr. Cleveland also discussed the problem of the UN's desire for African participation in the training, and Adoula and Mobutu's unwillingness to have it. On economic matters, Mr. Cleveland said that we had reached a fair degree of agreement on the total and the shares, with an arrangement for a UN clearance mechanism to deter Bloc aid. Ambassador Gullion was skeptical of contributions other than the U.S. and Belgian. He thought the EEC might well do nothing for a year, and he was not sure the Belgians would be politically able to meet the commitments they had made. The President stated that under no circumstances should we give more than 1/2, and Mr. Cleveland and Ambassador Gullion agreed.

Mr. West reviewed the domestic and economic picture in the Congo with emphasis on the integration problems. The President and Mr. West discussed the export potential of the Congo, which should reach $450 million a year, in two years. It was now less than $200 million. The need for aid to permit industries to get up to full capacity was clear. When they did, the country could be self-sufficient.

The President returned to the question of what we do if U Thant refuses to allow the UN to play a role in the troop training program we have requested. Mr. Cleveland responded that we might have to organize a Western cartel of ourselves, the Belgians, Italians, and Norwegians, and deal directly with the Congo Government on this basis. This raised the question of how we contain bloc offers without a UN cover. Mr. Cleveland said that we would know in a week whether or not we had to face this problem.

The President asked further about Tshombe and his attitude toward integration. Ambassador Gullion responded that he was at best giving lip service to it. The great problem for us and the Central Government was how to get ANC troops in operation in the Katanga. Even now, the border at Dillola is not under Congo or UN control. There are now at most 3,000 acceptable troops in the ANC, and even these could not be left loose in the Katanga on their own. It was urgent that training get started.

In response to a question by Mr. McGhee, Ambassador Gullion said that Tshombe was awaiting the opportunity to re-create secession, and he himself would prefer not to deal with Tshombe if we could avoid it. The President asked how we should move in respect to other countries on the problem of economic aid. Mr. Cleveland responded that the next step was to get a firm program in Léopoldville for the rest of 1963 and 1964, indicating requirements and tentatively assigning sources. If the UN approved, we would use this as a sales document in approaching other donors.

The President then raised the question of whether it was desirable for him to receive Sir Roy Welensky. After some discussion, Mr. McGhee agreed that he would get a recommendation.

Governor Williams raised the question of a Presidential Unit Citation for the Air Force Transport Unit in Léopoldville which had run the biggest airlift in our history without a single accident. The President asked Mr. Nitze to report to him on this problem.

C.K.3

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Brubeck Series, Congo, February–July 1963. Confidential. Drafted by Kaysen; his handwritten notes of the meeting are filed with the source text.

2 Reference is to talks held March 21–22 in Washington with Rothschild and Davignon on Congolese issues. Telegram 1459 to Léopoldville, March 22, outlined the facts concerning the talks. (Department of State, Central Files, POL The Congo) Circular telegrams 1640 and 1642, March 22 and 23, summarized the conclusions. (Ibid., E 1–1 The Congo)

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

418. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 418. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy1

Washington, April 6, 1963.

SUBJECT

UN Troop Withdrawals from the Congo

You have asked if there is any action which should be taken to slow up the withdrawal of Indian troops from the Congo given the somewhat ominous news from Katanga.2 Such action is not possible since all but a support group of the Indian forces have already left the Congo.

The departure of Indian troops has been partly offset by the arrival of 1,600 additional Indonesians. The UN's total Congo force is now 13,360 men. Troop repatriations and rotations scheduled for April will reduce this to 11,560 by the end of the month. There are no known UN plans for further troop withdrawals for May or June. Therefore, action to limit UN withdrawals does not appear immediately necessary as the UN force level through April 30 appears sufficiently high to meet general security needs in Katanga.

While there have been a number of recent incidents, some involving Europeans, acts of violence have been characteristic of the Congo's history, and some can unfortunately be expected whatever the UN's force levels. In addition, while there are disturbing reports of the continued presence of Tshombe's mercenaries and military equipment in Northern Rhodesia and Angola, there are no organized rebel or bandit groups known to be active in the Congo at present.

We may well be confronted with a problem of maintaining an adequate force beyond the middle of this year. The UN is still in the process of assessing what the minimum requirements will be, with General Kebede in the Congo insisting he needs at least 10,000 men, while the UN Secretariat is considering reduction to approximately 6,000 because of the precarious financial situation in which the Organization finds itself. The U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff have concluded that a minimum of 8,000 troops are required. The extra 2,000 men recommended by the Joint Chiefs would raise the estimated cost of a 6,000 man UN force from about $5 million to $5.5 million a month.

The degree and extent to which the UN force can safely be reduced is, of course, directly dependent on the degree of progress in the retraining field. We are pressing for the early beginning of the ANC retraining program. The Secretary General, apparently influenced by African members of the Congo Advisory Committee, has been reluctant to endorse a program administered and paid for by individual nations under a UN coordinating staff. We are seeking to overcome this reluctance by representations to African countries both directly and through the Congolese Government.

Finally, as you know, the financial problem is critical. Funds even for the 6,000 troop minimum are not yet on the horizon. We are continuing to take a very hard line that, at this juncture, the US contribution to operations in the Congo should be no more than our proportion of the regular assessed budget, which is 32.02%, and we are pressing for others to pay their arrearages and purchase more bonds. The Special GA Session on financing Congo and Middle East operations will open on May 14. We will forward to you our recommendations in this regard by about mid April at which time we will have a clearer picture of what other members have done to reduce arrearages and purchase bonds.

DR

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. A handwritten note on the source text indicates the memorandum was taken from the President's weekend reading dated April 11.

2 An April 1 memorandum from Kennedy to Rusk reads as follows: "The news is somewhat ominous from Katanga. Is there any action we should take to slow up the withdrawal of Indian troops until the Congolese are in a position to maintain order?" (Ibid.) Telegram 3565 from USUN, March 29, reported that Bunche had told Yost of a report that "possible fourth round in Katanga in making." (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 The Congo)

419. Memorandum From the Ambassador to the Congo (Gullion) to President Kennedy 419. Memorandum From the Ambassador to the Congo (Gullion) to President Kennedy1

Washington, April 6, 1963.

SUBJECT

US Action re Congo in Next Three to Four Months

In response to your request, I submit the following suggestions with respect to US policy in the Congo in the next three to four months.

1. Adoula Government

In the absence of acceptable alternatives we should continue to support Adoula but should press him to carry out measures we have already urged on him to unify the country, improve internal security, curb inflation, fight unemployment, and check corruption. We can help him in the formation of a new political party, the unification of the labor movement and the creation of a loyal and effective propaganda apparatus and the development of public works projects. If necessary, we should support the Adoula Government in taking strong measures to deal with an irresponsible Parliament.

2. The Army

As the UN force is removed, the Congolese army cannot reliably take its place. Highest priority in the Congo must go to army reform. We should push the UN to accept responsibility for coordinating military assistance but if the UN still balks a multilateral training effort by reliable nations should nevertheless be put into effect immediately.

3. UN Forces

The UN plans to reduce its forces to 6,000 by July 1. The US should strenuously oppose this reduction not only in discussion with the UN but also with contributing nations. As a minimum we should press for an 8,000 man force. This means the US will probably have to finance the extra 2,000 troops in spite of the position previously taken by us in a UN-finance committee that we would not contribute more than 32.02% to UN peace-keeping operations.

4. Police

The Congolese police and surete must be reorganized and redeployed throughout the Congo and an American survey mission is now preparing a precise estimate of needs. Police instructors will be supplied by other nations and the US should supply logistical support.

5. Economic Aid

The Congo will require approximately $150 million of external aid for each of the next two years. We have made it clear to the Belgians and others that our contribution cannot be more than 50%. The Belgians agree to consider an import assistance program in addition to technical assistance. In my own opinion, however, it is doubtful that as much as $75 million to match our contribution will be forthcoming from other donors, e.g. the European Economic Community, Belgium, Germany, the UK.

Financial stabilization and economic recovery in the Congo cannot be achieved without expanded technical assistance programs. High priority must be given to the provision of an adequate number of technicians in the Congolese ministries and provinces. The UN has had difficulty in recruiting adequate numbers of qualified personnel and we should assist it in every way possible.

6. Economic Aid Coordination

Coordination by the UN is preferable to uncoordinated bilateral assistance not only to provide a rational program but also to make it more difficult for the bloc to initiate substantial activities in the Congo. We appear to be reaching agreement with the Belgians, the UN, and the Congolese upon the necessary mechanisms.

7. Katanga

So long as Tshombe lives, Katanga separatism is not dead. Nevertheless withdrawal of Belgian support for secession robs it of sustenance. The Katanga gendarmerie remains a threat to internal security. To meet this threat the following actions should be taken: (a) The most reliable three battalions in the Congolese National Army should be permitted to move into Katanga. This movement could lead to clashes and incidents but without it it is difficult to see how integration of the country can be secured or how the Adoula Government could maintain its position. We should insist that the Congolese and the UN take every feasible precaution to reduce the risks, including, if possible, UN command, mixed patrols and judicious interposition of UN forces between ANC forces and population centers.

(b) The UN should be urged to give an accounting of its mandate with respect to dispersal and expulsion of mercenaries, disposition of arms and registration of former Katangese troops.

(c) The remaining border posts on the Angola-Katanga frontier should be promptly garrisoned by UN troops (i.e. Swedes).

(d) Civic retraining and vocational placement plans should be put into effect for the discharged gendarmerie.

8. Angola

Tshombe has troops, some aircraft, and money in Angola and has secretly consulted with Portuguese authorities in Angola. The US should develop all the information it can about this situation and take appropriate means to block any Portuguese assistance to renewed secession. If there is any renewed attempt at secession we should support the UN in suppressing it.

Edmund A. Gullion

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. A handwritten note on the source text indicates the memorandum was taken from the President's weekend reading dated April 11. Filed as an attachment to a memorandum from Kaysen to the President, which was also attached to Document 418. Kaysen noted that decisions as to whether to finance 2,000 extra U.N. troops and whether to provide additional support for retraining the Congolese Army were not immediately necessary and commented that he thought Gullion was unduly pessimistic about the economic aid available to the Congo from other countries.

420. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 420. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, April 10, 1963.

2573. Re Deptel 1516.2 In call on Adoula this morning stressed conviction of USG that release of Gizenga would do him perhaps fatal harm at present delicate juncture and would moreover cause difficulty in USG, with US public opinion, and elsewhere abroad. After general discussion of possible alternatives to his release, Adoula said he planned: (1) call on Kasavubu, who had yesterday seen some of parliamentarians who were behind scheduled interpellation of Adoula and others on Gizenga matter; (2) propose to same parliamentarians that they name delegation to visit Gizenga at his present detention place, in company of medical team, which would then submit report which would have be reviewed, etc. He said important thing was to appease opposition, which might if not satisfied reunite and censure ministers or pass no confidence vote against govt. He hoped that these tactics would lead to gaining time until parliamentary vacation began around April 24. (In new twist of Congolese logic, he is now interpreting Loi Fondamentale to require 50-day session from March 4, i.e. half of 100 days provided by Article 69.) He is hopeful medical team might find that Gizenga required change of climate (i.e., treatment in Europe). I suggested USSR or bloc but he made no response.

Adoula pointed out that there was no legal way he could prevent Gizenga from returning to Congo should he go abroad as right entry to Congolese citizen guaranteed by Loi Fondamentale. He noted that this was type of problem which was a price paid for democratic institutions and added in obvious reference to Struelens that in US, because of same reason, it seems impossible deport even an alien.

Throughout conversation Adoula was quite relaxed and did not seem bothered that USG had not been able to suggest solution with all advantages and no disadvantages. He seemed most preoccupied over differentiation which he obliged to make in interpellation between Gizenga, who being held under administrative detention, and Tshombists, who enjoy protection of Kasavubu amnesty proclamation even from obvious criminal offenses which they have committed and for which, he added as he has said before, they could be tried by criminal courts.

O'Sullivan

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 29–1 The Congo. Secret; Operational Immediate. Repeated to USUN, Conakry, Brazzaville, Elisabethville, and Stanleyville.

2 Telegram 1516, April 9, replied to telegram 2546 from Léopoldville, April 6, which reported that Adoula had asked Charge James L. O'Sullivan to ascertain the U.S. attitude toward a plan he was considering to deport Gizenga "possibly to an African country," with prior assurance that Gizenga would not be permitted to return for several weeks. Telegram 1516 listed several alternatives in order of preference: to "maintain Gizenga in his present status," his voluntary departure for the Soviet Union or another Soviet bloc country (if that could be arranged), prolonged expulsion to another African country, house detention on the Congolese mainland, and unconditional release. The Department considered that the last three alternatives carried disadvantages and the last "would be most inopportune and unfortunate." (Both ibid.)

421. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Williams) to Secretary of State Rusk 421. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Williams) to Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, May 13, 1963.

SUBJECT

Status Report on the Congo2

I. ANC Retraining:

Following the failure of efforts to organize a military assistance program under the aegis of the United Nations, the Congo Government has formally requested the assistance of the United States, Belgium, Norway, Canada, Israel and Italy in undertaking bilateral programs.3 Belgian-American working-level talks are scheduled to begin in Brussels on May 8.4 We have suggested that the other four nations be informed of the talks and invited to meet with the American-Belgian teams at their conclusion.

We have been informed that as a result of the opinion expressed by the Afro-Asians during the CAC meeting at the UN, Spaak is now entertaining the idea that Belgium with United States support should handle the ANC training without the other NATO nations plus Israel. Spaak reportedly would not object if these other nations participated in this training, but he doubts the wisdom of Belgium actually urging this action on other NATO countries.

Ambassador MacArthur vigorously opposed this position and saw Spaak about it today.5 The Ambassador emphasized to Mr. Spaak that training by the United States and Belgium alone would make both countries more vulnerable to Soviet and Afro-Asian propaganda attacks than if a number of other countries participated, and that if in addition to the countries already asked, Nigeria and two or three other Afro-Asian countries could sit on a Steering Group to coordinate training, Western vulnerability would be even further reduced. Spaak finally agreed to the establishment of some coordinating committee. This question will be pursued by the Belgian-American group now meeting in Brussels.

Ambassador Stevenson is sending the Department a telegram6 in which he states that the African delegates in New York are far less likely to criticize ANC retraining conducted bilaterally by the former mother country, Belgium, with the US supplying necessary equipment. Some radical Africans oppose the heavy NATO flavor of the presently proposed trainers and the Arabs and North Africans strongly oppose the Israeli role. We may well have smoother sailing in the Special General Assembly, if we persuade the Belgians to announce their intention to proceed bilaterally with ANC retraining, Ambassador Stevenson argues, and then support Belgium if it is attacked.

II. Briefing of the President:

On Saturday, May 4, Mr. Carl Kaysen of the White House staff requested a memorandum on the current status of ANC retraining in the light of the fact that it was decided at the March 25 meeting with the President and Departmental officers that the policy of UN coordination or endorsement of the retraining would be pursued.7 Mr. Kaysen had noted the Secretary-General's subsequent refusal to provide such coordination or endorsement, but he believed that a paper was needed to summarize the developments. No specific decision to depart from the earlier policy has ever been taken officially, although the trend of events has virtually excluded any other policy except proceeding on a bilateral basis.8

III. Status of ONUC Forces in the Congo:

The ONUC Force in the Congo has been reduced from a maximum strength of approximately 19,000 men in January. The level is now about 10,000 and it will reach 6,800 by July 1. In view of the serious financial limitations of the UN, it is very possible that the Secretary General will authorize the complete withdrawal of ONUC forces by December 31 or by some date in early 1964. Much depends upon the outcome of the Special UN General Assembly on Finances opening next Tuesday. The importance of ANC retraining is underlined by our objective that a minimum acceptable level of internal security be established in the Congo by the time ONUC forces are withdrawn.

IV. Internal Political Developments:

After considerable soul-searching, Adoula finally announced on April 17 the composition of a new Government consisting of 26 Cabinet members and 9 Secretaries of State. The government represents an extensive effort at compromise to include members from as many moderate parties as possible, particularly Conakat and Abako. The radical Gizenga and MNC/Lumumba elements remain excluded. The new government has already weathered one no-confidence vote. Major changes from the previous government were a shift of Foreign Minister Bomboko to the Justice portfolio, and Interior Minister Kamitatu to Ministry of Planning. The new Foreign Minister is a political unknown, Auguste Kalanda-Mabita, a college graduate holding moderate views.

Parliament is currently in session but has proven more unruly than useful and will continue to pose a threat to the stability of the executive branch as long as it is in session. Persistent rumors indicate that President Kasavubu may recess the present session and recall it as a constituent assembly for the purpose of taking action on the draft constitution. The fundamental law of the land continues to be the provisional constitution.

The most recent development has been a mutiny by the Léopoldville police on May 3 apparently sparked by pay demands. The mutiny was quickly quelled by the ANC and the gendarmerie with very little violence, and the mutineers are being dismissed. Mobutu's prompt and courageous action in quelling the mutiny has added to the prestige of the Adoula government.

V. Katanga:

Ileo has done a creditable job in Katanga and relations between the central government and Katangese authorities are as good as can be expected. Katanga is receiving back approximately 80% of its foreign exchange, the amnesty has been respected and Conakat members have been given key positions in the new Adoula government. A sizeable number of gendarmes who remain in the bush pose a potential threat to the security of the area. Despite reports of Katanga mercenaries in Angola we do not believe renewed secession is a danger at the present time.

Tribal fighting in Jadotville and incidents in Elisabethville involving ANC troops have kept tension high. These incidents also point up the urgent need to get the ANC retraining program underway.

Several of Tshombe's Ministers have been censured by the Provincial Assembly and Tshombe himself is facing increasing opposition from within his party. Under pressure from the Assembly Tshombe has transferred extremist Minister of Interior Munongo to the Ministry of Health. The Conakat and Balubakat Parties have formed a common front and a movement to reunify Katanga is gaining ground.

VI. Economic:

The Congolese economy is today in greater need of urgent stabilization measures than at the time of the Cleveland Mission in February. Inflation continues, and the Embassy predicts a continued injection of printing press money at the rate of about 1 billion francs ($20 million) a month. Until government expenditures are reduced through adequate staffing, financial management, and reduction of military outlays, smuggling is curtailed, and foreign exchange controls become more effective, there is little hope for improvement. Although the Monetary Council wavers on the issue of implementing a partial devaluation which the Embassy believes essential, public uncertainty has raised the Brazzaville exchange rate from 250 francs to the dollar to 320 francs in the past few weeks. We estimate a balance of payments deficit of $60 to $80 million for the present calendar year.

Efforts to obtain increased aid from Europe have been impeded by failure to resolve the question of aid coordination and the UN role. The UN, in this area also, seems very reluctant to assume the responsibility we believe it should. The Belgians are thinking in terms of about $5 million in economic assistance, although they have taken no new action, and we hope it will be possible to obtain another $30 million or so from the EEC, UK, Germany, and other countries in order to match our planned overall contribution of about $75 million. We have delayed a planned DAC discussion of Congo requirements pending clarification of the aid coordination issue.

VII. GOC-Portuguese Relations:

Adoula is showing increasing concern over the possibility of chaos in Angola and has expressed a willingness to act as intermediary between the Portuguese and nationalist leaders if this would help. Adoula told us that, although there is no doubt that Angola will eventually be independent, he would not object to a long period of Portuguese administration which provides for Angolans taking over government posts as they learn to manage their own affairs. He was not more specific about what he had in mind.

We are indicating to the Portguese in a general way that Adoula has shown an interest in entering into a dialogue with the GOP. We are not revealing to the Portuguese that Adoula appears to be thinking of trying to bring them and the Portuguese-African nationalists together.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 The Congo. Confidential. Drafted by Carlucci, Officer in Charge of Congo (Léopoldville) Economic Affairs William C. Harrop, and Officer in Charge of Burundi and Rwanda Affairs Arthur T. Tienken. The source text bears a note in Williams' handwriting: "Believe you'll find this worthwhile, Sir." There is no indication, however, that Rusk read it.

2 A handwritten note "(as of May 8)" appears at this point on the source text.

3 For text of a May 12 letter from Adoula to Thant informing him of this, see U.N. doc. S/5240/Add.2; also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pp. 664–665.

4 Talks on this subject were held May 8–13 in Brussels. Records of the meetings were enclosed with airgram A–1336 from Brussels. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19–2 The Congo)

5 Telegram 1679 from Brussels reported the May 7 conversation. (Ibid., DEF 19–2 The Congo/UN)

6 Telegram 4093 from USUN, May 8. (Ibid.)

7 A memorandum on that subject was sent to Bundy under cover of a May 7 memorandum from Brubeck. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

8 A May 14 note from Sam Belk to Kaysen reads in part as follows: "The result of yesterday's meeting in the Department on ANC retraining was that we now stand solidly behind a multi-national approach. Last week there had been some talk of letting the Belgians do it alone, and it was agreed to review the whole subject." (Ibid., Brubeck Series, Congo, February–July 1963)

422. Memorandum of Conversation 422. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, May 29, 1963, noon.

SUBJECT

Congo Problems

PARTICIPANTS

United States The Secretary

Mr. William R. Tyler

Mr. Edmund S. Glenn, LS

Mr. Robert M. Beaudry, WE

Ambassador Rothschild

Belgium Foreign Minister Spaak

Ambassador Scheyven

Ambassador de Staercke

In the course of a general conversation, Mr. Spaak mentioned problems we are having in the Congo.2 He said the Congolese are about to introduce monetary reform, and that the US and Belgium are being called upon to bless this effort. Mr. Spaak has reservations about the specific program and pointed to the grave political consequences if the program should fail with US and Belgian support. Mr. Spaak urged that we engage the IMF in this exercise on the grounds that the Fund is the international organization with world responsibilities for such activities. The Secretary indicated agreement with Mr. Spaak if the IMF would be prepared to act. Ambassador Rothschild reported that the working group had reached the same conclusion earlier this morning after being informed of the IMF's willingness to become involved.

The Secretary asked where Tshombe is getting his money to pay the gendarmes. Mr. Spaak replied that according to his information Tshombe doesn't have much money and the gendarmes, while a potential danger, are not a present source of concern. However, after UN military forces leave the Congo later this year, the situation could be extremely serious. Mr. Spaak recounted that when he had informed the UN SYG of his intention to send about 200 officers to the Congo by the end of the year, Mr. Bunche, who was there, replied, "Only 200!". Mr. Spaak noted that the Congolese would like to have the Belgian officers exercise a command function but the Belgians are not anxious to become engaged to this extent.

Mr. Spaak urged that we establish a small, permanent committee in Léopoldville to follow through on the day-to-day activities of the various aid operations in the Congo. He suggested that coordination be centralized in Léopoldville as it is impossible to coordinate operations effectively from Washington, Brussels and New York. Ambassador Rothschild pointed out that the working group had agreed this morning on some such arrangement and Mr. Beaudry added that the representatives of the donor countries in Léopoldville would form a de facto committee. The Secretary asked what might be done to control corruption in Léopoldville and remarked that we would have considerable trouble with Congress over giving aid to the Congo if there was widespread corruption.

Mr. Spaak replied that the EEC is planning to try to create an administrative infra-structure in the Congo which, if successful, could go a long way toward minimizing corruption.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) 8 The Congo. Secret. Drafted by Beaudry and approved in S on June 5. The conversation was held in the Secretary's office.

2 Spaak and Williams discussed questions relating to the Congo on May 28. A memorandum of the conversation is ibid., POL 3 The Congo/UN.

423. Memorandum of Conversation 423. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, May 31, 1963.

SUBJECT

Retraining of Congolese National Army

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Governor G. Mennen Williams

Colonel W. Gall—U.S. Army

Major Romaneski—U.S. Army

General Mobutu—Commander-in-Chief, Congolese National Army

Mr. Cardoso—Charge d'Affaires, Congolese Embassy

After the usual amenities, the President asked General Mobutu what would be the effect of withdrawal of the United Nations forces from the Congo, particularly what would be the effect in Katanga. Mobutu said that before answering that question he would like to express his appreciation to the President for the hospitality and help extended to him during his visit to the United States and for U.S. assistance to the Congo.

The President replied that he was happy to assist the Congolese to maintain their stability and territorial integrity. He then asked what the United States could do now. Mobutu replied that the Congo needed bilateral aid as requested in a letter which Adoula had sent to the U.S. Government.2

The President then asked what was the problem of ANC retraining. Mobutu said that the Congolese had a good army under the Belgians but when the white officers left the army fell to pieces. He recalled an old French proverb that "there are not good soldiers and poor soldiers but only good officers and poor officers". The Congolese problem was not one of troops but of officers.

Mobutu continued that the second problem is one of materiel. While there were chances of a civil war some countries had been reluctant to supply the Congolese with materiel, but now with the problem of civil war passed it was time to provide materiel before the UN leaves. The President then asked Governor Williams what had happened to the "Greene Plan" and what the present situation was relative to military assistance. Governor Williams replied that the United States had sought to set up a military aid program under a UN umbrella. Recently it had become clear that the UN would not undertake to provide such an umbrella. Presently we were holding discussions with the Belgians and other countries asked to provide bilateral aid. The Belgians were ready to move almost immediately. He pointed out that the U.S. program was to be one of supply of equipment, rather than training, at which point Colonel Gall indicated the Army wished to provide maintenance training.

The President then asked Mobutu what assistance General Mobutu expected from the U.S. Mobutu replied that there was lack of materiel particularly trucks, communications, and other equipment.

The President asked whether the Congolese had technical personnel to take care of the equipment. Mobutu replied that 22 Congolese officers had been trained in Belgium and received a diploma in maintenance but that they needed many technicians in addition.

The President asked how many soldiers there were in the Congolese army. Mobutu replied that the goal was to be 25,000 but that presently there were more in the army because under the U Thant Plan they had to incorporate the Katangese and Kasai gendarmerie.

The President returned to his question whether Mobutu could maintain order after the UN's departure. Mobutu without hesitation replied that he could if he could get U.S. military aid immediately. He said he needed foreign technicians in all units of the army to improve its discipline, maintain equipment, and carry on its administration.

Second, he needed help in the organization and training of the gendarmerie. He needed officers and technicians for the gendarmerie and a school in which to train them. Thirdly, he wanted to establish a military academy but this was for the future after the provision of technicians and equipment.

Mobutu stressed that the foreign officers were to function along with the Congolese officers. He then added that it would probably be easier to organize the army and gendarmerie if he had better equipment, particularly since he then could transport those that had been trained to the places where they had to go.

The President said that the retraining and modernization of the ANC would take considerable time, perhaps a matter of years. Mobutu said that he had a plan to accomplish the retraining and reorganization and that it would take three years. The President then asked whether or not during this time Tshombe and others might not be too powerful, have a military force at their disposal and cause trouble. Mobutu said he didn't know because now the UNOC was present, but he didn't think they would. He pointed out that thanks to the UN, Congolese units were now stationed in Katanga and Kasai and would later have some foreign technicians to help. The President asked what nationality they would be. Mobutu replied, "Belgians". The President asked whether there would be any difficulty between the troops and the Belgians. Mobutu replied that since independence there had been a return to discipline and he thought that the troops and Belgians could work together. Mobutu further pointed out that there wouldn't be trouble when the UN withdrew. For example, the UN had already withdrawn from the Kasai and there had been no trouble. Mobutu continued, "If you give me equipment, I'll be ready."

The President asked what the US timetable was for rendering assistance, specifically when were we going to get started and when and what kinds of equipment were we going to send. Colonel Gall answered that we did not have at this time a bilateral signed with the Congo; that although we did not know specifically what kinds of equipment were needed, we had made up a small program based on the "Greene Report"; that the arrival time depended upon the programming lead time and availability of equipment; that availability of equipment in many cases depended upon production schedules of industry; that these schedules in part were influenced by the amount of money made available to the various services for procurement of equipment.

The President then asked who was in charge of the military assistance program. Colonel Gall answered that the Army had the responsibility, specifically the DCS/OPS, General Johnson.3

The President then said we cannot just go on talking about this program but it was important not to give the appearance of or in fact undercutting the UN. He would look into the matter himself. He was sure that Spaak would help but wondered about assistance from other countries.

The President then asked about the participation of other countries. Colonel Gall replied that five other nations—Italy, Belgium, Norway, Israel and Canada—had been asked to assist. The U.S. was attempting to work out a coordinating mechanism to make sure there was no duplication of effort. The President then asked what action the US had taken relative to the participation of these other nations. Governor Williams stated we had had some talks with them but that nothing was firm as far as he knew other than participation by the Belgians. The President said, "You mean only the US and Belgium have signed up so far to help on this program"? Governor Williams said Israel had indicated it was willing to assist in parachute training and believed they had started this training. Colonel Gall noted that training had not yet begun.

At that time the President invited the General to move out into the rose garden for pictures; he said, "General, if it hadn't been for you, the whole thing would have collapsed and the Communists would have taken over." To which General Mobutu replied, "I do what I am able to do." The President then commented that he had done an outstanding job.

The President then asked about Gizenga, to which Mobutu replied that if the army had been handling the matter it would have turned out differently but it was a governmental problem.

After moving into the rose garden, the General asked if the President would be interested in the conclusions the General had drawn from his trip to American military installations and the President said he was.

General Mobutu said his first conclusion was that he personally wanted to take parachute training for four weeks at Fort Benning and for two weeks at the Special Warfare School at Fort Bragg. The President later asked him whether he wanted to do it himself and whether he could leave the country and Mobutu said he wanted to do it himself and he could leave the country because he had some assistants in whom he had confidence, after all he had been in the United States already for a couple of weeks. He had the Minister of Defense's permission to take a course in France, but wished to come to the US instead. The President said he was delighted.

The second conclusion the General reached was that the US would not only have to supply materiel but training also. He remarked that he had certain Belgian-trained troops that he wanted to finish off by sending them to Fort Bragg. Thirdly, he had a good parachute unit already and had ten officers in this unit which he wished to send to Fort Bragg for training.

Fourth, General Mobutu said he hoped to send some Congolese students to Fort Leavenworth. He saw that there were other foreign officers there and hoped some Congolese could go.

The President indicated his approval of training for General Mobutu and for ten paracommando officers. He was noncommittal on Mobutu's other requests.

Fifth, Mobutu said that he had spoken to the military about a command aircraft. The President said he knew about this and Mobutu should have it.

As the President walked out to say goodbye to General Mobutu he said that there was nobody in the world that had done more than the General to maintain freedom against the Communists and that whenever there was any crisis in the Congo, Mobutu's name was mentioned.

The President said to Governor Williams he would like to know on the basis of the morning's discussion what decisions were now required in order to implement this program.4

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. Drafted by Williams. Another memorandum of the conversation by Colonel William O. Gall, Assistant for Africa in the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, is ibid., Brubeck Series, Congo, February–July 1963.

2 No letter of this nature from Adoula has been found.

3 Deputy Chief of Staff for Military Operations Lieutenant General Harold K. Johnson.

4 A June 7 memorandum from Rusk to the President outlined the current status of the program and stated that no further decisions were necessary at that time. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

424. Memorandum From the Acting Department of State Executive Secretary (McKesson) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 424. Memorandum From the Acting Department of State Executive Secretary (McKesson) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, August 6, 1963.

SUBJECT

Status of Retraining of Congolese Army

The retraining of the Congolese Army (ANC) has long been recognized as one of the imperatives of establishing an acceptable level of security in the Congo. It will be recalled that it was the mutiny of this force in July 1960 which led to widespread disturbances in the Congo. Although the level of discipline has improved in the past year, the ANC is far from an effective instrument for maintaining internal security, particularly in the light of the continued unsettled conditions which prevail in the Katanga.

The Government of the Congo requested the US, Belgium, Israel, Canada, Italy and Norway to assist the Congo in the "modernization" of the armed forces. Responses to this request and the actual implementation of a retraining program have been delayed by a variety of causes, commencing with prolonged discussion of the proposed program by the Congo Advisory Committee in New York in April 1963.2 The upshot of this meeting was the decision of the Secretary General of the United Nations not to allow United Nations participation in the retraining program.3

As of this date the United States, Belgium, and Israel have signified their willingness to participate. Canada, Norway, and Italy have not replied. Prime Minister Adoula is currently in Rome, and it is not unlikely that the Italian Government will agree at least to undertake the training of Congolese pilots.

The United States has concluded a bilateral military assistance agreement with the Congo4 and has assigned the chief of a small United States military mission to the Congo. Two additional officers will depart in mid-August. The necessary actions have been taken to assemble military equipment principally vehicles for shipment to the Congo in mid-September.

Israel has undertaken to train Congolese parachutists, and a first group of 100 men have been scheduled to fly to Israel in early August for training.

Although both Norway and Canada agree that the retraining of the ANC is a matter of great importance and urgency, they appear to be most reluctant to participate. The Norwegian Government notes that it has military personnel in UNEF, UNOC, Kashmir and New Guinea and that it is training the Ethiopian navy. It lacks the French-speaking non-commissioned personnel qualified to train a Congolese river patrol force. Canada also has many commitments for its French-speaking officers and has shown no inclination to provide a senior Canadian officer with a small staff to coordinate the program.

Belgium has negotiated a military agreement with the Congo and has had the chief of its military mission, Colonel Logiest (formerly Belgian Ambassador to Rwanda) in Léopoldville since early July. The arrival of other officers has been delayed by Congolese procrastination in reviewing the names of the officers proposed and by inter-agency squabbles in Brussels regarding their salaries and other administrative questions. We understand from our Brussels Embassy that this log jam is broken and that the first officers are leaving for the Congo at once. As the first increment of Belgian officers will have to draw up detailed plans for the retraining program and will also have to assess the degree to which the return of Belgian officers is acceptable to the rank and file of the ANC, the delay in the arrival of these officers makes it unlikely that training can begin before October. The program will, therefore, barely be under way by the end of the year, the time at which the Secretary General has said he would like to withdraw the remaining UN forces.

Ambassador Gullion, who is returning to Washington on or about August 9, is deeply concerned that the premature withdrawal of the UN may result in renewed outbreaks of violence in the Congo and a deterioration of the situation there, which could return the Congo to the situation prevailing in 1960.

On the other hand, the Secretary General feels strongly that the UN force should be completely withdrawn by December 31. Our Mission in New York believes that it would be extremely difficult to obtain the necessary two-thirds support for an extension in the General Assembly and that in any financing formula adopted the United States would have to pay a larger share of the cost than the 37 percent which we are paying for the UN operations through the final six months of this year.

The UN withdrawal and the ANC retraining program are so closely related that we will shortly be faced with the difficult policy decision of whether to seek an extension of UNOC. At the same time we will of course press the other participating countries to expedite the ANC retraining schedule.

Grant G. Hilliker5

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. The source text does not indicate a drafter. Filed with a covering memorandum from Brubeck (who had become a member of the NSC Staff) to Bundy, stating that he understood the President had asked General Clifton about the status of Congolese army retraining. The source text bears a handwritten note stating that it was taken from the President's weekend reading dated August 9.

2 Secretary-General Thant's statement to the Advisory Committee on the Congo on April 23 is printed in part in Public Papers of the Secretaries-General, vol. VI, pp. 309–311.

3 See Thant's April 29 letter to Adoula, printed in U.N. doc. S/5240/Add.2, Annex VII, and in Public Papers of the Secretaries-General, vol. VI, pp. 311–312.

4 For texts of notes exchanged in Léopoldville on June 24 and July 19, see 15 UST 142.

5 Hilliker signed for McKesson.

425. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Williams) to Secretary of State Rusk 425. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Williams) to Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, August 13, 1963.

SUBJECT

Policy Problems regarding which Ambassador Gullion is Returning on Consultation

Ambassador Gullion is returning to Washington for consultation August 13 for a period of approximately ten days. The following is a brief statement of the policy problems which we believe he will wish to discuss with you and with other senior officials of the Department.

Future US Role in Congo

The fundamental question on which policy clarification will be sought during the Ambassador's consultation is the question of the role of the US in the Congo over the next one to two years. As a result of its policy of forthright support of the central government and of support to the United Nations, the US plays a leading role in Congolese affairs. American funds, personnel, and prestige have been heavily committed in the Congo, and the degree of success which had been achieved to date can be very largely ascribed to the great effort the US has made to restore the unity and stability of that troubled land. The Congo continues to be plagued with serious difficulties. Rampant tribalism, the division of the country into 21 provincettes, a nearly runaway inflation, a costly defense establishment which contributes little to law and order, a central government with little authority in outlying areas, an incompetent bureaucracy—all contribute to a situation which can again easily become a matter of profound international concern.

It is consonant with US policy, however, that Belgium should take primary responsibility and play a leading role in the rehabilitation in the Congo. Since Spaak became Foreign Minister in April 1961, Belgian relations with the Congo have undergone a steady improvement. Belgium is presently providing over 2,000 technicians in the Congo and has undertaken to retrain the Congolese Army. The recent agreement between Adoula and Spaak on the division of the Congolese public debt may open the way to greater Belgian financial assistance to the Congo. With its large economic stake in the Congo and approximately 30,000 Belgian nationals there, not to mention the moral obligation of helping assure the future of its former colony, Belgium should be expected to provide a large proportion of the technicians and aid which the Congo desperately needs.

On the other hand, Ambassador Gullion and other observers question the extent to which Belgium can and will assume this responsibility. They note the lack of any substantial aid to date and the narrow view Belgium has heretofore taken of its role. The history of Belgium's relations with the Congo can lead one to the conclusion that while Belgium will defend its financial interest in the Congo, there can be considerable doubt whether it has sufficient foresight to pursue policies which will be in the best interest of the US in this important part of Africa. An increase of Belgian influence, in place of the US and the UN, could involve real strains on Belgian-Congo relations and on Adoula's ability to manage radical policy elements.

It is obvious that a clearcut decision cannot be made on this matter, and indeed no one is recommending that the US should commence a large-scale reduction of its commitment in the Congo. It is understood that the US must continue its aid and PL–480 programs and will participate meaningfully in the retraining of the Congolese Army. There is, however, a basic question as to the desirability of increasing our commitment and influence, as to the degree to which we should reconcile our policies to Belgian interests, and as to the criteria which should govern any steps to diminish our commitment in the Congo in order to increase the Belgian commitment.

Future Role of the United Nations in the Congo

Ambassador Gullion and virtually all diplomatic observers in the Congo, with the exception of the representatives of the Bloc, believe that the premature withdrawal of the UN may easily result in renewed outbreaks of violence in the Congo and the deterioration of the situation there, which could return the Congo to the situation prevailing in 1960.

The situation is particularly acute in the South Katanga, where the Congolese Army fears and mistrusts the local population and where the army has committed a series of brutal crimes. Only approximately 1,200 Katanga gendarmes have turned themselves in, and gangs of armed gendarmes have resorted to banditry. It is not unlikely that they are only waiting for the UN to withdraw to renew the struggle against the central government. In addition, the Congo financial crisis and the planned devaluation of the Congolese franc may contribute to general unrest owing to the decline of the purchasing power of the franc. In sum, there are storm clouds ahead on the Congo horizon which make the retention of UN forces, at least until the army retraining program is well under way, extremely desirable unless an adequate substitute can be found.

On the other hand, the Secretary-General feels strongly that the UN forces should be completely withdrawn by December 31. He believes that the Congo's security problem has become primarily a matter of internal rather than international concern. He is worried about the UN's precarious financial condition and does not wish to see the UN's potentialities handicapped by funding problems. Our mission in New York believes that it would be extremely difficult to obtain the necessary two-thirds support for an extension in the General Assembly and that in any financing formula adopted the US would have to pay a larger share of costs than the 37% which we are paying for the UN operation through the final six months of this year.

The Department has sent a circular instruction to the African capitals and to the capitals of countries who have participated in UNOC in an attempt to establish to what extent these countries are prepared to support the extension of UNOC until mid-1964.2 All of the replies are not in, but, as might be expected, a large number of countries have as yet taken no position on this issue.

Prime Minister Adoula has publicly stated that he hopes the UN will remain until mid-1964. The UK, Belgium, Tanganyika, Ireland, Nigeria, and Ghana all believe the United Nations should not withdraw, and Nigeria has expressed its willingness to maintain forces in the Congo on a bilateral basis, provided the necessary financing and GOC support can be provided. France, Norway, Sweden, Tunisia, Sudan, and several other states have shown either outright opposition to extending UNOC or very serious reservations. We do not know at this time whether the maintenance of military contingents in the Congo outside the framework of the UN would be acceptable to the Congolese Government. The financing, support, and control of such contingents present obvious difficulties.

Although the level of discipline of the Congolese Army has improved in the past year, it is far from an effective instrument for maintaining internal security, particularly in the light of the continued unsettled conditions which prevail in the Katanga. As the first increment of Belgian officers who are to train the ground forces are only just arriving in the Congo, it is unlikely that training can begin before October. This program will, therefore, barely be under way by the end of the year, the time at which the Secretary-General has said he would like to withdraw the remaining UN forces. It will be difficult to speed up this training program, as the Belgians are faced with the serious possibility that the return of Belgian officers will not be welcomed by the rank and file of the Congolese Army. It will therefore require time as well as tact to introduce an effective training program.

In the light of the above, the problem we face is whether the US should press the UN to defer the withdrawal of UNOC and, if such pressure is not likely to be successful, whether some alternate plan to retain foreign forces in the Congo can be developed that will be workable as well as acceptable to all concerned.3

Other Problems

Other problems such as the retention of a USAF unit in N'djili, the role of the US in the retraining program of the Congolese Army, the steps which should be taken to provide the Congo with an air transport capability, etc., can be resolved following clarification of the basic questions posed above.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, PER-Gullion, Edmund A. Confidential. Drafted by Whitehouse. The memorandum was apparently not sent to Rusk until August 15, according to an August 15 covering note from Williams to Rusk. The initials "DR" on the note indicate that the memorandum was seen by Rusk. (Ibid., POL 23–9 The Congo)

2 Circular telegram 149, July 24. (Ibid., POL The Congo USUN)

3 The August 15 note from Williams to Rusk cited in the source note above stated that a meeting the previous day among Gullion, Stevenson, Yost, and representatives of IO, EUR, and AF concerning the U.N. role in the Congo had resulted in a telegram approved by Under Secretary for Political Affairs Harriman indicating U.S. willingness to support the retention of a reduced U.N. force in the Congo until mid-1964. The reference is to telegram 189 to Léopoldville, August 14, which also transmitted the text of a letter from Williams to Adoula urging him to send a message to Thant confirming his view that U.N. forces should remain in the Congo for at least 1 year. (Ibid., POL 27–4 The Congo/UN)

426. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 426. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, September 6, 1963, 9 p.m.

725. Congo—force retention. When Yost saw SYG this pm he explored further SYG's position on UN force level. SYG repeated now familiar arguments concerning need for at least 6,000 men if force retained after end 63. Referring to list of incidents in Congo during period May–August prepared by Dept and delivered him by Mission through Bunche, he remarked jokingly that since UN force still around 8,000 level and unable prevent such incidents he doubted 6,000 could be expected do as well. List was therefore further argument for withdrawal. In more serious vein he explained his concern and his responsibility for safety of any force left in Congo.

Yost said we understood his concern but that we did not expect 3,000 man force be split up in small, isolated detachments. It would rather be concentrated in two major centers and its value would be perhaps more psychological than military. Experts in Congo thought 3,000 man force would serve useful purpose and obviously would not recommend it if they thought its members in danger.

Yost said we had thought financial res of approximately $10 million could be obtained in GA. Noting however that SYG talking in terms of at least $25 million, Yost said he very doubtful such res could be passed. He therefore wondered what SYG thought of different approach along fol lines: First an obtainable sum of money could be voted, with SYG given discretion on how to use it during six month period following Dec. 31. Starting with 6,000 men SYG could gradually reduce them, at rate he saw fit, bearing in mind amount of funds available and situation as it developed in Congo. Under such formula SYG might not find it necessary or possible keep troops in Congo for full six months but he would at least have provided transitory presence during additional period after Dec 31.

SYG did not comment directly upon this possible approach but neither did he reject it. He remarked that he still had to hear from CAC members Sept 10 and said he would issue his report Sept 16. In his report he would present problem and would lay particular stress on fact that if he were to be asked to continue any size force it would be necessary because of necessity of shutting off pipe line in Congo that he know will of GA soonest. He said he thought therefore that anyone proposing extension would have to arrange have general debate interrupted in order send problem to Fifth Comite. He thought this could be done in one mtg of plenary and that two-thirds vote could be obtained to send item to comite. He thought Fifth Comite could handle item in perhaps one week's time although he still did not believe sufficient vote could be obtained there to ensure adoption of res by necessary two-thirds vote in subsequent plenary mtg.

SYG pointed out Nigeria was only African state which had urged him maintain force. (In this connection he said Wachuku had indicated Nigeria willing maintain police at own expense and provide troop retention UNOC force.)2 Of all Arabs only Sudan had indicated support although he expected CAC members in general as well as Africans be divided on subject. Outside of Nigeria only countries urging him retain were US, UK, Italy, Ireland and Belgium. Federenko, who left just as Yost was arriving, reiterated USSR's long-standing opposition to continuance while Seydoux (France) had expressed France's opposition just yesterday. While SYG had no recent info on attitude of Latins he recalled that they had not been particularly enthusiastic in special session and presumed they were even less so at present time. He added that only 20 percent of funds voted for second half CY 63 received and said he thought no more than 60 percent of any funds which might be voted for first half CY 64 could be collected.

Comment: While SYG in no way indicated he withdrawing from 6,000 man figure, it was somewhat encouraging that he had obviously been thinking about how a res could be passed, if that were will of sufficient number of members, early enough in forthcoming session to permit him reverse present trend of evacuation troops. It may also be considered mildly encouraging that he did not immediately reject Yost's suggestion that there might be possible phase-down of 6,000 man force in first six month period 1964. It appeared he will at least give this suggestion careful thought. We still face related facts that very few dels have indicated to SYG a strong interest in continuance of force and that he has in no way abandoned his insistence on 6,000 minimum.

Plimpton

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–4 The Congo/UN. Confidential. Repeated to Léopoldville.

2 Wachuku touched on this subject in a conversation with Rusk on September 4. (Memorandum of conversation; ibid., POL 27–4 The Congo/UN)

427. Memorandum of Conversation 427. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, September 9, 1963, 11:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

Strategy at the 18th General Assembly

PARTICIPANTS

The White House—

The President

Mr. Bundy

Mr. Schlesinger

Mr. Sorensen (in part)

The Department—

The Secretary

Ambassador Stevenson

Mr. Ball

Mr. Harriman

Mr. Cleveland, IO

Mr. Sisco, UNP

Amb. Thompson, S/AL

[Here follows discussion of agenda item 1, which concerned an unrelated matter.]

2. Extension of UNOC.

Ambassador Stevenson outlined the difficulties we are encountering with Secretary-General Thant regarding retention of UNOC for six months beyond the end of this year. The President suggested that he might write to four or five African Prime Ministers. Ambassador Stevenson suggested deferring this matter until he has had a further opportunity for discussion with key Africans, including the Nigerians. The President agreed. He also agreed we should include an appropriate reference in favor of an extension of UNOC in the United States speech before the Assembly.

The President asked whether an OAU Force is not a viable substitute. Mr. Cleveland pointed out that, while such a force might be helpful in the Congo, there is danger that it might be used in other places in Africa, i.e., Angola and Mozambique. Mr. Ball likewise agreed. The President thought we might talk to the Portuguese on this matter with a view to seeing whether they would be willing to talk to the French. He thought the Portuguese might tell the French that the alternative to UNOC extension is an OAU Force which, in turn, carries risks for Portugal in Angola.2

[Here follows discussion of agenda items 4–7, which concerned unrelated matters.]

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 3 UN. Confidential. Drafted by Sisco and approved in S on September 12.

2 Kennedy had raised the subject of the extension of U.N. forces with Rusk in a memorandum of September 6, which noted that Gullion had spoken to him about the importance of keeping U.N. forces in the Congo and asked for ideas on how 3,000 troops could be maintained there beyond December. (Ibid., POL 26 The Congo) A September 13 memorandum from Department of State Executive Secretary Benjamin H. Read to Bundy responded to Kennedy's memorandum, noting that the problem had been explored at the September 9 meeting and that diplomatic efforts were continuing. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

428. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 428. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, September 20, 1963, 9:30 p.m.

920. Congo. Ref: tel #1 USUN 921,2 tel #2 USUN 922.3

1. Session with Bunche afternoon Sept. 20th was most satisfactory. Bunche was accompanied by Duran and Liu. US represented by Ambs Stevenson, Plimpton, Yost, Asst. Secy. Cleveland and staff; West present from Am Embassy Léopoldville.

2. There has developed a somewhat different atmosphere on Congo affairs in Secretariat during past week or ten days. On civilian operations, Bunche's takeover of responsibility plus sequence of small increments to Congo fund and Adoula's willingness to contribute hard currency to the fund, have created for first time in months, sense that Congo fund might actually get through 1963, and 1964 can therefore be faced with the courage to plan ahead. On military side, SYG's discussions with Africans, British, Belgians and ourselves, topped by President's public endorsement of ONUC continuing (not only in GA speech,4 but also in extemporaneous remarks to Secretariat by Americans5 and in private conversation with SYG and Bunche),6 have produced a mood into which SYG now willing to say he prepared to continue ONUC if funds therefor become available.

3. Congo military

On ONUC financing for 1964, Cleveland took line in paper, text of which in cable reftel #1. By meeting time, USUN and Secretariat Staff had agreed that total cost for force of 5279 (179 headquarters, 3880 combat, 1220 support) would be 20.2 million dollars, including battalion strength airlift. From this gross figure, it was agreed one million dollars could be deducted by transferring to civilian operations present ONUC charges for airport controls, meteorological personnel. Also deductible from gross figure is 3.2 million dollars of costs arising in local currency, which GOC might appropriately pick up. Net foreign exchange requirement for GA consideration is therefore sixteen million dollars for January–June 1964. Bunche said SYG would be willing to certify this figure to Fifth Committee as requirement needing to be covered by Assembly action.

4. On politics of GA action, Bunche said SYG had told President he thought it might be easier to handle ONUC financing question by inscribing a special item, despite presence on agenda of item for consideration ONUC cost estimates. SYG seems to feel that Soviets and French less likely to challenge inscription of a new item successfully, and might raise procedural dust if Fifth Committee simply proceeds under existing agenda item. We will consider this problem further here and advise.

5. Bunche also said SYG had told President that Congolese and Nigerians would be best ball carriers for ONUC financing proposition. He thought that Bomboko not strong enough to handle leadership discussion in New York, but thought Adoula's presence in New York would be impressive and useful.

6. Yost and Cleveland raised question of actions now being taken by Secretariat, such as proposed phasing out of Nigerian troops, which might prejudice continuation of ONUC before GA had fully considered the matter. Bunche said problem was of concern to Secretariat. On Nigerians, he said message just received from Prime Minister Balewa asking that Nigerians not be rotated home in October as presently planned, and indicated UNNY would honor this Nigerian request.

7. In this general connection, Bunche said that Seydoux in recent conversation with SYG had made firm commitment of $75,000 for UNEF as voluntary contribution, and weighed in strongly against any continuation of ONUC, strongly implying that French would pay up ONUC arrears when Congo operation shut down. We asked whether this was French promise or commitment, and Bunche said Seydoux did not go that far. No similar implied promises have been received from Soviets.

8. Congo civilian operations

Cleveland referred to paper (reftel #2) and summarized following elements of problem; US could finance Congo fund only on 50–50 matching basis. For some types of services US govt could enter into arrangements with Congolese to help Congolese finance continuing presence of operational personnel (teachers, doctors, judges, ministerial advisers, etc.) in either contractual form or "funds in trust" form as described reftel #2. Given these arrangements, plus transfer to ETAP and special fund of some advisory, developmental and training personnel, residual requirement for direct financing by Congo fund as such could surely be held below three million dollars, and thus be "manageable" for 1964 fund raising on 50–50 matching basis.

Bunche agreed that such arrangements would enable UN to continue to operate on something like its present scale, and provide framework within which progressive transfer of responsibility to Congolese govt could be carried out over one-to-two-year period.

Cleveland also stressed importance of maintaining Office of Chief of Civil Operations as central programming and coordinating agency. Bunche agreed that under financial arrangements above described, Congo fund would continue and therefore it would be appropriate to continue a UN civil operations presence on UN payroll in Leoville. He said that Office of SYG's Special Representative, who supervises both ONUC and CIVOPS, would disappear when ONUC disestablished, but that a special civilian operations or technical assistance representative would be maintained for duration of special UN responsibilities on the civil side. He pointed out that chief of civil operations already wears two other hats as resrep of TAB and country director for special fund, and framework is therefore present for eventual transition to normal UN pattern when UN responsibilities in the Congo eventually normalized.

On Congo fund for 1963, Cleveland said it would probably be possible for US to match not only salary payments for other operating personnel but cost of German telecommunications equipment being contributed to the Congo fund. Against new money requirement of 7.25 million in Congo fund for CY 1963, following receipts are therefore in hand or in prospect: (figures in millions of dollars): received from non-US sources so far 2.3; German equipment 8; received from US so far 2.0; probable further US contribution 1.0; payment to Congo fund recently agreed to by GOC .75; Total 6.75; shortfall .5 to be made up if necessary by further Congolese payment late this year.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 3 The Congo/UN. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Léopoldville, Brussels, and Lagos.

2 Telegram 921, September 20, transmitted the text of a summary of the U.S. position on financing of U.N. forces in the Congo, which Cleveland had given to Bunche at a meeting that afternoon. It argued that it should be possible to fund the cost of continuing U.N. operations in the Congo until mid-1964, and the United States was prepared to work with other countries and to pay a fair share of the cost. (Ibid., POL 27–4 The Congo/UN)

3 Telegram 922, September 20, transmitted the text of an informal aide-memoire concerning the financing of U.N. civilian operations in the Congo, which Cleveland had left with Bunche that afternoon. (Ibid., AID (UN) 8 The Congo)

4 Kennedy addressed the General Assembly on September 20. For text of his address, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 693–698.

5 For text of Kennedy's remarks on September 20 to staff members of the U.S. Delegation to the United Nations, see ibid., pp. 698–699.

6 No record of the conversation has been found.

429. Memorandum of Conversation 429. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 4, 1963, 11:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

Congo

PARTICIPANTS

United States The President

Acting Secretary Ball

Mr. William R. Tyler, EUR

Mr. Francis E. Meloy, Jr., WE

Belgium Foreign Minister Spaak

Ambassador Scheyven, Belgian Embassy

Mr. Robert Rothschild, Chef de Cabinet

The President inquired about the situation in the Congo. Mr. Spaak said the Adoula Government is weak and the administration is bad. It is hard for Adoula to take decisions. If Adoula can come to a decision it may be that there can be monetary discussions in Washington next week. Although the Congo Government is weak, everyone agrees that Adoula is the best man available. Belgian relations are good with the Congo Government.

The President inquired if agreement had been reached as to the period of time for which U.N. forces would be retained in the Congo. Mr. Spaak and Mr. Ball said that U.N. forces would be retained for another six months after January 1, 1964.2

Mr. Spaak said the Congo Parliament may give full powers to Adoula which would enable him to govern more effectively. In his view a democratic parliamentary system is not the best one for the Congo at the present.

The President said that he was glad that U.N. troops would be staying in the Congo. It is worth a great deal both to Belgium and to the United States that the situation not be allowed to retrogress.

The President asked Mr. Ball to provide him with a report on the training of the Congo army.3 He asked Mr. Spaak if the training was going fast enough. Mr. Spaak replied that until now progress had been slow but there were better prospects for the future. The President inquired who in addition to the Belgians were assisting in the training program. Mr. Rothschild said that the Italians had agreed to help train the Congo air force. Mr. Spaak also mentioned Israeli training of Congolese paratroopers.

The President said he wished to keep in close touch with Mr. Spaak regarding the Congo. He congratulated Mr. Spaak for his efforts and said the Foreign Minister had done a wonderful job and reiterated that we must stay in close touch. Mr. Spaak thanked the President and said the only way he could succeed would be to stay in close touch with the U.S.4

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Belgium. Secret. Drafted by Director of the Office of Western European Affairs Francis E. Meloy, Jr. The meeting was held at the White House.

2 On October 18, the General Assembly adopted Resolution 1885 (XVIII), authorizing the Secretary-General to expend up to $18.2 million for U.N. operations in the Congo from January 1 to June 30, 1964.

3 An undated report headed "Retraining and Modernization of the Congolese National Army," sent to Bundy with a covering memorandum of October 9 from Read, stated that the retraining program was moving very slowly. It concluded that it was necessary to find a way to move the problem off dead-center, and that efforts would continue to urge both the Belgians and the Congolese to expedite the process. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

4 Spaak also discussed the Congo briefly with Rusk on September 30 and with Ball on October 5. (Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2318, and ibid., Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330, respectively)

430. Memorandum of Conversation 430. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 10, 1963, noon–12:45 p.m.

SUBJECT

Congo

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Prime Minister Adoula2

Mr. Toumayan, Interpreter

After the initial exchange of greetings the President thanked the Prime Minister for the support the latter had expressed in his letter to him about the position taken by the President at the UN.3 The President indicated that the UN troops would not remain longer than six months and that by July 1964 the ANC would have to be responsible for maintaining internal order. Had the ANC reached a sufficient stage of development to that end? The Prime Minister replied that with respect to modernization of the army, from the military viewpoint the ANC was fully capable of maintaining order. The only drawback was the question of equipment. Today you could say that throughout the country the ANC was doing its duty, trying to be disciplined; the lack of transport and logistic support, jeeps, trucks, etc., prevented the army from reaching the point where it should be. Training was lagging behind because the Belgians do not want to go too fast with the reform of the army. There are some psychological difficulties which the opposition is attempting to exploit by telling the people that the Belgians will come back and take over their army; this demagogic attitude makes the soldiers hesitant. We can make them understand, continued Adoula, that there is no question of changing the leadership of the army, that they will be trained and taught how to use more modern equipment and that the aid they receive from abroad is intended to accomplish that purpose.

The President asked if it were true that there were only ten Belgian officers and those ten in staff positions only. Would they not need more officers than that? The Prime Minister agreed with the President. The President pointed out that owing to the size of the country and the guerrilla potential more officers would be needed. The Prime Minister agreed and stated that the Belgians were not prepared to send officers in sufficient numbers. The President stressed the significance of the July 1964 UN deadline and the importance of making progress before that date. The Prime Minister indicated that they were encountering difficulties with several African nations about their choice of the nations that would help them. The Arab countries in particular attacked their choice of Israel; yet 250 paratroopers had already come back from Israel, having received very good training there, and this effort would be kept up. It was essential to solve the problems of equipment for the ANC and of training abroad. The Prime Minister himself had traveled with sixteen student pilots on their way to Italy to be trained there. Norway had promised assistance to train navy personnel and Canada for training in telecommunications; these two countries had not yet acted on their promises. Nigeria had agreed to train the police force; talks were presently underway and a decision would be reached soon.

The President emphasized that the UN would not remain after an additional six months; in fact, U Thant had not originally wanted to do that much. The effort should therefore be concentrated upon modernizing the ANC, which would have to keep the peace in the face of serious difficulties. The Prime Minister responded that he fully understood this aspect of the problem. He felt that efforts would be made. They could not indefinitely take undue advantage of foreign aid, but should use it to help themselves get the country going. If during this first months they had been able to look after the security of the country they would have done so, but certain documents had fallen into their hands indicating that after the secession some circles were continuing to seek revenge; it was in order to avoid a bloodbath that the UN had been asked to remain for six months. "I pledge to you," continued the Prime Minister, "that we will apply all our efforts to be ready when the UN departs. We think you can greatly help us by impressing upon those countries which have agreed to help us the urgency of making good on their promises." The Prime Minister singled out Norway, Canada, Belgium, and Italy. The President assured the Prime Minister that he would personally take care of it, since he considered the matter to be of the utmost priority.

The President asked about Tshombe and what had happened to him. Adoula replied that as far as he knew nothing had happened to him and that he was in Barcelona keeping his powder dry (il prepare ses batteries) because he wanted to make a political comeback as a strong man. The President asked if he had not lost his financial means. Adoula replied that he thought so but perhaps not completely; anyway, Tshombe had something in reserve. The President asked if mining had resumed and if they were receiving the income from it. Adoula replied affirmatively and stated that they were in complete control of it. The President inquired about the state of agriculture, pointing out that the Congo used to be an agricultural exporter. What were the prospects today? The Prime Minister stated that there was a marked improvement with respect to last year. This year they were making efforts to send people back to growing crops, but in order to keep this up the rural people had to see an improvement in their standard of living, and commodities and consumer goods had to be available to them. Otherwise they would revert to a very low level of subsistence agriculture. This was partly tied to the road improvement program. If the interior could be reached, then cash crops could move. It was also related to the smuggling problem and the weakening of the currency. On the last point the Prime Minister was currently engaged in talks with the IMF.4

The President stressed that we do all we can to help the Congo, within the limits placed upon us by our limited sources stretched all over the world. We greatly admire the efforts of the Prime Minister over the last year or so. The Prime Minister responded that our aid had been needed in the past and would continue to be needed. The Congolese people greatly appreciated the interest the American people are taking in them. Even though some propaganda circles may attempt to distort the nature of American aid and make it appear that the US is trying to establish its rule over the Congo, the people understand that the assistance comes from the American people. While being grateful for it, the Congolese do not want to continue to rely indefinitely upon this aid; they want this aid to enable them to straighten up their own country so that they in turn can aid others.

The President asked the Prime Minister if he had anyone accompanying him and the Prime Minister indicated that his Foreign Minister and his Finance Minister were with him. The President then proceeded to the Cabinet Room with the Prime Minister [Governor Williams, Mr. Hutchinson, and Mr. Roosa were also in the Cabinet Room]5 where he repeated in front of the group his main points about the urgency of modernization of the ANC in view of the UN deadline. The Prime Minister responded at length, expressing his appreciation and reiterating the intention of the Congolese to do all they could to bring about a speedy recovery. He assured the President that our efforts were not in vain, that the Republic of the Congo had resumed some of the responsibilities of managing the country, and that the paramount problem was bringing about the economic recovery of the country.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. Drafted by Alec G. Toumayan of the Office of Language Services. The time of the meeting is taken from Kennedy's appointment book. (Kennedy Library) During the last part of the conversation, others were also present (see the last paragraph). According to Kennedy's appointment book, they included Williams, Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs G. Griffith Johnson, Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs Robert V. Roosa, Hutchinson, Congolese Foreign Minister Kalanda, Finance Minister Emanual Bamba, Charge Mario Cardoso, and other members of the Prime Minister's party.

2 Prime Minister Adoula visited Washington October 9–12 after attending the U.N. General Assembly in New York.

3 Dated October 2. It was sent to Kennedy under cover of an October 9 memorandum from Read to Bundy. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo)

4 During Adoula's visit to Washington, a number of formal Congo-IMF meetings and informal bilateral conversations among U.S., Belgian, Congolese, and IMF representatives were held. In a meeting with Adoula on October 11, Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs Harriman expressed the hope that Adoula and the Fund would be able to reach agreement on monetary reform and expressed U.S. willingness to be helpful in any Congo-IMF arrangement. (Memorandum of conversation; Department of State, Central Files, FN 17–1 The Congo) Telegram 423 to Léopoldville, October 13, stated that preliminary Congo-IMF agreement had been reached. (Ibid.) Adoula announced a program of financial and monetary reform on November 9. Further documentation on this subject is ibid.

5 Brackets in the source text.

431. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 431. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, October 25, 1963.

SUBJECT

Situation in the Congo

1) During Adoula's visit to the United States centrifugal forces seemed to be at work within the Congolese Government and there were reports of plans for various groupings to take over the Government. At the same time, leaders of the left-wing opposition escaped from jail and made their way to Brazzaville. Their colleagues, reportedly with assistance from bloc embassies were urging the people to follow the example of Brazzaville and throw out the Adoula Government. The school teachers' union went on strike and its leaders, together with those of the other major unions, called for the replacement of the present Government by a politically neutral government of "Public Safety" pending elections next year.

2) While probably not of significance in the current political maneuvers in Léopoldville, a substantial number of ANC troops at the Luluabourg garrison mutinied during the week of October 14. They arrested and beat their officers. The mutiny was finally put down by Minister of Defense Anany, who indicated it had been sparked by leftist parliamentarians who were assisted "by certain Embassies".

3) On Adoula's return, members of his cabinet presented for approval a "state of exception" decree. The decree was then signed by Kasavubu and put into effect on October 21. It imposed, in effect, martial law in Léopoldville and established a ministerial committee of three (Defense, Anany; Interior, Maboti; and Justice, Bomboko) to administer it.

4) Labor union demands became more insistent for wage increases and a change of government. They apparently thought that Adoula, an ex-labor leader, would be more receptive than the other members of his government. Adoula was under great pressure to initiate talks with the union leaders. In addition to the teachers' strike, other unions called for a general strike on October 23. The strike call was not universally heeded and failed. Nevertheless, Anany arrested both first and second level leaders of the labor unions. Ambassador Gullion is doing what he can to arrange for their release.

5) Anany has informed Gullion he will expel all Bloc diplomatic representatives (USSR, Poland, Bulgaria, Czech), except Yugoslavia, due to their "meddling" in Congo politics.

Conclusion:

The events of the last two weeks have enhanced Anany's position considerably. All of the major moves have been at his initiative and have, thus far, been successful. None of the moves seem to be directed against Adoula but the trend of events leaves Adoula on the sidelines with the initiative and control in other hands. It is impossible to forecast the effect of these events on the structure and personalities of the Congolese Government. Externally, the arrest of the labor leaders will cause the Congolese Government many difficulties both in the United States and elsewhere. By the same token, the expulsion of the bloc embassies will tend to identify the Congolese Government with the West and thus make it a target for criticism from the more "neutralist" of the Afro-Asian countries.2

Grant G. Hilliker3

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Congo. Confidential. Filed with a memorandum of October 29 from Brubeck to Bundy.

2 Brubeck's memorandum (see the source note above) stated that it might be useful to have a meeting with the President on the Congo soon to consider whether to support Adoula, turn to the potential new "strong man" Anany, or "stay out and let the dust settle." With respect to the Soviet bloc Embassies, it commented that the Congolese could more usefully "reduce bloc staffs to the point of impotence without stirring up issues of cold war politics." No record of a meeting with the President on the Congo in late October or November 1963 has been found, but see Document 432.

3 Hilliker signed for Read.

432. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo 432. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Congo1

Washington, October 28, 1963, 6:40 p.m.

497. Eyes only—for Ambassador. Dept has impression that, as result Washington trip, attitudes expressed on future aid (Embtel 901)2 and other matters, Adoula and others in Léopoldville may believe that USG is withdrawing support from Adoula. Such belief would be unfortunate and could have serious effect on relations within GOC. Ambassador therefore requested reassure Adoula and other key GOC figures in manner Ambassador deems appropriate that USG attitude toward Adoula has not changed. In this connection you may wish recall tone of President's conversation with Adoula, and Governor Harriman's expression assurance of our continued confidence in him (Deptel 422).3 Ambassador should also make clear to Adoula and others concerned that USG policy re future aid contemplates continued cooperation with GOC, UN, IMF and other donors in working towards economic stabilization objective. USG prepared consider use of its aid resources (including $22.5 million) support purposeful measures to this end. Although decision re devaluation requires reconsideration modalities US aid, we have no rigid position and are prepared accept decision, and work with others to develop and support reasonable program for future.

Embtel 9254 and other recent Embassy cables raise basic policy questions. Basic US objective continues to be Western oriented Congo governed in such a way as to achieve maximum progress toward economic and political stability. Dept believes that future Government of Congo will continue to be coalition of basic power forces. In past this has been represented by Binza group.5 It is therefore essential to know who as leader can make the coalition function most effectively toward achievement of our basic objectives. In past we have seen no alternative to Adoula in this role. Whether Adoula, Anany, or some other individual can fulfill this role depends in large measure on attitudes toward them of other key figures involved: Mobutu, Nendaka, Ndele, Bomboko, Kasavubu, etc. In connection with any consideration of Anany as potential Prime Minister, would be important to know whether he can and would be willing work effectively with other members Binza group in developing agreed position on constitutional issues and political party. Would appreciate Ambassador's assessment these basic questions and attitudes these individuals. Would also appreciate Ambassador's suggestions as to need for and nature of any additional means indicate at this time our continued support for Adoula.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) 9 The Congo. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Ford; cleared by Williams, Johnson, and in draft by Richard M. Cashin, Director of the Office of Central African Affairs in the Agency for International Development; and approved by Harriman.

2 Telegram 901, October 28, reported discussions concerning U.S. financial assistance to the Congo. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 422, October 12, summarized the October 11 meeting between Adoula and Harriman (see footnote 3, Document 430). (Department of State, Central Files, FN 17–1 The Congo)

4 In telegram 925, October 25, Gullion commented that a government dominated by Anany "would make short work of non-alignment policy, would be vigorous, decisive and well-disposed toward U.S. On other hand, it would probably be obscurantist, arbitrary, primitive, totalitarian, willful and [garble—irresponsible?]." He reported that he had expressed to Adoula and the members of the "triumvirate" misgivings on the arrest of the labor leaders, sent them a clipping on the attitudes of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee showing an inverse relation between foreign aid and dictatorial acts, and made clear to them the dangers of commissions usurping the role of the government, hinting that aid to the Congo could be jeopardized; he also suggested further pressures that might be applied. (Attached to the source text; also in Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–2 The Congo)

5 Reference is to an informal group of Congolese leaders that included Mobutu, Bomboko, and Nendaka.234

433. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State 433. Telegram From the Embassy in the Congo to the Department of State1

Léopoldville, November 4, 1963, 2 p.m.

969. 1. During consultations this weekend between Godley and Govt. officials (including Adoula and Mobutu) and also meetings of Amb, there came to light acute case of jitters among Congolese officials which led some to believe, or profess to believe, that USG had decided Adoula govt. was lost cause and was proceeding to transfer its support to an opposition group led by jailed labor leaders. As usual in Congo, intensity of conviction increased farther the observer was placed from events. Thus Mobutu, who has been sitting things out in usual hamlet manner, was most worried of govt. team. In support of their hypothesis they had dreamed up everything from missed appointments in Leo to [garble] coup d'etat in Vietnam.

2. [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

3. Adoula's own past relations with labor movement and his apparent inability or unwillingness to give his colleagues straight story on his own connection with Irving Brown (he invited him to Leo); and his attitude on arrest of labor leaders (he was against it) seems further to have agitated his companions.

4. Of group Adoula seemed least concerned. Kasavubu not at all.

5. Godley's meetings Nov. 2 and 3 appeared to have disabused group of their worst fears. Also seem to have had effect of increasing their understanding of their dependence on Adoula or rather on Adoula's reputation in outside world.

6. At any rate when at Adoula's request I met with him, Mobutu, Bomboko and Nendaka their fears had grown less; in fact it was I who had to bring matter up in interest of clearing the air. Even if I did not dispel every last suspicion, believe I succeeded in curing hallucinations about US intrigue with labor leaders. I assured them Adoula-led GOC continued have Emb. support. I reviewed whole record of US involvement with GOC and UN from days of Kitona and rounds two and three; referred to US stake of 350 million dollars in Congo. Told group that we had recently furnished to Adoula material for his forthcoming speech citing aid he could expect from US.

7. Then took occasion explain to group that while US citizens could understand closing of parliament and reasons for state of exception (in view threat to state), GOC should realize what kind of people we were; that principal support up to now for US policies in support of UN and Adoula came from just those sources which extreme dictatorial action could alienate. Also said it was natural for USG to be interested in how institution of commissioners regime affected responsibilities of GOC and of its head.

8. Group absorbed these remarks with little comment. Bomboko as spokesman reiterated their continuing firm solidarity with Adoula and others volunteered affirmation their determination proceed with constitution drafting to be followed by early elections. Expressed their confidence in latter provided they had help. After meeting Adoula told me it had been useful in clearing up confusion.

9. I believe GOC largely over its uneasiness and that meeting had salutary aspect in letting Binza group know it should not take USG for granted no matter what.

10. Nervousness and insecurity of group, of course, mean that it must be handled with special care and understanding. We do not yet have discernible alternative, and in Adoula, despite his faults, we have credible international figure.

11. At same time we should be aware that A. Despite group's renewed conviction that they need Adoula, they have never shown less concern for him than in last few weeks.

B. Adoula can still hold group together but characteristically he does it by playing on misinformation and suspicions, e.g. by letting them persist in illusion re labor intrigue which he could have set right immediately.

C. Despite considerable new decisiveness and efficiency, discernible in such things as propaganda and security, group is far from out of woods and will not be so long as economic difficulties persist and corruption is unchecked.

Gullion

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL The Congo-US. Secret; Priority. Repeated to USUN and Brussels.

434. Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency 434. Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated.

[Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Congressional Affairs, Review Staff Files. Sensitive. Extracts—10 pages of source text not declassified.]

Index Index

Abbas, Mekki, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 38], 9 8n [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 51],119–120 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 57], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 61],140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 67]

Abboud, Ibrahim, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 35], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 38]

Achilles, Theodore C, 291n [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 149]

Acly, R. Austin, 393n [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 208]

Adamafio, Tawiah, 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 45]

Adeel, Omar Abdel Hamid, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 38]

Adoula, Cyrille (see also Adoula government), 126–127 [Pgs. 126–127 include portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 130n [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 62], 145n [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 72], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 80]

Katanga reintegration, 313–314 [Pgs. 313–314 include portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 325–327 [Pgs. 325–327 include portions of Doc. 168, Doc. 169, and Doc. 170], 517–518 [Pgs. 517–518 include portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

economic measures, 469–470 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 242]

Kitona Accord implementation, 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 209]

McGhee visit, 584–586 [Pgs. 584–586 include portions of Doc. 295, Doc. 296, and Doc. 297], 600–601 [Pgs. 600–601 include portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

troop movements and, 574–577 [Pgs. 574–577 include portions of Doc. 289, Doc. 290, and Doc. 291]

Tshombe-Adoula meeting resumption, 407–409 [Pgs. 407–409 include portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 419–421 [Pgs. 419–421 include portions of Doc. 218, Doc. 219, and Doc. 220], 505–507 [Pgs. 505–507 include portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

political situation, 368–370 [Pgs. 368–370 include portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, and Doc. 196], 601–602 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 304], 678–682 [Pgs. 678–682 include portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 701–703 [Pgs. 701–703 include portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345]

UN military intervention in Katanga (1961), 229–231 [Pgs. 229–231 include portions of Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120], 233n [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 121], 307–308 [Pgs. 307–308 include portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157]

UN Security Council discussions, 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

U.S. visits, 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 187], 373–380 [Pgs. 373–380 include portions of Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202], 876–882 [Pgs. 876–882 include portions of Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432]

Adoula government (see also Adoula government subheadings under other subjects; Congo National Army; Katanga reintegration):

African military aid, 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 225], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 226]

Belgian economic aid, 471–472 [Pgs. 471–472 include portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 476–477 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 245],865–866 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 425]

Belgium, relations with, 844 [Pg. 844 is part of Doc. 416]

economic situation, 471–472 [Pgs. 471–472 include portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 245], 486–487 [Pgs. 486–487 include portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 855–856 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 421]

establishment, 6 2n [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69],181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]tt, 184–185 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 93],189–192 [Pgs. 189–192 include portions of Doc. 95, Doc. 96, and Doc. 97], 194n [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]

Adoula role, 126–127 [Pgs. 126–127 include portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 130n [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 62], 145n [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 72], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 80]

Belgian position, 52–53 [Pgs. 52–53 include portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22],150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 75],153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 77], 155–157 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 78],164–165 [Pgs. 164–165 include portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

British position, 49n [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 20]

Defense position, 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 16]

Gizenga role, see below

Indian position, 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 55]

Kasavubu position, 33–34 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 14],166–169 [Pgs. 166–169 include portions of Doc. 83, Doc. 84, and Doc. 85]

Kasavubu role, 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 16],40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 43–44 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 24], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 55],130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 62]

Katangan participation, 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 62],150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 75], 152–154 [Pgs. 152–154 include portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77],156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 78], 158–159 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 79],176–178 [Pgs. 176–178 include portions of Doc. 88, Doc. 89, and Doc. 90], 186–190 [Pgs. 186–190 include portions of Doc. 94, Doc. 95, and Doc. 96]

Leopoldville government position, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 23]

tripartite discussions, 158–159 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 79], 186–187 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 94]

tripartite position, 173–174 [Pgs. 173–174 include portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]

UN position, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 11], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15], 57–58 [Pgs. 57–58 include portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 26], 145–146 [Pgs. 145–146 include portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73],150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 75], 162–163 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 81]

U.S. position, 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 43–44 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17], 48–49 [Pgs. 48–49 include portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 45],130n [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 62], 130–132 [Pgs. 130–132 include portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63],131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 62],152–154 [Pgs. 152–154 include portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 78],167–170 [Pgs. 167–170 include portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc. 86],172–176 [Pgs. 172–176 include portions of Doc. 87, Doc. 88, and Doc. 89],188–189 [Pgs. 188–189 include portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Gizenga role, 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 81],167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 84], 174–175 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 88],190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 96], 248–249 [Pgs. 248–249 include portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 157], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 165], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 345]

Adoula-Gizenga meeting, 192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

arrest, 366–370 [Pgs. 366–370 include portions of Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, and Doc. 196]

Belgian position, 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

British position, 158–161 [Pgs. 158–161 include portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]

censure motion, 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 187]

French position, 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 79], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 135]

Gizenga position, 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 48]

release, 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 345], 776–777, 779–780 [Pgs. 779–780 include portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 851–852 [Pgs. 851–852 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421]

Soviet position, 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 157]

UN position, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15], 145–146 [Pgs. 145–146 include portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 173]

U.S. position, 130–131 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 62], 136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 142–143 [Pgs. 142–143 include portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 74],167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 84],169–170 [Pgs. 169–170 include portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc. 86], 172–173 [Pgs. 172–173 include portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 178–179 [Pgs. 178–179 include portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90],184–185 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 93], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 135], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 140], 360–361 [Pgs. 360–361 include portions of Doc. 188, Doc. 189, and Doc. 190], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 337]

Katanga reintegration, 181–183 [Pgs. 181–183 include portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 210–212 [Pgs. 210–212 include portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 251–252 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 130], 574–577 [Pgs. 574–577 include portions of Doc. 289, Doc. 290, and Doc. 291]

political situation (see also Gizenga role above), 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 119], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 165], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 265],601–602 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 304], 678–682 [Pgs. 678–682 include portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 701–703 [Pgs. 701–703 include portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 358]

Congo National Army position, 710–711 [Pgs. 710–711 include portions of Doc. 348, Doc. 349, and Doc. 350]

new U.S. policy (Dec. 2962), 720–722 [Pgs. 720–722 include portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 359], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 359], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 359]

post-reintegration, 842–843 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 416], 845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 417], 849 [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 419], 854–855 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 421], 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 429], 880–881 [Pgs. 880–881 include portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

Soviet bloc, relations with, 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 223], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 226], 708–710 [Pgs. 708–710 include portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349], 717–718 [Pgs. 717–718 include portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353],846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 417], 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

tripartite discussions, 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 94]

UN economic aid, 193–194 [Pgs. 193–194 include portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98],209–210 [Pgs. 209–210 include portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 207], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 230],572–573 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 288],642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 320]

Belgian position, 845–846 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 417], 857–858 [Pgs. 857–858 include portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]

package proposal development, 479–481 [Pgs. 479–481 include portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247],491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 251],544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 274]

U.S.-British discussions, 364–365 [Pgs. 364–365 include portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

U.S. position, 244–245 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 127], 273–274 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 140], 384–386 [Pgs. 384–386 include portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 838–839 [Pgs. 838–839 include portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416], 844 [Pg. 844 is part of Doc. 416], 846–847 [Pgs. 846–847 include portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 419],856 [Pg. 856 is part of Doc. 421]

UN forces and, 191–192 [Pgs. 191–192 include portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

UN military aid, 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 274], 741–742 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 361]

United States, relations with, 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 881–884 [Pgs. 881–884 include portions of Doc. 431, Doc. 432, and Doc. 433]

Adoula visits to U.S., 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 187], 373–380 [Pgs. 373–380 include portions of Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202], 876–882 [Pgs. 876–882 include portions of Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432]

U.S. economic aid (see also UN economic aid above), 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 142], 878–879 [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 430]

U.S. military aid, 680–681 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 337], 717–720 [Pgs. 717–720 include portions of Doc. 352, Doc. 353, and Doc. 354], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 354]

Congolese requests, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 139], 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 644–646 [Pgs. 644–646 include portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 859–861 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 423], 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 430]

UN position, 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 361], 773–774 [Pgs. 773–774 include portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378]

U.S. military mission, 784–785 [Pgs. 784–785 include portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384]

U.S. support for, 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 140], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 140]

African states (see also Afro-Asian countries; Casablanca powers; specific countries), 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 7–8 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2],10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 2],15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 5], 26–28 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 11], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 32], 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 225]

Afro-Asian countries (see also African states; specific countries), 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 2],44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 17], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 122], 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 165]

Alexander, Maj. Gen. HT., 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 55]

Algeria, 1–2 [Pgs. 1–2 include portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

Alphand, Herve, 53–55 [Pgs. 53–55 include portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23], 70–72 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33],158–159 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 79], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 135], 619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

Amachree, Godfrey K.J., 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]

Anany, 710–711 [Pgs. 710–711 include portions of Doc. 348, Doc. 349, and Doc. 350]

Anderson, Adm. George W., 734n [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 360], 735–736 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 360]

Andrews, George R., 427n [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 519n [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 265], 577n [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 770n [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 376], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410]

Angola, 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 152], 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 200], 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 856 [Pg. 856 is part of Doc. 421], 871 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 427]

Astor, Bill, 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 186]

Balewa, Sir Abubakar, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 35], 497n [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 253], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 329]

Ball, George W., 242n [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 125], 244n [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 127], 248–250 [Pgs. 248–250 include portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 261n [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 136], 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 179], 356n [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 186], 399n [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 449n [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 488n [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 525n [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 267], 535n [Pg. 535 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 556n [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 561n [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 284], 570n [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 577n [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 797n [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 392], 803n [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 806n [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]

Adoula government, 366–367 [Pgs. 366–367 include portions of Doc. 192, Doc. 193, and Doc. 194], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353],881–883 [Pgs. 881–883 include portions of Doc. 431, Doc. 432, and Doc. 433]

Congo National Army reorganization, 406–407 [Pgs. 406–407 include portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

Congo National Army training, 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 429]

Katanga issue, 234–237 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 122], 304–307 [Pgs. 304–307 include portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 158], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Katanga reintegration, 249–250 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 129], 261–262 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 136], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 340–341 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 178],436–437 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 226], 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]

Adoula government use of force, 716–717 [Pgs. 716–717 include portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]

Dodd letter, 558–559 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 282]

economic measures, 342–344 [Pgs. 342–344 include portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 350–351 [Pgs. 350–351 include portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 367–368 [Pgs. 367–368 include portions of Doc. 193, Doc. 194, and Doc. 195], 372–373 [Pgs. 372–373 include portions of Doc. 197, Doc. 198, and Doc. 199], 414–416 [Pgs. 414–416 include portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 597–598 [Pgs. 597–598 include portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 723–727 [Pgs. 723–727 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358], 724–725 [Pgs. 724–725 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357]

Kitona Accord implementation, 393–394 [Pgs. 393–394 include portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 413–414 [Pgs. 413–414 include portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]

McGhee visit, 578–579 [Pgs. 578–579 include portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

new U.S. policy (Dec. 1962), 734–737 [Pgs. 734–737 include portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 762–764 [Pgs. 762–764 include portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]

package proposal development, 488–492 [Pgs. 488–492 include portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 512–514 [Pgs. 512–514 include portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 519–522 [Pgs. 519–522 include portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 527–532 [Pgs. 527–532 include portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 552–553 [Pgs. 552–553 include portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

package proposal implementation, 594–598 [Pgs. 594–598 include portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302],647–651 [Pgs. 647–651 include portions of Doc. 322, Doc. 323, and Doc. 324], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 720–727 [Pgs. 720–727 include portions of Doc. 353, Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358]

secession collapse, 802n [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 396], 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 808–809 [Pgs. 808–809 include portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 814–816 [Pgs. 814–816 include portions of Doc. 403, Doc. 404, and Doc. 405]

Tshombe-Adoula meeting (Kitona), 312–313 [Pgs. 312–313 include portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 315–317 [Pgs. 315–317 include portions of Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163], 320–322 [Pgs. 320–322 include portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 327n [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 336–338 [Pgs. 336–338 include portions of Doc. 175, Doc. 176, and Doc. 177]

U.S.-Belgian discussions, 476–477 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 245]

U.S.-Belgian-British consultations, 435–436 [Pgs. 435–436 include portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 444–447 [Pgs. 444–447 include portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]

U.S.-British discussions, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 224], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 762–764 [Pgs. 762–764 include portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]

U.S.-Indian discussions, 438–439 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 227]

Stanleyville government, 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 135]

UN General Assembly meeting, 871 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 427]

UN Security Council discussions, 370–371 [Pgs. 370–371 include portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, and Doc. 197]

U.S. policy, 551–552 [Pgs. 551–552 include portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, and Doc. 278]

Bamba, Emanual, 876n [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430]

Barnard, Robert J., 438n [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 227]

Battle, Lucius D., 95n [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 45], 98n [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 184n [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 93], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 142], 374n [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 391n [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

Beaudry, Robertn, 365n [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 393n [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 208], 471n [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 243], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 782n [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 799n [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 808n [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 400], 814n [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 403], 816n [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410], 829n [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 857n [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 422]

Belgian involvement (see also Belgian position under other subjects), 31–32 [Pgs. 31–32 include portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 21],80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 37]

Adoula government establishment and, 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 75],153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 77], 155–157 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 78],164–165 [Pgs. 164–165 include portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

Afro-Asian positions, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 28]

Indian position, 49n [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 54],117–118 [Pgs. 117–118 include portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]

Katanga government (see also personnel withdrawal below), 5–6 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 14],155–157 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 78], 263–264 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 137], 617–618 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 310]

UN position, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 38],145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 72],150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 75]

U.S. position, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37],148–149 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 74],153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 77]

Leopoldville government, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2],19–20 [Pgs. 19–20 include portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 22–23 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 9], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 11], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 13], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

personnel withdrawal (see also UN military presence under Katanga reintegration), 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 63],136–138 [Pgs. 136–138 include portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66], 141–142 [Pgs. 141–142 include portions of Doc. 68, Doc. 69, and Doc. 70],144–147 [Pgs. 144–147 include portions of Doc. 71, Doc. 72, and Doc. 73], 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 78]

Egge plan, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 97]

Ghanaian position, 95–96 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 45]

UN General Assembly discussion, 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 59]

UN intervention, 198–201 [Pgs. 198–201 include portions of Doc. 99, Doc. 100, Doc. 101, and Doc. 102]

UN position, 83–85 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 38], 144–145 [Pgs. 144–145 include portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72],150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 75]

U.S. position, 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 79–81 [Pgs. 79–81 include portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 82n [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 38], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 50], 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53],115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 54],148–149 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 74]

resentment of, 6–7 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2], 26–27 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 11], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17]

UN hiring, 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

UN position, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 28],151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

UN protection requests, 31–32 [Pgs. 31–32 include portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

UN role expansion and, 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 17]

U.S.-Belgian discussions, 132–135 [Pgs. 132–135 include portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64], 137–138 [Pgs. 137–138 include portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 141–142 [Pgs. 141–142 include portions of Doc. 68, Doc. 69, and Doc. 70]

Belgium. See Belgian involvement; Belgian, U.S.-Belgian, and U.S-Belgian-British subheadings under other subjects

Bell, David E., 139n [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

BeYard, Armand, 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 51], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Bergesen, Alf E., 348n [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 182]

Bemau, Phyllis D., 199n [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 101], 217n [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 110], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 275], 802n [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 396], 807n [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 399], 820n [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

Bisukiro, 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 345]

Blue, William L., 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11],146n [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 148n [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 74], 155n [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 78], 158n [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 79], 172n [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 87], 201n [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 102], 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 111], 240n [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 124], 260n [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 135]

Bocheley-Davidson, E., 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 109], 217–218 [Pgs. 217–218 include portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 112], 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

Boggs, Marion W., 1–2 [Pgs. 1–2 include portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2],14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

Bohlen, Charles E., 68n [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

Boland, Frederick H., 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 26]

Bolikango, Jean, 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 93],189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

Bolton, Lt. Col. Don P., 845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 417]

Bomboko, Justin, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 55–57 [Pgs. 55–57 include portions of Doc. 22, Doc. 23, and Doc. 24], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 40], 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 143]

Adoula government role, 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 93],189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Belgian involvement, 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 13], 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 136–137 [Pgs. 136–137 include portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]

Katanga reintegration, 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 249–250 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 129], 318n [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 410–412 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 215], 501–503 [Pgs. 501–503 include portions of Doc. 255, Doc. 256, and Doc. 257], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 304], 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 316]

political situation, 248–249 [Pgs. 248–249 include portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 421]

U.S. military aid requests, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 14], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 139], 644–646 [Pgs. 644–646 include portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

Bowles, Chester B., 111–112 [Pgs. 111–112 include portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53],116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 55], 129n [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 61], 142–143 [Pgs. 142–143 include portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 148n [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 74], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 135]

Adoula government economic aid, 138–139 [Pgs. 138–139 include portions of Doc. 65, Doc. 66, and Doc. 67], 244–245 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 127]

Katanga issue, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 53], 227–228 [Pgs. 227–228 include portions of Doc. 116, Doc. 117, and Doc. 118], 232–233 [Pgs. 232–233 include portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 240–243 [Pgs. 240–243 include portions of Doc. 124, Doc. 125, and Doc. 126]

Katanga reintegration, 135–136 [Pgs. 135–136 include portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65], 238–239 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 123], 261–262 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 136], 734n [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 360], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 360], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 363]

Brook, Sir Norman, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 224]

Brown, L. Dean, 53n [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 186n [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 94]

Brubeck, William H., 111n [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52], 462–464 [Pgs. 462–464 include portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240], 515n [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 527n [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 539–542 [Pgs. 539–542 include portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 560n [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 283], 600n [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 656n [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 325], 788–790 [Pgs. 788–790 include portions of Doc. 386, Doc. 387, and Doc. 388], 880n [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 431], 881n [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

Bruce, David K.E., 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 55], 258n [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 224], 452–457 [Pgs. 452–457 include portions of Doc. 234, Doc. 235, and Doc. 236], 507–508 [Pgs. 507–508 include portions of Doc. 258, Doc. 259, and Doc. 260], 661–662 [Pgs. 661–662 include portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]

Buffun, William B., 15n [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 5], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11], 98n [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 106n [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 111n [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52], 172n [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 87], 176n [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 238n [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 123], 240n [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 124], 255n [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 267n [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 139], 268n [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 304n [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 155], 361n [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 370n [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 406n [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 213], 413n [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 418n [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 218], 444n [Pg. 444 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 459n [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 512n [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 261], 552n [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 570n [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 644n [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 321], 720n [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 729n [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 359], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410]

Bunche, Ralph, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 38], 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43],114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 54], 227 [Pg. 227 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 300n [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 153], 359–360 [Pgs. 359–360 include portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 872–874 [Pg. 872 is part of Doc. 428]

Adoula government establishment, 162–163 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 81], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 89]

Katanga issue, 216–217 [Pgs. 216–217 include portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 221–222 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 113], 228–229 [Pgs. 228–229 include portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, and Doc. 119], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 143], 314–315 [Pgs. 314–315 include portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 318n [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]

Katanga reintegration, 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 275], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 655–656 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 325], 766–768 [Pgs. 766–768 include portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 778n [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 380], 795–796 [Pgs. 795–796 include portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

economic measures, 350n [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 183], 416–417 [Pgs. 416–417 include portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 667–669 [Pgs. 667–669 include portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333]

Kitona Accord implementation, 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 180], 388–390 [Pgs. 388–390 include portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 423–427 [Pgs. 423–427 include portions of Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]

package proposal development, 493–495 [Pgs. 493–495 include portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 255], 554–556 [Pgs. 554–556 include portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

package proposal implementation, 586–587 [Pgs. 586–587 include portions of Doc. 296, Doc. 297, and Doc. 298], 653–654 [Pgs. 653–654 include portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 326], 667–669 [Pgs. 667–669 include portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 696–698 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 343]

secession collapse, 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 400], 810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 401], 822–825 [Pgs. 822–825 include portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]

Tshombe-Adoula meeting (Kitona), 304–305 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 155], 311–314 [Pgs. 311–314 include portions of Doc. 159, Doc. 160, and Doc. 161], 318n [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 333–334 [Pgs. 333–334 include portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 336–337 [Pgs. 336–337 include portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]

Bundy, McGeorge, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 18], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42],184n [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 93], 312n [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 160], 324n [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 327n [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 37An, 413n [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 435n [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 560n [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 283], 600n [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 686n [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 366]

Adoula government political situation, 880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 431]

Congo National Army training, 862 [Pg. 862 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424]

Katanga issue, 231–232 [Pgs. 231–232 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 322n [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 166], 339n [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 177]

Katanga reintegration, 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 142], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 224], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 245], 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 352]

new U.S. policy (Dec. 1962), 7Mn, 735–736 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 360], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 787–788 [Pgs. 787–788 include portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

military aid, 717–718 [Pgs. 717–718 include portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]

UN General Assembly meeting, 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]

U.S. policy, 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 551–552 [Pgs. 551–552 include portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, and Doc. 278]

Burden, William A.M., 22–23 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 9], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Burdett, William C, Jr., 116n [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 55], 255n [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 257n [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 133], 261n [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 136], 284n [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 304n [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 155], 309n [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 158], 310n [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 312n [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 160], 372n [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 399n [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 421n [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 427n [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 430n [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 224], 435n [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 444n [Pg. 444 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 459n [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 488n [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 498n [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 254], 503n [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 512n [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 261], 535n [Pg. 535 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 570n [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 578n [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 644n [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 321], 647–648 [Pgs. 647–648 include portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 686n [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 699n [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 711n [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350], 714n [Pg. 714 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 720n [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 724n [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 752n [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367]

Burke, Adm. Arleigh A., 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 10]

Caccia, Sir Harold, 49–51 [Pgs. 49–51 include portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 29],116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 55], 158–159 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 79]

Cameron, Turner, 438n [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 227]

Campbell (UK), 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

Campbell, Alan L., Jr., 438n [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 227]

Canada, 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 430]

Canup, Willian, 67–68 [Pgs. 67–68 include portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 299n [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]

Adoula government establishment, 165–166 [Pgs. 165–166 include portions of Doc. 82, Doc. 83, and Doc. 84],180–181 [Pgs. 180–181 include portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Katanga issue, 112–113 [Pgs. 112–113 include portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53],181–183 [Pgs. 181–183 include portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92],197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 99], 212–213 [Pgs. 212–213 include portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

Katanga reintegration, 194–198 [Pgs. 194–198 include portions of Doc. 97, Doc. 98, Doc. 99, and Doc. 100]

Lumumba imprisonment/ assassination, 17–18 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 6], 20–21 [Pgs. 20–21 include portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

Cardoso, Mario, 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 391–392 [Pgs. 391–392 include portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 858 [Pg. 858 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423], 876n [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430]

Cargo, William I., 15n [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 5], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11], 28–29 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11], 53n [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

Carlucci, Frank C, III, 102–103 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 48],171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 86], 358n [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 187], 360n [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 435n [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 438n [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 227], 472n [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 534n [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 270], 570n [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410], 852n [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 420 and Doc. 421]

Casablanca Conference, 1–2 [Pgs. 1–2 include portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2],10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 2],15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 5]

Casablanca powers, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 2], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 32], 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

Lumumba support, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2], 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 58–59 [Pgs. 58–59 include portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

Stanleyville government support, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2], 7–8 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2], 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 2],13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 3], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 29]

UN forces contingents, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 2], 15–16 [Pgs. 15–16 include portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 10], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 12],42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17]

UN Security Council meeting proposal, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 11], 36–37 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15]

Cashin, Richard M., 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

Catlett, Don V., 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]

Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 17–18 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 6],46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 18],89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 93–94 [Pgs. 93–94 include portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 885 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 434]

Ceylon, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 27n [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 11], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 33], 74–75 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 34], 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 143]

Chadboun, Philip H., 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 79n [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

Charpentier, Amb., 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

Chatterjee, Amb., 438–439 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 227]

Chatti, 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 215]

Chayes, Abran, 656n [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 325]

Chibundu, Victor, 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

China, People’s Republic of, 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

Cleveland, Harlan, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11], 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11], 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 39], 110n [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 51], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52], 115n [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 54], 129n [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 61], 135n [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 81], 169n [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 178n [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 216n [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 220n [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 112], 221n [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 113], 223n [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 114], 227n [Pg. 227 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 232n [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 260n [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 135], 284n [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 306n [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 156], 320n [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 165], 322n [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 166], 327n [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 336n [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 350n [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 183], 359n [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 188], 370n [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 459n [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 471n [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 243], 472n [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 488n [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 512n [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 261], 519n [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 265], 525n [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 267], 533n [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 269], 552n [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 597n [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 599n [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 303], 714n [Pg. 714 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 720n [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 723n [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 355], 729n [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 359], 752n [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 753n [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 755n [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 369], 770n [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 376], 782n [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 788n [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 793n [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 797n [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 392], 809n [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 814n [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 403], 815n [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 829n [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 833n [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 413], 837n [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]

Adoula government establishment, 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 16],162–163 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 81]

Adoula visit to U.S., 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

Belgian involvement, 147n [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 73]

Congo National Army training, 846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 417]

Congo visits, 432–435 [Pgs. 432–435 include portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, and Doc. 226],801–802 [Pgs. 801–802 include portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396],805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 398], 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 400], 837–839 [Pgs. 837–839 include portions of Doc. 414, Doc. 415, and Doc. 416], 845–846 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 417]

Katanga issue, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 53], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 113], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 142], 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 191]

Katanga reintegration, 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 390–391 [Pgs. 390–391 include portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207], 425–427 [Pgs. 425–427 include portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 265], 522–524 [Pgs. 522–524 include portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 790–791 [Pgs. 790–791 include portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]

Kitona Accord implementation, 423–426 [Pgs. 423–426 include portions of Doc. 220, Doc. 221, and Doc. 222]

new U.S. policy (Dec. 1962), 734n [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 360], 735–743 [Pgs. 735–743 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, and Doc. 362], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 363], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 386]

package proposal implementation, 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 323], 653–656 [Pgs. 653–656 include portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 340]

UN expanded role, proposals for, 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 16]

UN forces financing, 873 [Pg. 873 is part of Doc. 428]

UN General Assembly meeting, 871 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 427]

Cleveland, Stanley M., 367n [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 391n [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 393n [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 208]

Clifford, Clark M., 19n [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7]

Clifton, Maj. Gen. Chester V., 525n [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 267], 769n [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 375]

Commerce, U.S. Department of, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 53]

Conciliation Commission, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 17], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]

Confederation proposals (see also Adoula government: establishment; Katanga reintegration), 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 2], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 33], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 107]

Congo Advisory Committee (CAC), 82–83 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 38], 526–527 [Pgs. 526–527 include portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

Congo crisis:

see also:

Adoula government

Belgian involvement

Congo National Army

Katanga issue

Katanga reintegration

Leopoldville government

Round Table Conferences

Stanleyville government

UN forces new U.S. policy (2961), 38–45 [Pgs. 38–45 include portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 47–49 [Pgs. 47–49 include portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

Belgian position, 52–53 [Pgs. 52–53 include portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

British position, 49–51 [Pgs. 49–51 include portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

French position, 53–55 [Pgs. 53–55 include portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23]

Leopoldville government position, 55–57 [Pgs. 55–57 include portions of Doc. 22, Doc. 23, and Doc. 24]

UN position, 35–37 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 57–59 [Pgs. 57–59 include portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, and Doc. 25]

Soviet policy, 68–70 [Pgs. 68–70 include portions of Doc. 31, Doc. 32, and Doc. 33]

SNIE 65–61 [Pg. 65 is part of January–August 1961: The Problem of Lumumba and the Gizenga Regime], 2–11 [Pgs. 2–11 include portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

U.S. clandestine activities, 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]

U.S. policy, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 10], 382–386 [Pgs. 382–386 include portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 551–552 [Pgs. 551–552 include portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, and Doc. 278]

ad hoc committee, 25–29 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11]

CIA silver bullets program, 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

Congo National Army (CNA) (see also Adoula government; Leopoldville government; specific topics), 4–5 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2],12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3]

air force issue, 411–413 [Pgs. 411–413 include portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]

neutralization proposals and, 35–36 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 50–51 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 20], 87–88 [Pgs. 87–88 include portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]

political situation and, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2], 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2], 710–711 [Pgs. 710–711 include portions of Doc. 348, Doc. 349, and Doc. 350]

reorganization (see also training Mow), 379–380 [Pgs. 379–380 include portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 383–384 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 203], 406–407 [Pgs. 406–407 include portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 274]

Stanleyville government and, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]

training, 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 862–864 [Pgs. 862–864 include portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424]

Belgian position, 853–854 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 421], 875–876 [Pgs. 875–876 include portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430]

British position, 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 191]

Katanga issue and, 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 140], 639–640 [Pgs. 639–640 include portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 320]

Leopoldville government position, 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47],107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 50], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 200], 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 225], 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 858–862 [Pgs. 858–862 include portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, and Doc. 424]

UN mandate strengthening and, 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17], 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 19], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 20], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 22]

UN position, 150–151 [Pgs. 150–151 include portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76],193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 97], 846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 417]

U.S. position, 531–532 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 268], 838 [Pg. 838 is part of Doc. 415], 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 416], 849 [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 419], 853–854 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 421]

UN military intervention in Katanga, 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 155], 314–315 [Pgs. 314–315 include portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Congress, U.S., Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 6]

Connet, William B„ 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410]

Coote, Wendell B., 42n [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17], 495n [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Coquilhatville conference, 126–127 [Pgs. 126–127 include portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61],130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 62], 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63],141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]

Costa Rica, 288–289 [Pgs. 288–289 include portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]

Couve de Murville, Maurice, 186–187 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 94], 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 111], 302–303 [Pgs. 302–303 include portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 619–620 [Pgs. 619–620 include portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

Crowe (UK), 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Cuba, 643n [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 320]

Cumming, Hugh S., 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 10]

Cutler, Walter L., 223n [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 114], 338n [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 556n [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

d’Aspremont (Belgium), 22n [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 9]

Davignon, Etienne, 479n [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 246], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 268], 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 343], 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 343]

Davis, Richard H., 340n [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 178], 344n [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 584n [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 671n [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 31] 4n [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 734n [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 360], 793n [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 799n [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

Dayal, Rajeshwar, 14–15 [Pgs. 14–15 include portions of Doc. 3, Doc. 4, and Doc. 5], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 13], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30], 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]

replacement, 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17], 50–51 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 20], 57–58 [Pgs. 57–58 include portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 38], 89–91 [Pgs. 89–91 include portions of Doc. 41, Doc. 42, and Doc. 43],98–99 [Pgs. 98–99 include portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, and Doc. 47],110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 51],114–117 [Pgs. 114–117 include portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 121–122 [Pgs. 121–122 include portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58],126–128 [Pgs. 126–128 include portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61],139–140 [Pgs. 139–140 include portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

de Bassompierre, Jean, 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 245], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 265], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 265]

de Commines (France), 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 268]

de Gaulle, Charles, 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 263]

de Staercke, Amb., 857 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 422]

Dean, Jonathan, 603–614 [Pgs. 603–614 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309], 663–664 [Pgs. 663–664 include portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 691–693 [Pgs. 691–693 include portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 704–705 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 346], 813n [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 402], 835–837 [Pgs. 835–837 include portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]

Dean, Sir Patrick, 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 103], 306–307 [Pgs. 306–307 include portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 486–487 [Pgs. 486–487 include portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Defense, U.S. Department of, 38–39 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 16], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 153], 361–362 [Pgs. 361–362 include portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190],531–532 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 268], 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Delvaux, Albert, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Dickinson, Dwight, 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 255]

Dixon, Sir Pierson, 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 94]

Dodd, Thomas J., 283–284 [Pgs. 283–284 include portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 558–560 [Pgs. 558–560 include portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283],579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 301]

Dove-Edwin, George, 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Dulles, Allen, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1],14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 18], 59–60 [Pgs. 59–60 include portions of Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

Dumont, Donald, 77n [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 121n [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 135n [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]

Dumontet, Georges, 107n [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 50], 112–113 [Pgs. 112–113 include portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

Dundee, Lord, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 234], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 235]

Dungan, Ralph A., 95n [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 45], 97n [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 45] 98n [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 312n [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 160], 488n [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 525n [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 267], 527n [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 551 [Pg. 551 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 352], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 375]

Dunnett (UK), 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 150]

Dunnigan, Thomas J., 184n [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 93]

d’Ursel, Jean, 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Dutton, Frederick G., 358n [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 187]

Easun, Donald B., 31n [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 39]

Edmondson, William B., 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11]

Egge, Col. Bjorn, 193n [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 97], 196–197 [Pgs. 196–197 include portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

Egge plan, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 97]

Eisenberg, Robert, 14 8n [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92],192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 201n [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 102], 232n [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 238n [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 123], 255n [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 257n [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 133], 265n [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 267n [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 139], 270n [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 140], 299n [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 327n [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 346n [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 366n [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 370n [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 372n [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 391n [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 406n [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 213], 444n [Pg. 444 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 459n [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 640n [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 815n [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410]

Eisenhower, Dwight D., 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1],14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

Eleo, Ambroise, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 207]

Elisabethville government. See Katanga issue; Katanga reintegration.

Ethiopia, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 38], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 143], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 173], 841 [Pg. 841 is part of Doc. 416]

Evans, Harold, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 224]

Ewell, Col. Julian J., 435n [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

Falaize, Pierre-Louis, 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 94]

Ferguson, C. Vaughan, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11], 47n [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 19], 53n [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 66n [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30], 67n [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 31], 77n [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 98n [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 106n [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 121n [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 201n [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 102], 240n [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 124], 242n [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 125], 366n [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

Ford, Alan W., 365n [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 372n [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 413n [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 418n [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 218], 444n [Pg. 444 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 498n [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 254], 503n [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 839n [Pg. 839 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416], 881n [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

France (see also France, French, and tripartite subheadings under other subjects), 53–55 [Pgs. 53–55 include portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33],187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 94],194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]

confederation proposals, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 33]

Matadi conflict, 112n [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

UN role expansion, proposals for, 53–54 [Pgs. 53–54 include portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

Fredericks, J. Wayne, 155n [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 78], 169n [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 172n [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 87], 176n [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 178n [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 214n [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 109], 221n [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 113], 227n [Pg. 227 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 248n [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 255n [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 338n [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 344n [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 346n [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 363n [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 191], 365n [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 372n [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 399n [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 421n [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 435n [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 444n [Pg. 444 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 471n [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 243], 498n [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 254], 501n [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 503n [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 525n [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 267], 535n [Pg. 535 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 539n [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 552n [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 639n [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 318], 699n [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 803n [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397]

Katanga reintegration, 423–424 [Pgs. 423–424 include portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 269], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 309], 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 316], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 326], 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410]

Gall, Col. William O., 858 [Pg. 858 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423], 860 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 423]

Gardiner, Robert, 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 61],145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 72], 394–397 [Pgs. 394–397 include portions of Doc. 208, Doc. 209, and Doc. 210]

Gardiner-Nwokedi agreement, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 60], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 61]

Katanga reintegration, 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 221],522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 671–673 [Pgs. 671–673 include portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 766–767 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 374]

Kitona Accord implementation, 394–396 [Pgs. 394–396 include portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 423–426 [Pgs. 423–426 include portions of Doc. 220, Doc. 221, and Doc. 222]

package proposal development, 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 255], 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 671–673 [Pgs. 671–673 include portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 697–698 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 343]

secession collapse, 811–813 [Pgs. 811–813 include portions of Doc. 401 and Doc. 402], 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]

U.S. military aid to Adoula government, 773–774 [Pgs. 773–774 include portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378]

Gardiner-Nwokedi agreement, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 60],128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 61]

Gavin, Jamesn, 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 94],287–288 [Pgs. 287–288 include portions of Doc. 146, Doc. 147, and Doc. 148]

Gbenye, Christopher, 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 48],167–168 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 84], 184–185 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 93],189–190 [Pgs. 189–190 include portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 129], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 157], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 337]

Ghana (see also African states; Casablanca powers), 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1],4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 7–8 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 95–98 [Pgs. 95–98 include portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 841–842 [Pg. 841 is part of Doc. 416]

Gilpatric, Roswell L., 734n [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 360], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 360], 780n [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389]

Gizenga, Antoine (see also Gizenga role under Adoula government; Stanleyville government), 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 23], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 102–103 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 48], 286–287 [Pgs. 286–287 include portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147]

Glenn, Edmund S., 275n [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 141], 374n [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 379n [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 201], 476n [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 245], 686n [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 857 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 422]

Godley, G. McMurtrie, II, 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 152n [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 160–161 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 80],164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 82], 558n [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 282], 577n [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 641n [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 644n [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 321], 720n [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 724n [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 725n [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 779n [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 381]

Adoula government, 189–192 [Pgs. 189–192 include portions of Doc. 95, Doc. 96, and Doc. 97], 366n [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

Adoula government establishment, 166–171 [Pgs. 166–171 include portions of Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc. 86],173–176 [Pgs. 173–176 include portions of Doc. 87, Doc. 88, and Doc. 89]

Belgian personnel withdrawal, 199–200 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 101]

Katanga issue, 290–291 [Pgs. 290–291 include portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323],650–651 [Pgs. 650–651 include portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388],828–829 [Pgs. 828–829 include portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411]

Good, Robert C, 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410]

Goodpaster, Brig. Gen. Andrew J., 19n [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7]

Gore, Albert, 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]

Greene, Col M.J.L., 267n [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 139], 361n [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 532n [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 268], 641n [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 734n [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 360], 752n [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367]

Greenhill, Denis, 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 79], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 265], 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 799–800 [Pgs. 799–800 include portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 400]

Gromyko, Andrei, 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 59]

Grove, Brandon H., 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410]

Guinea (see also African states; Casablanca powers), 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Gullion, Edmund A., 192–194 [Pgs. 192–194 include portions of Doc. 96, Doc. 97, and Doc. 98], 300n [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 153], 525n [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 267], 866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 425]

Adoula government: political situation, 361n [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 366n [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 367n [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 368–370 [Pgs. 368–370 include portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, and Doc. 196], 601–602 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 304], 678–682 [Pgs. 678–682 include portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 701–703 [Pgs. 701–703 include portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 710–711 [Pgs. 710–711 include portions of Doc. 348, Doc. 349, and Doc. 350],776–777 [Pgs. 776–777 include portions of Doc. 378, Doc. 379, and Doc. 380]

Soviet military aid, 708–710 [Pgs. 708–710 include portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349]

UN economic aid, 209–210 [Pgs. 209–210 include portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 244n [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 127]

United States, relations with, 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 883–884 [Pgs. 883–884 include portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433]

Katanga issue, UN military intervention, 205–207 [Pgs. 205–207 include portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 214–216 [Pgs. 214–216 include portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 224–226 [Pgs. 224–226 include portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116], 229–231 [Pgs. 229–231 include portions of Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120], 233n [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 121], 307–308 [Pgs. 307–308 include portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 314–315 [Pgs. 314–315 include portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 205]

Katanga reintegration, 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 370]

Adoula government position, 210–212 [Pgs. 210–212 include portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 251–252 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 130],440–442 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 228]

Cleveland visit, 432–435 [Pgs. 432–435 include portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, and Doc. 226]

Dodd ietter, J 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 283], 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

economic measures, 469–470 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 242]

Kitona Accord implementation, 347n [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 181], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 205], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 407–409 [Pgs. 407–409 include portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 419–421 [Pgs. 419–421 include portions of Doc. 218, Doc. 219, and Doc. 220], 432–434 [Pgs. 432–434 include portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]

McGhee visit, 584–586 [Pgs. 584–586 include portions of Doc. 295, Doc. 296, and Doc. 297], 600–601 [Pgs. 600–601 include portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 614–619 [Pgs. 614–619 include portions of Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311], 621–623 [Pgs. 621–623 include portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313], 628–634 [Pgs. 628–634 include portions of Doc. 314, Doc. 315, and Doc. 316]

package proposal development, 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 265], 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 567–570 [Pgs. 567–570 include portions of Doc. 286, Doc. 287, and Doc. 288]

package proposal implementation, 568–570 [Pgs. 568–570 include portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 574–577 [Pgs. 574–577 include portions of Doc. 289, Doc. 290, and Doc. 291], 589–593 [Pgs. 589–593 include portions of Doc. 298, Doc. 299, and Doc. 300], 602–603 [Pgs. 602–603 include portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 625–628 [Pgs. 625–628 include portions of Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 706–708 [Pgs. 706–708 include portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 764–765 [Pgs. 764–765 include portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374]

secession collapse, 798–799 [Pgs. 798–799 include portions of Doc. 392, Doc. 393, and Doc. 394], 811–813 [Pgs. 811–813 include portions of Doc. 401 and Doc. 402], 818–820 [Pgs. 818–820 include portions of Doc. 405, Doc. 406, and Doc. 407], 822–825 [Pgs. 822–825 include portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 845–847 [Pgs. 845–847 include portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 849–851 [Pgs. 849–851 include portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420]

Tshombe-Adoula meeting (Kitona), 313–314 [Pgs. 313–314 include portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 318–321 [Pgs. 318–321 include portions of Doc. 163, Doc. 164, and Doc. 165], 322n [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 166], 323–327 [Pgs. 323–327 include portions of Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, and Doc. 170], 329–331 [Pgs. 329–331 include portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 335–336 [Pgs. 335–336 include portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]

Tshombe-Adoula meeting resumption, 394–396 [Pgs. 394–396 include portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 400n [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 211], 401n [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 407–409 [Pgs. 407–409 include portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 410–413 [Pgs. 410–413 include portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 419–421 [Pgs. 419–421 include portions of Doc. 218, Doc. 219, and Doc. 220], 422n [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 220], 432–434 [Pgs. 432–434 include portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 505–507 [Pgs. 505–507 include portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

Tshombe-Ball meeting proposal, 538–539 [Pgs. 538–539 include portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 275], 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 286]

UN military intervention and, 562–566 [Pgs. 562–566 include portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

UN military presence, 394–395 [Pgs. 394–395 include portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

UN position, 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 822–825 [Pgs. 822–825 include portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]

Hamilton, Fowler, 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]

Hammarskjold, Dag, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 11], 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13],42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17],129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 61], 150–151 [Pgs. 150–151 include portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76],192–193 [Pgs. 192–193 include portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

Adoula government establishment, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15], 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 57–58 [Pgs. 57–58 include portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 26],145–146 [Pgs. 145–146 include portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73],150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 75]

Belgian personnel withdrawal, 6–7 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2], 144–145 [Pgs. 144–145 include portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 202–204 [Pgs. 202–204 include portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

Dayal replacement, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 51], 115n [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 54], 121–122 [Pgs. 121–122 include portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58],126–128 [Pgs. 126–128 include portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 139–140 [Pgs. 139–140 include portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

death of, 226–227 [Pgs. 226–227 include portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117]

Katanga issue, 202–204 [Pgs. 202–204 include portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 214–216 [Pgs. 214–216 include portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 228–229 [Pgs. 228–229 include portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, and Doc. 119]

Lumumba imprisonment/assassination, 60–63 [Pgs. 60–63 include portions of Doc. 25, Doc. 26, and Doc. 27]

Matadi “conflict, 108–109 [Pgs. 108–109 include portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51],125–126 [Pgs. 125–126 include portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]

neutralization proposals, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 20]

new U.S. policy (2961), 35–37 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 57–59 [Pgs. 57–59 include portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, and Doc. 25]

Soviet criticisms of, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 2], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 28], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 45],100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 47]

UN mandate strengthening, 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 20], 82–85 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 38],104–106 [Pgs. 104–106 include portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50]

UN withdrawal proposals, 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 3], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 12]

U.S. criticisms of, 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 16n [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

Hanainy, Helen, 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 273], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 275]

Hare, Raymond A., 15n [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 5], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11], 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Harriman, W. Avereil, 24–25 [Pgs. 24–25 include portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 94], 261–265 [Pgs. 261–265 include portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138],871 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 427], 881n [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

Harrop, William C, 471n [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 243], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410], 852n [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 420 and Doc. 421]

Hart, Philip, 253n [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]

Hartman, Arthur A., 724n [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356]

Hefner, Frank K., 244n [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 127]

Herter, Christian A., 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 14–16 [Pgs. 14–16 include portions of Doc. 3, Doc. 4, Doc. 5, and Doc. 6]

Herz, Martin, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 11], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

Hilliker, Grant G., 862–864 [Pgs. 862–864 include portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 880–881 [Pgs. 880–881 include portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

Hilsman, Roger, 727–728 [Pgs. 727–728 include portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358], 734n [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 360]

Hoffacker, Lewis, 253–255 [Pgs. 253–255 include portions of Doc. 130, Doc. 131, and Doc. 132], 558n [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 282]

Katanga issue, 283–284 [Pgs. 283–284 include portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 292–293 [Pgs. 292–293 include portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Katanga reintegration, 317–318 [Pgs. 317–318 include portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164], 322n [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 166], 329–330 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 171], 360n [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 386–387 [Pgs. 386–387 include portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 566–567 [Pgs. 566–567 include portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

Hoffman, Paul G., Ill Home, Lord, 49n [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 20],116–118 [Pgs. 116–118 include portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]

Katanga issue, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 111], 302–303 [Pgs. 302–303 include portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 338–339 [Pgs. 338–339 include portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]

Katanga reintegration, 186–187 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 94], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 289n [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 148], 507–508 [Pgs. 507–508 include portions of Doc. 258, Doc. 259, and Doc. 260], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 263]

constitution, 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 329]

economic measures, 583–584 [Pgs. 583–584 include portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 302]

McGhee visit, 582–584 [Pgs. 582–584 include portions of Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and Doc. 296]

new U.S. policy (Dec. 2962), 760–764 [Pgs. 760–764 include portions of Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373], 774–776 [Pgs. 774–776 include portions of Doc. 377, Doc. 378, and Doc. 379]

U.S.-Belgian-British consultations, 443–444 [Pgs. 443–444 include portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]

Hood, Lord, 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 55],158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 79], 427–429 [Pgs. 427–429 include portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]

Huffman, Robert C, 244n [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 127]

Hughes, Thomas L., 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

Hutchinson, Edmond C, 444n [Pg. 444 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 471n [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 243], 479n [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 246], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 417], 876n [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430]

Igwe, D.C, 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Ileo, Joseph, 33–34 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 14], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30],127 [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 62],166–167 [Pgs. 166–167 include portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84],184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 93],189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 855 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 421]

India, 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 19], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

Lumumba imprisonment/assassination, 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Rusk-Nehru discussion, 114–115 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 54]

UN forces participation, 105–106 [Pgs. 105–106 include portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 458–459 [Pgs. 458–459 include portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

UN military intervention in Katanga, 232n [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

UN Security Council discussions, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 15], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 143]

Indonesia, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 12], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 203], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 207]

International Cooperation Administration (ICA), 244n [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 127]

International Monetary Fund (IMF), 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 203], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 207], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 243], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 245], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 338], 857 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 422]

Ireland, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15], 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 26]

Israel, 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 430]

Ivory Coast, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 38]

Iyasu (Ethiopia), 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 38]

Jha, L.K., 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 38]

Johnson, G. Griffith, 876n [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430], 881n [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

Johnson, Lyndon B., 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 245]

Johnson, U. Alexis, 155n [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 78], 169n [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 178n [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 111], 324n [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]

Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 16], 291n [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 149], 324n [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 325n [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 718–720 [Pgs. 718–720 include portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 780–782 [Pgs. 780–782 include portions of Doc. 381, Doc. 382, and Doc. 383]

Jones, G. Lewis, 47n [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 19]

Junkemann, Col, 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410]

Kalanda-Mabita, Auguste, 855 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 421], 876n [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430] ‘Kalonji, Albert, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 6], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 44], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 81], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 96], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 290]

Kambola, Henri, 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

Kamitatu, Cleophas, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 45],131–132 [Pgs. 131–132 include portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 86], 410–412 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 215], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 221], 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 854–855 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 421]

Kanza, Thomas, 145n [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 72], 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345]

Kasanda, Justin, 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

Kasavubu, Joseph, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 32–33 [Pgs. 32–33 include portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 20], 55–57 [Pgs. 55–57 include portions of Doc. 22, Doc. 23, and Doc. 24], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 61]

Adoula government establishment, 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 16], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 43–44 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 24], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 55], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 166–169 [Pgs. 166–169 include portions of Doc. 83, Doc. 84, and Doc. 85]

Congo National Army training, 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 50]

Katanga reintegration, 318–319 [Pgs. 318–319 include portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 314]

Matadi conflict, 119–120 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 57]

political situation, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2], 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 337], 682n [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]

Round Table Conferences, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 33–34 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 14], 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 126–127 [Pgs. 126–127 include portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]

Stanleyville government, 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]

UN role expansion, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 17], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 22]

Kashamura, Amicet, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 23], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]

Kasongo, Julien, 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 67], 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 84],174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 88], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 157], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

Katanga issue (see also Katanga reintegration):

Belgian involvement (see also UN military intervention (2962) below), 5–6 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 11], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 38],145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 72], 148–149 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 74],150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 75],153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 77], 155–157 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 78], 263–264 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 137], 617–618 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 310]

Belgian position, 208–209 [Pgs. 208–209 include portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 242–243 [Pgs. 242–243 include portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 258–259 [Pgs. 258–259 include portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 143]

British position, 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 105], 240–241 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 124], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 143]

Canup recall, 67–68 [Pgs. 67–68 include portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Dodd visit, 283–284 [Pgs. 283–284 include portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]

economic importance of, 5–6 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 13], 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 122]

French policy, 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 31], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 33]

Gizenga speech and, 286–287 [Pgs. 286–287 include portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147]

Independence Day celebrations, 487–488 [Pgs. 487–488 include portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 506n [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 258]

Kongolo conflict, 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 209], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 214], 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 290], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 325]

Leopoldville government position, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 14], 207n [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 105]

Lumumba imprisonment/assassination and, 17–18 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 6], 20–21 [Pgs. 20–21 include portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 44]

Munongo insurrection, 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 103], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 104], 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 105]

post-reintegration, 835–837 [Pgs. 835–837 include portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415], 843–844 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 416], 846–847 [Pgs. 846–847 include portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 850–851 [Pgs. 850–851 include portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420],855 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 421],866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 425]

Rhodesian Federation and, 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 122], 240–241 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 124], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 285–286 [Pgs. 285–286 include portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 152], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 154], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 182]

Round Table Conference and, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 14]

Seven Seas munitions transport, 112–113 [Pgs. 112–113 include portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

SNIE 65–61 [Pg. 65 is part of January–August 1961: The Problem of Lumumba and the Gizenga Regime], 5–6 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2]

SNIE 65–2–41, 294–299 [Pgs. 294–299 include portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, and Doc. 153]

Stanleyville neutral zone invasion, 12–13 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3],16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7]

Tshombe visit to U.S., 380–381 [Pgs. 380–381 include portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

UN forces (see also UN subheadings below and under Katanga reintegration), 12–13 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 38], 127–128 [Pgs. 127–128 include portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 193n [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 97]

Indian reinforcements, 105–109 [Pgs. 105–109 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, and Doc. 51], 116–118 [Pgs. 116–118 include portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]

Katanga position, 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 92]

UN military intervention (2962), 196n [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 198–201 [Pgs. 198–201 include portions of Doc. 99, Doc. 100, Doc. 101, and Doc. 102], 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 165]

Adoula government position, 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 307–308 [Pgs. 307–308 include portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 322n [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 166]

Belgian mercenary involvement, 212–213 [Pgs. 212–213 include portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 221–222 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 113], 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 134], 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 191]

Belgian position, 218–219 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 111], 246–247 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 128], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 141], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 185], 355n [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 185]

British position, 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 165], 338–339 [Pgs. 338–339 include portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 191]

cease-fire negotiations, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 109], 223–225 [Pgs. 223–225 include portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 232–233 [Pgs. 232–233 include portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 254–255 [Pgs. 254–255 include portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 154], 304–309 [Pgs. 304–309 include portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 322n [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 166], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 171]

command arrangements, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 161]

Congo National Army participation, 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 155], 314–315 [Pgs. 314–315 include portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Indian troops, 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 155], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 161]

Katangan position, 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 92],197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 99], 238n [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 123], 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 253–254 [Pgs. 253–254 include portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 292–293 [Pgs. 292–293 include portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 171]

Kitona Conference and, 332–333 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 173]

mercenaries, 332–333 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 173]

SNIE 65–2–61, 297 tripartite discussions, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 111], 302–303 [Pgs. 302–303 include portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

UN position, 202–204 [Pgs. 202–204 include portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 214–217 [Pgs. 214–217 include portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 221–222 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 113], 224–226 [Pgs. 224–226 include portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116], 228–229 [Pgs. 228–229 include portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, and Doc. 119], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 153], 314–315 [Pgs. 314–315 include portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

UN Security Council discussions, 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 140], 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 140]

U.S. assistance, 221–222 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 113], 227–228 [Pgs. 227–228 include portions of Doc. 116, Doc. 117, and Doc. 118], 231–232 [Pgs. 231–232 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 122], 267–268 [Pgs. 267–268 include portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 290–293 [Pgs. 290–293 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, and Doc. 151], 361–362 [Pgs. 361–362 include portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 205]

U.S. information, 324–325 [Pgs. 324–325 include portions of Doc. 167, Doc. 168, and Doc. 169]

U.S. position, 201–202 [Pgs. 201–202 include portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 220–222 [Pgs. 220–222 include portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 299–302 [Pgs. 299–302 include portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 159]

UN Security Council discussions, 268–275 [Pgs. 268–275 include portions of Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141], 278–282 [Pgs. 278–282 include portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

U.S.-British discussions, 338–339 [Pgs. 338–339 include portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]

U.S. policy, 76–77 [Pgs. 76–77 include portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 205–206 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 104], 234–237 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 122], 268–274 [Pgs. 268–274 include portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 344–346 [Pgs. 344–346 include portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, and Doc. 181]

Katanga reintegration (see also Katangan participation under Adoula government: establishment):

Adoula government position, 210–212 [Pgs. 210–212 include portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 122], 249–252 [Pgs. 249–252 include portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 375–376 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 200], 440–442 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 228], 501–503 [Pgs. 501–503 include portions of Doc. 255, Doc. 256, and Doc. 257], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 258], 517–518 [Pgs. 517–518 include portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

Adoula government use of force, 574–577 [Pgs. 574–577 include portions of Doc. 289, Doc. 290, and Doc. 291], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 301], 602–603 [Pgs. 602–603 include portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 716–717 [Pgs. 716–717 include portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]

Belgian personnel withdrawal and, 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 75],153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 77],155–157 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 78]

Belgian position, 164–165 [Pgs. 164–165 include portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83],185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 93],188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 95], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 122], 276–277 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 141]

Bocheley-Davidson appointment, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 109], 217–218 [Pgs. 217–218 include portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 112], 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

British position, 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 110], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 122], 258n [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 265–266 [Pgs. 265–266 include portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 289–290 [Pgs. 289–290 include portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 481–483 [Pgs. 481–483 include portions of Doc. 246, Doc. 247, and Doc. 248]

Cleveland visit, 432–435 [Pgs. 432–435 include portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, and Doc. 226]

constitution, 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 173]

Adoula government position, 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 256], 527–528 [Pgs. 527–528 include portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 627–628 [Pgs. 627–628 include portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374]

Belgian position, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 294]

British position, 467–468 [Pgs. 467–468 include portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 247], 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 295], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 329]

Katangan position, 606–609 [Pgs. 606–609 include portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307], 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]

package proposal development, 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 251], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 251], 546–547 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 274]

Tshombe Vice-Presidency offer and, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 248]

UN position, 512–513 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 261], 515–516 [Pgs. 515–516 include portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 655–658 [Pgs. 655–658 include portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

U.S.-Belgian discussions, 477–478 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 245]

U.S.-Belgian-British consultations, 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 230]– 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 230], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 231], 456–457 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 236], 462–463 [Pgs. 462–463 include portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]

U.S. position, 472–473 [Pgs. 472–473 include portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 254], 514–515 [Pgs. 514–515 include portions of Doc. 261, Doc. 262, and Doc. 263], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 301]

Dodd letter, 558–560 [Pgs. 558–560 include portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 566–567 [Pgs. 566–567 include portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

economic measures (see also under package proposal implementation below), 372–373 [Pgs. 372–373 include portions of Doc. 197, Doc. 198, and Doc. 199], 376–377 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 200], 482–483 [Pgs. 482–483 include portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

Adoula government position, 376–377 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 200], 469–470 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 242]

Belgian position, 293–294 [Pgs. 293–294 include portions of Doc. 150, Doc. 151, and Doc. 152], 355n [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 185], 356–357 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 186], 367–368 [Pgs. 367–368 include portions of Doc. 193, Doc. 194, and Doc. 195], 397–399 [Pgs. 397–399 include portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 212]-405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 212], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 223], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 239], 465–467 [Pgs. 465–467 include portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 250], 510–511 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 260]

British position, 482–483 [Pgs. 482–483 include portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 274]

Katangan position, 692–693 [Pgs. 692–693 include portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

package proposal development, 479–480 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 246], 490–491 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 251], 525–526 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 267], 529–530 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 268], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 274]

Tshombe-Adoula meeting and, 414–419 [Pgs. 414–419 include portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, and Doc. 219], 422–423 [Pgs. 422–423 include portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 425–427 [Pgs. 425–427 include portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]

UN position, 416–417 [Pgs. 416–417 include portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 484–485 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 248], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 250], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 252]

U.S.-Belgian discussions, 351–353 [Pgs. 351–353 include portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 356–357 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 186], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 245]

U.S.-Belgian-British consultations, 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 230]– 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 230], 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 237]

U.S. position, 272–273 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 140], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 142], 284–286 [Pgs. 284–286 include portions of Doc. 144, Doc. 145, and Doc. 146], 296–297 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 152], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 153], 342–344 [Pgs. 342–344 include portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 350–352 [Pgs. 350–352 include portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 354–355 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 185], 365–366 [Pgs. 365–366 include portions of Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 203], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 244], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 498–499 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 254], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 261]

formal declaration, 463–464 [Pgs. 463–464 include portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]

French position, 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 263], 619–620 [Pgs. 619–620 include portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

Harriman-Tshombe discussions, 261–265 [Pgs. 261–265 include portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138]

Hilsman paper, 727–728 [Pgs. 727–728 include portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358]

Katangan position, 181–182 [Pgs. 181–182 include portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92],194–196 [Pgs. 194–196 include portions of Doc. 97, Doc. 98, and Doc. 99], 287–288 [Pgs. 287–288 include portions of Doc. 146, Doc. 147, and Doc. 148], 391–392 [Pgs. 391–392 include portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

Kennedy letter, 647–648 [Pgs. 647–648 include portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

Kitona Accord, 334–338 [Pgs. 334–338 include portions of Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, and Doc. 177]

Kitona Accord implementation (see also economic measures above; Tshombe-Adoula meeting resumption below), 340–341 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 178], 344–346 [Pgs. 344–346 include portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, and Doc. 181], 351n [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 377–378 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 200], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 203], 386–388 [Pgs. 386–388 include portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, and Doc. 205], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 215]

Belgian position, 393–394 [Pgs. 393–394 include portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

British position, 348–349 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 182], 363–364 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 191]

UN position, 388–390 [Pgs. 388–390 include portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]

U.S.-Belgian discussions, 352–353 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 184], 356–357 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 186]

McGhee visit, 578–579 [Pgs. 578–579 include portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 301], 646–647 [Pgs. 646–647 include portions of Doc. 321, Doc. 322, and Doc. 323], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 328]

Adoula government meetings, 632–634 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 316]

Adoula government position, 584–586 [Pgs. 584–586 include portions of Doc. 295, Doc. 296, and Doc. 297], 600–601 [Pgs. 600–601 include portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Belgian position, 581–582 [Pgs. 581–582 include portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]

British position, 582–584 [Pgs. 582–584 include portions of Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and Doc. 296]

reports, 628–631 [Pgs. 628–631 include portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315],635–638 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 317]

Tshombe letters, 621–623 [Pgs. 621–623 include portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313], 640–641 [Pgs. 640–641 include portions of Doc. 318, Doc. 319, and Doc. 320], 680–681 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 337]

Tshombe meetings, 603–619 [Pgs. 603–619 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311]

UN position, 579–580 [Pgs. 579–580 include portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]

mediation proposals (see also Wachuku mediation proposals below), 276–277 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 141], 286–287 [Pgs. 286–287 include portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147], 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 427–429 [Pgs. 427–429 include portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 434–435 [Pgs. 434–435 include portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 227], 441–442 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 228], 445–447 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 230], 513–514 [Pgs. 513–514 include portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 329]

military pact, 151–152 [Pgs. 151–152 include portions of Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77]

mixed commission, 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

new U.S. policy (Dec. 1962) (see also U.S. military aid under UN military intervention, possible (1962) below), 720–722 [Pgs. 720–722 include portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 729–746 [Pgs. 729–746 include portions of Doc. 359, Doc. 360, Doc. 361, and Doc. 362], 760–764 [Pgs. 760–764 include portions of Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 787–788 [Pgs. 787–788 include portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

Nigerian position, 495–496 [Pgs. 495–496 include portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

package proposal development (see also package proposal implementation below), 479–481 [Pgs. 479–481 include portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 483n [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 527–532 [Pgs. 527–532 include portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 541–549 [Pgs. 541–549 include portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

Adoula government position, 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

British position, 507–508 [Pgs. 507–508 include portions of Doc. 258, Doc. 259, and Doc. 260]

French position, 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 274]

UN position, 493–495 [Pgs. 493–495 include portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 500–501 [Pgs. 500–501 include portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 512–513 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 261], 552–553 [Pgs. 552–553 include portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

U.S.-Belgian-British-French discussions, 519–522 [Pgs. 519–522 include portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 527–529 [Pgs. 527–529 include portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 539–541 [Pgs. 539–541 include portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

U.S. position, 488–492 [Pgs. 488–492 include portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 498–499 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 254], 503–504 [Pgs. 503–504 include portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 258], 512–514 [Pgs. 512–514 include portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 525–527 [Pgs. 525–527 include portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 269]

package proposal implementation (see also McGhee visit above), 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Adoula government position, 602–603 [Pgs. 602–603 include portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 625–628 [Pgs. 625–628 include portions of Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 644–645 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 321], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 337], 706–708 [Pgs. 706–708 include portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 764–765 [Pgs. 764–765 include portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374]

Adoula government troop movements and, 574–577 [Pgs. 574–577 include portions of Doc. 289, Doc. 290, and Doc. 291]

Belgian position, 581–582 [Pgs. 581–582 include portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 682–685 [Pgs. 682–685 include portions of Doc. 337, Doc. 338, and Doc. 339]

British position, 583–584 [Pgs. 583–584 include portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 302]

economic measures, 583–584 [Pgs. 583–584 include portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 591–593 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 300], 597–598 [Pgs. 597–598 include portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 303], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 325], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 328], 664–673 [Pgs. 664–673 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, and Doc. 334], 674–678 [Pgs. 674–678 include portions of Doc. 335, Doc. 336, and Doc. 337], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 337], 711–716 [Pgs. 711–716 include portions of Doc. 349, Doc. 350, Doc. 351, and Doc. 352], 723–727 [Pgs. 723–727 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358], 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 359], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 361], 764–765 [Pgs. 764–765 include portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374]

Elisabethville commissions, 585n [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 296], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 589–590 [Pgs. 589–590 include portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

Katangan position, 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 286],691–693 [Pgs. 691–693 include portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 704–705 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 346]

New York meeting, 693–699 [Pgs. 693–699 include portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, Doc. 343, and Doc. 344], 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2], 706–709 [Pgs. 706–709 include portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

UN position, 586–587 [Pgs. 586–587 include portions of Doc. 296, Doc. 297, and Doc. 298], 657–659 [Pgs. 657–659 include portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 682–684 [Pgs. 682–684 include portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 696–699 [Pgs. 696–699 include portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]

U.S.-Belgian discussions, 664–667 [Pgs. 664–667 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, and Doc. 332], 686–690 [Pgs. 686–690 include portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340],696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 343]

U.S. position, 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 284], 568–573 [Pgs. 568–573 include portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 577–578 [Pgs. 577–578 include portions of Doc. 290, Doc. 291, and Doc. 292], 594–597 [Pgs. 594–597 include portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 599–600 [Pgs. 599–600 include portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 623–625 [Pgs. 623–625 include portions of Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314], 647–651 [Pgs. 647–651 include portions of Doc. 322, Doc. 323, and Doc. 324], 653–656 [Pgs. 653–656 include portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 699–701 [Pgs. 699–701 include portions of Doc. 343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345]

Proposal for National Reconciliation, 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 265], 523–524 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 266], 529–530 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 268], 540–541 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 274], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 274], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 274]—548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 274]

protocols of agreement (June 22–24, 1961), 150–152 [Pgs. 150–152 include portions of Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77]

secession collapse, 832 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 412]

Belgian position, 814–815 [Pgs. 814–815 include portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]

British position, 799–800 [Pgs. 799–800 include portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 808–809 [Pgs. 808–809 include portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401]

Bunche visit, 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 400], 810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 401]

Cleveland report, 837–839 [Pgs. 837–839 include portions of Doc. 414, Doc. 415, and Doc. 416]

Cleveland visit, 801–802 [Pgs. 801–802 include portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396], 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 398], 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 400], 837–839 [Pgs. 837–839 include portions of Doc. 414, Doc. 415, and Doc. 416]

Tshombe return, 797–801 [Pgs. 797–801 include portions of Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, and Doc. 395], 803–804 [Pgs. 803–804 include portions of Doc. 396, Doc. 397, and Doc. 398], 808–809 [Pgs. 808–809 include portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 814–815 [Pgs. 814–815 include portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 818–820 [Pgs. 818–820 include portions of Doc. 405, Doc. 406, and Doc. 407], 825n [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 408] 897 [Pg. 897 is part of Index]

UN forces and, 811–813 [Pgs. 811–813 include portions of Doc. 401 and Doc. 402], 815–816 [Pgs. 815–816 include portions of Doc. 403, Doc. 404, and Doc. 405]

UN position, 822–825 [Pgs. 822–825 include portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]

UN role, 816–818 [Pgs. 816–818 include portions of Doc. 404, Doc. 405, and Doc. 406], 820–822 [Pgs. 820–822 include portions of Doc. 406, Doc. 407, and Doc. 408], 826–827 [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 409]

U.S. policy, 804–806 [Pgs. 804–806 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399], 809–811 [Pgs. 809–811 include portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, and Doc. 402], 828–831 [Pgs. 828–831 include portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 845–847 [Pgs. 845–847 include portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418]

SNIE 65–62, 450–451 [Pgs. 450–451 include portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

Struelens interference, 399–402 [Pgs. 399–402 include portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, and Doc. 212], 502–503 [Pgs. 502–503 include portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 642–643 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 320], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 325]

summit conference proposal and, 165–166 [Pgs. 165–166 include portions of Doc. 82, Doc. 83, and Doc. 84],180–181 [Pgs. 180–181 include portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

tripartite discussions, 186–187 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 94]

Tshombe Vice-Presidency offer, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 248], 487

Tshombe-Adoula meeting (Kitona), 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 137], 265–266 [Pgs. 265–266 include portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 288–290 [Pgs. 288–290 include portions of Doc. 147, Doc. 148, and Doc. 149], 295–296 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 152], 304–305 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 155], 312–313 [Pgs. 312–313 include portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 313–321 [Pgs. 313–321 include portions of Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, and Doc. 165], 322–328 [Pgs. 322–328 include portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, and Doc. 170], 329–330 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 171], 338n [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]

Belgian-British document, 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 156], 310–311 [Pgs. 310–311 include portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159],314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 161]

Bunche approach, 304–305 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 155], 311–313 [Pgs. 311–313 include portions of Doc. 159, Doc. 160, and Doc. 161]

Kitona Conference, 330–334 [Pgs. 330–334 include portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, and Doc. 174]

security, 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 171]

Tshombe-Adoula meeting resumption, 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 205], 394–396 [Pgs. 394–396 include portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 402–404 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 212], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 212], 407–413 [Pgs. 407–413 include portions of Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, and Doc. 216], 416–417 [Pgs. 416–417 include portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 419–421 [Pgs. 419–421 include portions of Doc. 218, Doc. 219, and Doc. 220], 423–426 [Pgs. 423–426 include portions of Doc. 220, Doc. 221, and Doc. 222], 432–434 [Pgs. 432–434 include portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 436–437 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 226], 505–507 [Pgs. 505–507 include portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

airport incident, 421–422 [Pgs. 421–422 include portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

breakdown, 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 251]

economic measures and, 414–419 [Pgs. 414–419 include portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, and Doc. 219], 422–423 [Pgs. 422–423 include portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 425–427 [Pgs. 425–427 include portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]

progress, 410–414 [Pgs. 410–414 include portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 223]

Struelens interference, 399–402 [Pgs. 399–402 include portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, and Doc. 212], 502–503 [Pgs. 502–503 include portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]

Tshombe-Ball meeting proposal, 534–539 [Pgs. 534–539 include portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274], 549–551 [Pgs. 549–551 include portions of Doc. 275, Doc. 276, and Doc. 277], 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 286]

UN-Katangan military conflict (Dec. 1962–Jan. 1963), 788–790 [Pgs. 788–790 include portions of Doc. 386, Doc. 387, and Doc. 388], 790–796 [Pgs. 790–796 include portions of Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391], 806–807 [Pgs. 806–807 include portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 811–813 [Pgs. 811–813 include portions of Doc. 401 and Doc. 402]

UN military intervention, possible (1962) (see also UN-Katangan military conflict (Dec. 1962–Jan. 1963) above), 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 263]

British position, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 241], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 263]

Soviet position, 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 226]

U.S.-Belgian-British consultations, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 234]

U.S. military aid, 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 354], 732–736 [Pgs. 732–736 include portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 361], 744–746 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 362], 748–754 [Pgs. 748–754 include portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, and Doc. 368], 757–760 [Pgs. 757–760 include portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 765–768 [Pgs. 765–768 include portions of Doc. 373, Doc. 374, and Doc. 375], 768–769 [Pgs. 768–769 include portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 774–776 [Pgs. 774–776 include portions of Doc. 377, Doc. 378, and Doc. 379], 777–778, 780–782 [Pgs. 780–782 include portions of Doc. 381, Doc. 382, and Doc. 383], 792–793 [Pgs. 792–793 include portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, and Doc. 390]

UN military intervention, possible (2962)--Contmued U.S. military mission, 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 754–755 [Pgs. 754–755 include portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369], 757–758 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 371], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 765–768 [Pgs. 765–768 include portions of Doc. 373, Doc. 374, and Doc. 375], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 376], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 378], 782–788 [Pgs. 782–788 include portions of Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, and Doc. 387]

U.S. position, 201–202 [Pgs. 201–202 include portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 556–557 [Pgs. 556–557 include portions of Doc. 279, Doc. 280, and Doc. 281], 562–566 [Pgs. 562–566 include portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 659–660 [Pgs. 659–660 include portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

UN military presence and, 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 176], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 203], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 204], 388–389 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 205], 390–391 [Pgs. 390–391 include portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207], 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 208], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 224], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 231], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 235], 458–459 [Pgs. 458–459 include portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 248], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 251], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 254], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 325], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 325], 663–664 [Pgs. 663–664 include portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 361]

UN position, 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 110], 483–485 [Pgs. 483–485 include portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 522–524 [Pgs. 522–524 include portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]

UN Security Council discussions, 271–272 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 140]

U.S. approaches to Adoula government, 503–504 [Pgs. 503–504 include portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]

U.S.-Belgian discussions, 476–478 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 245], 508–511 [Pgs. 508–511 include portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

U.S.-Belgian-British consultations, 427–429 [Pgs. 427–429 include portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 224], 435–436 [Pgs. 435–436 include portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 443–447 [Pgs. 443–447 include portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 449–450 [Pgs. 449–450 include portions of Doc. 231, Doc. 232, and Doc. 233], 452–455 [Pgs. 452–455 include portions of Doc. 234, Doc. 235, and Doc. 236], 462–465 [Pgs. 462–465 include portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240]

aide-memoire, 455–457 [Pgs. 455–457 include portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 459–462 [Pgs. 459–462 include portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239]

U.S.-British discussions, 430–432 [Pgs. 430–432 include portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]

U.S. contingency plans, 648–656 [Pgs. 648–656 include portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325]

U.S.-Indian discussions, 438–439 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 227]

U.S. policy, 255–258 [Pgs. 255–258 include portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134], 271–272 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 140], 382–383 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 203]

U.S. position, 136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 238–239 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 123], 261–262 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 136], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 370]

Wachuku mediation proposals, 508–510 [Pgs. 508–510 include portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 263], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 303]

Kaysen, Carl, 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 363], 753n [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 797n [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 392], 815n [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 816n [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 845n [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 417], 849n [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 419]

Katanga reintegration, 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 646–647 [Pgs. 646–647 include portions of Doc. 321, Doc. 322, and Doc. 323], 651–653 [Pgs. 651–653 include portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325], 716–717 [Pgs. 716–717 include portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 727–728 [Pgs. 727–728 include portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358]

new U.S. policy (Dec. 1962), 734–737 [Pgs. 734–737 include portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361], 748–749 [Pgs. 748–749 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

secession collapse, 801–806 [Pgs. 801–806 include portions of Doc. 395, Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410]

UN-Katangan conflict, 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]

UN military intervention, 659–660 [Pgs. 659–660 include portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 375], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 386]

Kazadi, Fernand, 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 44]

Keating, Kenneth, 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 325]

Kellerman, Henry J., 363n [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 191], 370n [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Kennedy, John F., 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 10], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 18], 71n [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 33], 92–93 [Pgs. 92–93 include portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66],144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]

Adoula government, 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 142], 876–879 [Pgs. 876–879 include portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430]

Adoula visit to U.S., 374–380 [Pgs. 374–380 include portions of Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

Congo National Army training, 858–862 [Pgs. 858–862 include portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, and Doc. 424], 875–876 [Pgs. 875–876 include portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430]

Katanga issue, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 122], 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140],275–278 [Pgs. 275–278 include portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 284n [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 380–381 [Pgs. 380–381 include portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

UN military intervention, 231–232 [Pgs. 231–232 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 309–311 [Pgs. 309–311 include portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 312n [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 160]

Katanga reintegration, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 111], 261n [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 136], 338n [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241],472–475 [Pgs. 472–475 include portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 270], 558n [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 282], 619–620 [Pgs. 619–620 include portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 651–652 [Pgs. 651–652 include portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 774–776 [Pgs. 774–776 include portions of Doc. 377, Doc. 378, and Doc. 379]

Adoula government position, 517 [Pg. 517 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 518n [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 264]

McGhee visit, 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 317], 646–647 [Pgs. 646–647 include portions of Doc. 321, Doc. 322, and Doc. 323]

new U.S. policy (Dec. 1962), 729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 359], 734–737 [Pgs. 734–737 include portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362], 747–748 [Pgs. 747–748 include portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 751–752 [Pgs. 751–752 include portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 760–764 [Pgs. 760–764 include portions of Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373]

package proposal development, 525–527 [Pgs. 525–527 include portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

package proposal implementation, 599–600 [Pgs. 599–600 include portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304],641–643 [Pgs. 641–643 include portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 653–656 [Pgs. 653–656 include portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 686–690 [Pgs. 686–690 include portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

secession collapse, 801–802 [Pgs. 801–802 include portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396], 807n [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 399], 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 411],837 [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415],845–847 [Pgs. 845–847 include portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 849 [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 419]

Tshombe-Adoula meeting (Kitona), 310–311 [Pgs. 310–311 include portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 322n [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 166], 328n [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 170]

UN military intervention, 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 363], 774–776 [Pgs. 774–776 include portions of Doc. 377, Doc. 378, and Doc. 379]

U.S.-Belgian discussions, 476–478 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 245], 686–690 [Pgs. 686–690 include portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

U.S.-Belgian-British consultations, 449–450 [Pgs. 449–450 include portions of Doc. 231, Doc. 232, and Doc. 233]

U.S.-British discussions, 430–432 [Pgs. 430–432 include portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 760–764 [Pgs. 760–764 include portions of Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373]

Nkrumah visit to U.S., 95–98 [Pgs. 95–98 include portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

UN forces, 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 497n [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 253], 847 [Pg. 847 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418]

UN General Assembly meeting, 870–871 [Pgs. 870–871 include portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]

Kenney, George R., 367n [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 372n [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 391n [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

Khiary, Mahmoud, 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84],182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 92], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 101], 244n [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 127], 394–395 [Pgs. 394–395 include portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

Khrushchev, Nikita, 99–100 [Pgs. 99–100 include portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Kibwe, Jean-Baptiste, 165–166 [Pgs. 165–166 include portions of Doc. 82, Doc. 83, and Doc. 84], 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 150]

Kimba, Evariste, 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77],196–197 [Pgs. 196–197 include portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 150], 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 493–494 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 252], 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 341], 788–789 [Pgs. 788–789 include portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

Kimbimbi, Emmanuel, 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 215]

Kimvay, Felicien, 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

Kirk, Alan G., 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 351n [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 186]

Kitona Accord. See under Katanga reintegration.

Kiwewa, Antoine, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Klutznick, Philip M., 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]

Knepper, William E., 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410]

Kohler, Foy D., 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 79n [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 55], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 245]

Korn, David, 142n [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

Koumorico, Victor, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Lansdowne, Lord, 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

Lardner, ‘Lynford, 361n [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]

Lavallee, Jerome, 77n [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 160n [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 80]

Lebel, Claude, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33], 78n [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 36], 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 79]

Ledward, R.T.D., 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 55]

Lefevre, Rene, 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 122]

Legere, Col. Lawrence J., 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 352], 768n [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 787n [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 386]

LeMay, Gen. Curtis E., 718–720 [Pgs. 718–720 include portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354]

Lemnitzer, Gen. Lyman L., 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 10],46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 18], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 324n [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 325n [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

Leopoldville government (see also Adoula government):

African states support for, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

Belgian involvement, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2],19–20 [Pgs. 19–20 include portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 22–23 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 9], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 11], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 13], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

neo role, 166–167 [Pgs. 166–167 include portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]

Kasavubu-Mobutu conflicts within, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2],12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3]

Katanga reintegration, 151–152 [Pgs. 151–152 include portions of Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77]

Lumumba participation, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2],12–13 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 11], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 13]

new U.S. policy (1961) and, 55–57 [Pgs. 55–57 include portions of Doc. 22, Doc. 23, and Doc. 24]

political prisoners executions (see also Lumumba participation above), 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 33], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 35], 78–79 [Pgs. 78–79 include portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

public relations, 89–90 [Pgs. 89–90 include portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

Stanleyville government economic aid, 103–104 [Pgs. 103–104 include portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49],107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 50]

Stanleyville government, military conflicts with, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 56–57 [Pgs. 56–57 include portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 68n [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 32], 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 39],128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 61]

UN economic aid, 138–139 [Pgs. 138–139 include portions of Doc. 65, Doc. 66, and Doc. 67],149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 74],151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

UN forces and, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30]

UN recognition, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 33]

U.S. military aid, 33–34 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 14], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33]

weakness of, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 2], 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 9], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 35]

Liberia, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 33], 74–75 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 34], 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 143]

Libya, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Linner, Sture C, 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 61],199–200 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 101]

Adoula government establishment, 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 84],170–171 [Pgs. 170–171 include portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86],174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 88], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 93],192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

Katanga reintegration, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 161], 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 205], 482–483 [Pgs. 482–483 include portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

UN military intervention in Katanga, 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 105], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 109], 290–291 [Pgs. 290–291 include portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149],302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 155]

Loridan, Walter, 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 493–495 [Pgs. 493–495 include portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 343], 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 343]

Loutfi, Omar, 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 143]

Lucet, Charles, 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 94]

Lumumba, Patrice (see also Stanleyville government):

African states support for, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 7–8 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2],15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 5], 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 58–59 [Pgs. 58–59 include portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

imprisonment/assassination, 16–18 [Pgs. 16–18 include portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 20–21 [Pgs. 20–21 include portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30], 93–94 [Pgs. 93–94 include portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

Afro-Asian states position, 63–64 [Pgs. 63–64 include portions of Doc. 26, Doc. 27, and Doc. 28], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 45]

Soviet position, 99–100 [Pgs. 99–100 include portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

UN investigation, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 28],124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 59], 841–842 [Pg. 841 is part of Doc. 416]

UN position, 60–64 [Pgs. 60–64 include portions of Doc. 25, Doc. 26, Doc. 27, and Doc. 28]

U.S. Congressional investigation, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 6]

influence of, 3–4 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2],15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 5]

Leopoldville government participation, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2],12–13 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 13], 41n [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 17] release proposals, 36–37 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15], 41n [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 17], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 17],48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 19], 49n [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 21], 61–62 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 26]

Round Table Conference and, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11]

Soviet support for, 58–59 [Pgs. 58–59 include portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

takeover possibility, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 2],13–14 [Pgs. 13–14 include portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

Lundula, Victor, 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 48],107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 50],131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 62],150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 75], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 129], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 135], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 140]

Lutula, Joseph, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

MacArthur, Douglas, II, 164–165 [Pgs. 164–165 include portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 476n [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 245], 479n [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 246], 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 421]

Belgian involvement, 132–138 [Pgs. 132–138 include portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66], 141–142 [Pgs. 141–142 include portions of Doc. 68, Doc. 69, and Doc. 70], 147n [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 73], 153n [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 77]

Katanga issue, 208–209 [Pgs. 208–209 include portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 111], 246–248 [Pgs. 246–248 include portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 258–259 [Pgs. 258–259 include portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]

Katanga reintegration, 289n [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 148], 461n [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 238], 464–465 [Pgs. 464–465 include portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]

economic measures, 293–294 [Pgs. 293–294 include portions of Doc. 150, Doc. 151, and Doc. 152], 355n [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 185], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 186], 397–399 [Pgs. 397–399 include portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211],403–405 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 212],465–467 [Pgs. 465–467 include portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Kitona Accord implementation, 401–402 [Pgs. 401–402 include portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212],405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 212]

package proposal implementation, 664–667 [Pgs. 664–667 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, and Doc. 332],676–678 [Pgs. 676–678 include portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337],682–683 [Pgs. 682–683 include portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 696–697 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 343]

UN military intervention, 757–760 [Pgs. 757–760 include portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]

U.S.-Belgian discussions, 476–477 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 245], 508–511 [Pgs. 508–511 include portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260],686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

MacEoin. See McKeown.

Macmillan, Harold, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 111], 310–311 [Pgs. 310–311 include portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 338n [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 430–432 [Pgs. 430–432 include portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225],467–468 [Pgs. 467–468 include portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 760–764 [Pgs. 760–764 include portions of Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373], 774–776 [Pgs. 774–776 include portions of Doc. 377, Doc. 378, and Doc. 379]

Madagascar, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 38]

Maffitt, Edward P., 114n [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 54]

Mahamba, Alexandre, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 26]

Maiga (Mali), 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 38]

Malaya, 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

Mali (see also African states; Casablanca powers), 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 38]

Manning, Robert J., 755n [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 369]

Manzikala, 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 48],131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 62]

Martin, Edwin M., 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 53], 244n [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 127]

Mau, Frank A., 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 65n [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 29]

McBride, Robert H., 31n [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 52n [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 21], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 70n [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33], 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 39]

McCloskey, Robert J., 755n [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 369]

McCone, John A., 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 363]

McGhee, George C. (see also Katanga reintegration: McGhee visit, 306n [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 156], 327n [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 344n [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 346n [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 354n [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 185], 358n [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 187], 365n [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 366n [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 372n [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 399n [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 413n [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 418n [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 218], 421n [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 427n [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 444n [Pg. 444 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 459n [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 471n [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 243], 472n [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 479n [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 246], 488n [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 498n [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 254], 501n [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 503n [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 525n [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 267], 533n [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 269], 570n [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 577n [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 578n [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 639n [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 318], 640n [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 711n [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350], 714n [Pg. 714 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 720n [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 723n [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 355], 724n [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 725n [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 752n [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 770n [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 376], 793n [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 797n [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 392], 803n [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 806n [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 815n [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 816n [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 820n [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 829n [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411]

Katanga reintegration, 427–429 [Pgs. 427–429 include portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 476–478 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 245], 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 534–535 [Pgs. 534–535 include portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]

economic measures, 350–353 [Pgs. 350–353 include portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 356–357 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 186]

new U.S. policy (Dec. 1962), 73 4n [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2] , 747, 757n [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 371], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 386]

package proposal development, 519–522 [Pgs. 519–522 include portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 269]

package proposal implementation, 641–643 [Pgs. 641–643 include portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 647–648 [Pgs. 647–648 include portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 650–651 [Pgs. 650–651 include portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 653–655 [Pgs. 653–655 include portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 657–659 [Pgs. 657–659 include portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 664–667 [Pgs. 664–667 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, and Doc. 332], 671–675 [Pgs. 671–675 include portions of Doc. 333, Doc. 334, and Doc. 335], 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 340], 693–695 [Pgs. 693–695 include portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

secession collapse, 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410],845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 417]

UN military intervention, 659–660 [Pgs. 659–660 include portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 386]

McHugh, Brig. Gen. Godfrey T., 801n [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 395], 802n [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 396]

Mcllvaine, Robinson, 55–57 [Pgs. 55–57 include portions of Doc. 22, Doc. 23, and Doc. 24]

McKeown, Maj. Gen. Sean, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 40],129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 61]

McKesson, John A., Ill, 862–864 [Pgs. 862–864 include portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424]

McKillop, David, 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

McNamara, Robert S., 19n [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42],92–93 [Pgs. 92–93 include portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 353], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

McSweeney, John M., 51n [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 20] Meloy, Francis E., Jr., 875n [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 429]

Merrill, Philip, 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410]

Mexico, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 12]

Meyer, Andre, 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 186]

Millar, Frederick Hoyer, 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 55]

Miller, Robert H., 79n [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 146n [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 176n [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 242n [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 125], 284n [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 306n [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 156], 340n [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 178], 344n [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 351n [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 354n [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 185], 356n [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 186]

Millet (France), 486–487 [Pgs. 486–487 include portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Mladen, J.V., 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 243],476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 245]

Mobutu, Col. Joseph (see also Congo National Army; Leopoldville government), 3–4 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 11], 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24],190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 96], 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 858–862 [Pgs. 858–862 include portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, and Doc. 424]

Morocco (see also African states; Casablanca powers), 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2],15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 5], 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Mouvement National Congolais (MNC), 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 26]

Mozambique, 871 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 427]

Mpolo, Maurice, 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 60n [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 44]

Muana, Tshiala, 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 316]

Muhona, Paul, 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

Muller, Charles, 153n [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 77]

Munongo, Godefroid, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 6], 20–21 [Pgs. 20–21 include portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 60n [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65],164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 82],166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84],182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 92],193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 97],196–197 [Pgs. 196–197 include portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

Murron, Edward R., 90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 42]

Narasimhan, C.V., 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 60], 300n [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 153], 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 165], 388–389 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 205], 486–488 [Pgs. 486–488 include portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]

Nasser, Gamal Abdel, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11],146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 157]

National Security Council (NSC): Action Memoranda: No. 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 11], 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44] No. 97, 231–232 [Pgs. 231–232 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121] No. 120, 324–325 [Pgs. 324–325 include portions of Doc. 167, Doc. 168, and Doc. 169]

Executive Committee meetings: No. 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15], Dec. 17,1962, 747 No. 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 15], Dec. 17,1962,750–752

meetings:

473d, Jan. 5, 1961, 1–2 [Pgs. 1–2 include portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

474th, Jan. 12,1961, 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

475th, Feb. 1,1961, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 18]

Navez, Andre J., 148n [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 74]

Ndele, Albert, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 391–392 [Pgs. 391–392 include portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

Nehru, Jawaharlal, 49n [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 114–117 [Pgs. 114–117 include portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 438–439 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 227]

Nendaka, 308n [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 157], 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

Neuberger, Maurine B., 253n [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]

Neutralization proposals, 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 17], 48–51 [Pgs. 48–51 include portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 87–89 [Pgs. 87–89 include portions of Doc. 39, Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42]

British position, 49n [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

French position, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 22]

UN position, 35–36 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 28]

Ngalula, Joseph, 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 296], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 308]

Niembo, A., 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

Nigeria, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 24], 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 26], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 35], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 38],187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 94], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 141], 869 [Pg. 869 is part of Doc. 426], 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 430]

Nitze, Paul H., 38–39 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 16], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 417]

Nkrumah, Kwame, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2],10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 2], 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 17],95–98 [Pgs. 95–98 include portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 94]

Noel, Cleo A., Jr., 438n [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 227]

Nokin, Max, 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 212]

Noronha, Gen., 845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 417]

Norway, 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 430]

Nwokedi, Francis, 126n [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 60]

Nyerere, Julius, 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 80]

O’Brien, Conor Cruise, 165–166 [Pgs. 165–166 include portions of Doc. 82, Doc. 83, and Doc. 84], 180–181 [Pgs. 180–181 include portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92],196–198 [Pgs. 196–198 include portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, and Doc. 100], 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 254–255 [Pgs. 254–255 include portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

Ofori-Atta, A. E. A., 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 45]

Okita, Joseph, 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 60n [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 44]

Operating Plan for the Congo. See new U.S. policy (Dec. 1962) under Katanga reintegration.

Organization of African Unity (OAU), 871 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 427]

Orientale government. See Gizenga, Antoine; Stanleyville government.

Ormsby Gore, David, 265–266 [Pgs. 265–266 include portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 288–290 [Pgs. 288–290 include portions of Doc. 147, Doc. 148, and Doc. 149], 348–349 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 182], 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 191], 430–432 [Pgs. 430–432 include portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 481–483 [Pgs. 481–483 include portions of Doc. 246, Doc. 247, and Doc. 248], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 372]

aSullivan, James L., 851–852 [Pgs. 851–852 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421]

Pachachi, Adnan N., 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 38]

Package proposal, U.S. See under Katanga reintegration. Pakistan, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 38]

Peicovits, Nathan, 267n [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 139], 406n [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 213], 488n [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 570n [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]

Pelen, Pierre, 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 79]

Pelt, Adrian S., 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 61]

Penfteld, James K., 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11], 28–29 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11], 49n [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 66n [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30], 67n [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 31], 68n [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 77n [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 79n [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 43], 95n [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 45], 98n [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 106n [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 121n [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]

Plimpton, Francis T.P., 139–140 [Pgs. 139–140 include portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67],192–194 [Pgs. 192–194 include portions of Doc. 96, Doc. 97, and Doc. 98], 286–287 [Pgs. 286–287 include portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147], 868–870 [Pgs. 868–870 include portions of Doc. 425, Doc. 426, and Doc. 427]

Katanga reintegration, 388–390 [Pgs. 388–390 include portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 416–417 [Pgs. 416–417 include portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 423–426 [Pgs. 423–426 include portions of Doc. 220, Doc. 221, and Doc. 222], 486–488 [Pgs. 486–488 include portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 500–501 [Pgs. 500–501 include portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 795–796 [Pgs. 795–796 include portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 826–827 [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 409]

Portugal, 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 856 [Pg. 856 is part of Doc. 421], 871 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 427]

Prem Chand, Maj. Gen. Dewan, 845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 417]

Proposal for National Reconciliation (see also Katanga reintegration), 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 265], 523–524 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 266], 529–530 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 268], 540–541 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 274], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 274], 545–548 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 274]

PSA, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 24]

Pweto, Jean-Marie, 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

Qassin, Gen. Abdul Karin, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 38]

Rahman (India), 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 155]

Raja, Gen., 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 155]

Ramsbothan, Peter, 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 55]

Raymond (journalist), 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 33]

Read, Benjamin H., 880–881 [Pgs. 880–881 include portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

Rewinkel, Milton C., 142n [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

Rhodesian Federation, 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 122],240–241 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 124], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 285–286 [Pgs. 285–286 include portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 152], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 154], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 182]

Riches, Sir Deren, 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

Rikhye, Brig. Gen. Indar Jit, 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 3],109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 51], 193n [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 97], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 173], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389], 826–827 [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 409]

Rives, Lloyd M., 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410]

Robb, M.A.M., 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 224]

Robiliart, Herman, 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 82], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 143], 351n [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 397–399 [Pgs. 397–399 include portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 212]

Rolz-Bennett, Jose 386n [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 205], 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Romaneski, Maj., 858 [Pg. 858 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]

Roosa, Robert V., 876n [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430]

Roston, Walt W., 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 18], 185n [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 93], 238n [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 123]

Rothschild, Robert, 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 141], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 234], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 235], 464–465 [Pgs. 464–465 include portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 245], 479n [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 246], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 343], 857 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 422], 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 429]

Round Table Conferences: Belgian position, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 13]

Coquilhatville, 126–127 [Pgs. 126–127 include portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61],130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 62],132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63],141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]

economic, 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]

Ileo government and, 33–34 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 14]

minor parties participation, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 24]

Tshombe participation, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 14]

U.S. position, 28–29 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 43–44 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17],107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 50]

Rowan, Carl T., 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]

Rowell, Edward J., 263–265 [Pgs. 263–265 include portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

Ruanda-Urundi, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7]

Ruchti, James R., 25n [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11]

Rusn, Dean, 23n [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 18], 88n [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 40], 115n [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 54], 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Adoula government, 184–185 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 93], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 187], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 471–472 [Pgs. 471–472 include portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 644–646 [Pgs. 644–646 include portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

economic aid, 364–365 [Pgs. 364–365 include portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 857–858 [Pgs. 857–858 include portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 425]

Gizenga disruptions, 360–361 [Pgs. 360–361 include portions of Doc. 188, Doc. 189, and Doc. 190], 779 [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 381]

Adoula government establishment, 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 16], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 48–49 [Pgs. 48–49 include portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20],148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 74],160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 80],162–163 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 81], 169–170 [Pgs. 169–170 include portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc. 86]

Gizenga role, 172–173 [Pgs. 172–173 include portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88],178–179 [Pgs. 178–179 include portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

Katanga participation, 152–153 [Pgs. 152–153 include portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 155–157 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 78],176–178 [Pgs. 176–178 include portions of Doc. 88, Doc. 89, and Doc. 90],186–189 [Pgs. 186–189 include portions of Doc. 94, Doc. 95, and Doc. 96]

tripartite discussions, 158–159 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 79]

U.S. role, 153–154 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 77]

Belgian involvement, 31–32 [Pgs. 31–32 include portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 79–81 [Pgs. 79–81 include portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 146–147 [Pgs. 146–147 include portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73],146–149 [Pgs. 146–149 include portions of Doc. 72, Doc. 73, and Doc. 74],155–157 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 78]

Congo National Army training, 639–640 [Pgs. 639–640 include portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]

Hammarskjold death, 226–227 [Pgs. 226–227 include portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117]

Katanga issue, 268–274 [Pgs. 268–274 include portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

Canup recall, 67–68 [Pgs. 67–68 include portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

UN military intervention (1961), 201–202 [Pgs. 201–202 include portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 216–222 [Pgs. 216–222 include portions of Doc. 109, Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113], 223–224 [Pgs. 223–224 include portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 139]– 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 299–303 [Pgs. 299–303 include portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 155], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 158], 361–362 [Pgs. 361–362 include portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]

UN Security Council discussions, 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]– 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 140], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 142]

U.S.-British discussions, 338–339 [Pgs. 338–339 include portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 363–364 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 191]

Katanga reintegration:

Adoula government position, 501–503 [Pgs. 501–503 include portions of Doc. 255, Doc. 256, and Doc. 257]

British position, 265–266 [Pgs. 265–266 include portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 348–349 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 182], 363–364 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 191], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 483n [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 808–809 [Pgs. 808–809 include portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401]

constitution, 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 254], 514–515 [Pgs. 514–515 include portions of Doc. 261, Doc. 262, and Doc. 263], 577–578 [Pgs. 577–578 include portions of Doc. 290, Doc. 291, and Doc. 292]

economic measures, 284–286 [Pgs. 284–286 include portions of Doc. 144, Doc. 145, and Doc. 146], 351–353 [Pgs. 351–353 include portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 354–356 [Pgs. 354–356 include portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 365–366 [Pgs. 365–366 include portions of Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193], 418–419 [Pgs. 418–419 include portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 422–423 [Pgs. 422–423 include portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 498–499 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 254], 584n [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 669–671 [Pgs. 669–671 include portions of Doc. 332, Doc. 333, and Doc. 334],671–673 [Pgs. 671–673 include portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 674–675 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 335], 711–715 [Pgs. 711–715 include portions of Doc. 349, Doc. 350, and Doc. 351]

French position, 619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

Katangan position, 391–392 [Pgs. 391–392 include portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

Kitona Accord implementation, 344–349 [Pgs. 344–349 include portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182], 363–364 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 191], 393–394 [Pgs. 393–394 include portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 399–401 [Pgs. 399–401 include portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, and Doc. 212],418–419 [Pgs. 418–419 include portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 421–423 [Pgs. 421–423 include portions of Doc. 219, Doc. 220, and Doc. 221]

McGhee visit, 640–641 [Pgs. 640–641 include portions of Doc. 318, Doc. 319, and Doc. 320], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

new U.S. policy (Dec. 1962), 747, 751–754 [Pgs. 751–754 include portions of Doc. 366, Doc. 367, and Doc. 368]

Nigerian position, 495–496 [Pgs. 495–496 include portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

package proposal development, 479–481 [Pgs. 479–481 include portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 284]

package proposal implementation, 570–573 [Pgs. 570–573 include portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 577–578 [Pgs. 577–578 include portions of Doc. 290, Doc. 291, and Doc. 292], 581–582 [Pgs. 581–582 include portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 623–625 [Pgs. 623–625 include portions of Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 649–650 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 323], 653–656 [Pgs. 653–656 include portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 669–675 [Pgs. 669–675 include portions of Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, and Doc. 335],699–701 [Pgs. 699–701 include portions of Doc. 343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345],711–715 [Pgs. 711–715 include portions of Doc. 349, Doc. 350, and Doc. 351]

secession collapse, 797–800 [Pgs. 797–800 include portions of Doc. 392, Doc. 393, and Doc. 394], 803–804 [Pgs. 803–804 include portions of Doc. 396, Doc. 397, and Doc. 398], 808–811 [Pgs. 808–811 include portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, and Doc. 402], 816–818 [Pgs. 816–818 include portions of Doc. 404, Doc. 405, and Doc. 406], 820–822 [Pgs. 820–822 include portions of Doc. 406, Doc. 407, and Doc. 408], 828–831 [Pgs. 828–831 include portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 837–839 [Pgs. 837–839 include portions of Doc. 414, Doc. 415, and Doc. 416]

Tshombe-Adoula meeting (Kitona), 288–290 [Pgs. 288–290 include portions of Doc. 147, Doc. 148, and Doc. 149], 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 327–328 [Pgs. 327–328 include portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]

Tshombe-Ball meeting proposal, 535–537 [Pgs. 535–537 include portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 275]

UN-Katangan military conflict (Dec. 1962–Jan. 1963), 790–795 [Pgs. 790–795 include portions of Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391], 806–807 [Pgs. 806–807 include portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]

UN military intervention, possible (1962), 556–557 [Pgs. 556–557 include portions of Doc. 279, Doc. 280, and Doc. 281], 770–773 [Pgs. 770–773 include portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 777–778, 782–784 [Pgs. 782–784 include portions of Doc. 382, Doc. 383, and Doc. 384]

UN military presence and, 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 391n [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

U.S. approaches to Adoula government, 503–504 [Pgs. 503–504 include portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]

U.S.-Belgian discussions, 351–353 [Pgs. 351–353 include portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 245]

U.S.-Belgian-British consultations, 427–429 [Pgs. 427–429 include portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 443–444 [Pgs. 443–444 include portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 449–450 [Pgs. 449–450 include portions of Doc. 231, Doc. 232, and Doc. 233], 459–462 [Pgs. 459–462 include portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239]

U.S. policy, 255–258 [Pgs. 255–258 include portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134]

Lumumba imprisonment/assassination, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30]

Nehru discussion, 114–115 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 54]

new U.S. policy (1961), 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17]-41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 17], 47–55 [Pgs. 47–55 include portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23]

Nkrumah visit to U.S., 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 45], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 45]

Stanleyville government, 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 29], 359–360 [Pgs. 359–360 include portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

Tananarive Conference, 106–108 [Pgs. 106–108 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, and Doc. 51]

UN forces: Dayal replacement, 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42],98–99 [Pgs. 98–99 include portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, and Doc. 47], 121–122 [Pgs. 121–122 include portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]

Indian participation, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 50],117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 55]

withdrawal, 833–834 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 413], 847–848 [Pgs. 847–848 include portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 425]

UN General Assembly meeting, 871 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 427]

UN mandate strengthening, 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 19], 70–72 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33], 77–79 [Pgs. 77–79 include portions of Doc. 35, Doc. 36, and Doc. 37], 86–87 [Pgs. 86–87 include portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]

U.S.-British discussions, 116–118 [Pgs. 116–118 include portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]

U.S. Naval Task Force (Solant Amity), 92–93 [Pgs. 92–93 include portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

Rutter, Peter, 647n [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 659n [Pg. 659 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410]

Sahbani, Taieb, 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53],144–145 [Pgs. 144–145 include portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72],147n [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 73], 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 75]

Salinger, Pierre, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 224]

Salumu, Bernard, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2]

Samuel, A.C.L, 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 55]

Sandys, Duncan, 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]

Sanger, Richard H., 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11]

Satterthwaite, Joseph C, 15n [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 5], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11]

Sauvagnargues, Jean, 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 94]

Scheyven, Louis, 31–32 [Pgs. 31–32 include portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 52–53 [Pgs. 52–53 include portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22],86–87 [Pgs. 86–87 include portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 218–219 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 111], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 141], 351–353 [Pgs. 351–353 include portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 186], 427–429 [Pgs. 427–429 include portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 245], 857 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 422], 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 429]

Schlesinger, Arthur, 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 768–769 [Pgs. 768–769 include portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]

Scott, Joseph W., 360n [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

Scott, Sir Robert, 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]

Seip, Peter A., 47n [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 19], 52n [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 21], 53n [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

Sendwe, Jason, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 24],184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 93],189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Senegal, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 12], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 13]

Senghor, Leopold, 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 329]

Seven Seas Transport, 112–113 [Pgs. 112–113 include portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

Shuckburgh, Sir Evelyn, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 224]

Sisco, Joseph J., 15n [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 5], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11], 42n [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17], 77n [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 146n [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 155n [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 78], 221n [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 113], 223n [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 114], 304n [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 155], 370n [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 406n [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 213], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 488n [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 255], 711n [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350], 714n [Pg. 714 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 720n [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 729n [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 359], 753n [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 770n [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 376], 782n [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 797n [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 392], 814n [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 403], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410], 829n [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 832 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 412], 870n [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]

Sloan, Frank K., 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 792–793 [Pgs. 792–793 include portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, and Doc. 390]

Smith, Bromley K., 358n [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 187], 449n [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 363], 750 [Pg. 750 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366], 768–769 [Pgs. 768–769 include portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375]

Smith, George Ivan, 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 144]

Solant Amity. See U.S. Naval Task Force.

Songolo, Alphonse, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 36]

Sorensen, Theodore, 749–750 [Pgs. 749–750 include portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366], 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]

South Kasai government, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2], 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2], 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15]

Soviet bloc (see also Soviet and Soviet bloc subheadings under other subjects), 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 11], 68–70 [Pgs. 68–70 include portions of Doc. 31, Doc. 32, and Doc. 33]

intervention, requests for, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2],10–11 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 2], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 29]

Katanga issue, 278–282 [Pgs. 278–282 include portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

Lumumba imprisonment/assassination, 99–100 [Pgs. 99–100 include portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 841–842 [Pg. 841 is part of Doc. 416]

support for Stanleyville government, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1],4–5 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2],8–9 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2],58–59 [Pgs. 58–59 include portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 48],143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 70]

U.S.-Soviet talks proposals, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 11], 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 58–59 [Pgs. 58–59 include portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 33]

Soviet Union. See Soviet bloc.

Spaak, Paul-Henri:

Adoula government 155n [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 78], 164–165 [Pgs. 164–165 include portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 476–477 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 245], 857–858 [Pgs. 857–858 include portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]

Belgian involvement, 132–138 [Pgs. 132–138 include portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66], 141–142 [Pgs. 141–142 include portions of Doc. 68, Doc. 69, and Doc. 70], 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 146–147 [Pgs. 146–147 include portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 153n [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 77], 155n [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 78], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 122]

Congo National Army training, 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 421], 875–876 [Pgs. 875–876 include portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430]

Katanga issue, 208–209 [Pgs. 208–209 include portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 111], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 111], 258–259 [Pgs. 258–259 include portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 141], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 143], 289n [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 148]

Katanga reintegration, 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 93], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 95], 276–277 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 141], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 275]

economic measures, 293–294 [Pgs. 293–294 include portions of Doc. 150, Doc. 151, and Doc. 152], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 186], 403–405 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 212], 417n [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 217], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 223], 465–466 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 240], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 250], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 328],664–667 [Pgs. 664–667 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, and Doc. 332], 676–678 [Pgs. 676–678 include portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

Kitona Accord implementation, 393–394 [Pgs. 393–394 include portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 401–405 [Pgs. 401–405 include portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212] 903 [Pg. 903 is part of Index]

package proposal implementation, 581–582 [Pgs. 581–582 include portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 664–667 [Pgs. 664–667 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, and Doc. 332], 676–678 [Pgs. 676–678 include portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 682–690 [Pgs. 682–690 include portions of Doc. 337, Doc. 338, Doc. 339, and Doc. 340], 693–695 [Pgs. 693–695 include portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

UN position, 483–487 [Pgs. 483–487 include portions of Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250]

U.S.-Belgian discussions, 508–511 [Pgs. 508–511 include portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 686–690 [Pgs. 686–690 include portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

U.S.-Belgian-British consultations, 443–444 [Pgs. 443–444 include portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 461n [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 238], 464–465 [Pgs. 464–465 include portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]

U.S. military aid offer, 757–760 [Pgs. 757–760 include portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 376]

Special National Intelligence Estimates:

SNIE 65–2–61, 294–299 [Pgs. 294–299 include portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, and Doc. 153]

SNIE 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 29]-61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 26], 2–11 [Pgs. 2–11 include portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

SNIE 65–62 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 29], 450–451 [Pgs. 450–451 include portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

Springsteen, George S., Jr., 808n [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 400]

Stanley, H.S.H., 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

Stanleyville government (see also Gizenga, Antoine):

Adoula-Gizenga meeting, 192–193 [Pgs. 192–193 include portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

African states support for (see also Casablanca powers support for below), 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 11]

Belgian position, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 13], 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 39]

Casablanca powers recognition, 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 29]

Casablanca powers support for, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2], 7–8 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2],10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 2],13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 3],143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 70]

Congo National Army and, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3]

French position, 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 135]

Gizenga-Lundula conflict, 359–360 [Pgs. 359–360 include portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

Katanga issue, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 122], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 152]

Katanga neutral zone invasion, 12–13 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6],19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7]

Leopoldville government economic aid, 103–104 [Pgs. 103–104 include portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49],107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 50]

Leopoldville government, military conflicts with, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2],12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 56–57 [Pgs. 56–57 include portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 6Sn, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 32], 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 39]

political situation, 102–104 [Pgs. 102–104 include portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]

Round Table Conferences, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 50],121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]

Soviet bloc support, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 4–5 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 8–9 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2], 58–59 [Pgs. 58–59 include portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 48], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 70]

strength of, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 9]

UN surveillance, 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 74]

U.S. policy, 103–104 [Pgs. 103–104 include portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49],107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 50]

Stavropoulos, Constantin, 394n [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 209]

Steeves, John M., 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 55]

Stevens (UK), 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 235]

Stevenson, Adlai E., 35–36 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 36],123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 59], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 188], 773–774 [Pgs. 773–774 include portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378], 793n [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 871 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 427]

Adoula government establishment, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15],126–127 [Pgs. 126–127 include portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Congo National Army training, 853–854 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 421]

Katanga issue, 127–128 [Pgs. 127–128 include portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 280–282 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 143]

UN military intervention (1961), 202–204 [Pgs. 202–204 include portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 228–229 [Pgs. 228–229 include portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, and Doc. 119], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 153], 332–333 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 173], 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 191]

Katanga reintegration, 265–266 [Pgs. 265–266 include portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 426–427 [Pgs. 426–427 include portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223], 458–459 [Pgs. 458–459 include portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 483–485 [Pgs. 483–485 include portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 765–768 [Pgs. 765–768 include portions of Doc. 373, Doc. 374, and Doc. 375]

economic measures, 426–427 [Pgs. 426–427 include portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223], 667–669 [Pgs. 667–669 include portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333]

McGhee visit, 579–580 [Pgs. 579–580 include portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 582–584 [Pgs. 582–584 include portions of Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and Doc. 296]

new U.S. policy (Dec. 1962), 737–739 [Pgs. 737–739 include portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]

package proposal development, 493–495 [Pgs. 493–495 include portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 554–556 [Pgs. 554–556 include portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

package proposal implementation, 586–587 [Pgs. 586–587 include portions of Doc. 296, Doc. 297, and Doc. 298], 599–600 [Pgs. 599–600 include portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 657–659 [Pgs. 657–659 include portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 667–669 [Pgs. 667–669 include portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333], 682–686 [Pgs. 682–686 include portions of Doc. 337, Doc. 338, Doc. 339, and Doc. 340], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 340], 693–699 [Pgs. 693–699 include portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, Doc. 343, and Doc. 344]

UN-Katangan military conflict (Dec. 1962–Jan. 1963), 795–796 [Pgs. 795–796 include portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

Lumumba imprisonment/assassination, 60–63 [Pgs. 60–63 include portions of Doc. 25, Doc. 26, and Doc. 27]

new U.S. policy (2962), 57–59 [Pgs. 57–59 include portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, and Doc. 25]

UN forces, 25–26 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11],129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 61], 685–686 [Pgs. 685–686 include portions of Doc. 338, Doc. 339, and Doc. 340], . 872–874 [Pg. 872 is part of Doc. 428]

Dayal replacement, 109–110 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 51],11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2] 5n [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 61]

Matadi conflict, 108–109 [Pgs. 108–109 include portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51],125–126 [Pgs. 125–126 include portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]

UN mandate strengthening, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 28], 74–76 [Pgs. 74–76 include portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 82–85 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 38],104–106 [Pgs. 104–106 include portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50]

UN Security Council meeting proposal, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 11], 36–37 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15],458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 237]

Stoessel, Walter J., Jr., 19n [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 10], 97n [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 45], 121n [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]

Stone, Galen L., 152n [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 639n [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 318]

Streator, Edward, 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410]

Struelens, Michel, 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89],181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92],183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 92], 399–402 [Pgs. 399–402 include portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, and Doc. 212], 502–503 [Pgs. 502–503 include portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 642–644 [Pgs. 642–644 include portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 325]

Sudan, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 29], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 35], 869 [Pg. 869 is part of Doc. 426]

Sule (Nigeria), 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 38]

Swann, Emory C, 47n [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 19], 65n [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 29], 114n [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 54], 647n [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

Sweden, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15], 841 [Pg. 841 is part of Doc. 416]

Sweeney, Joseph, 257n [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 133], 265n [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 266n [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 138], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 224]

Swihart, James W., 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 55],118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]

Tananarive Conference, 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 45], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 48], 106–108 [Pgs. 106–108 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, and Doc. 51], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 107], 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 173]

Tasca, Henry J., 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11], 169n [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 393n [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 208], 399n [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 413n [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 427n [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 438n [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 227], 488n [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 512n [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 261]

Taylor, Gen. Maxwell D., 324–325 [Pgs. 324–325 include portions of Doc. 167, Doc. 168, and Doc. 169], 780–782 [Pgs. 780–782 include portions of Doc. 381, Doc. 382, and Doc. 383]

Thant, U, 486–487 [Pgs. 486–487 include portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

appointment of, 268n [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

Katanga issue: Tshombe-Adoula meeting (Kitona), 286–287 [Pgs. 286–287 include portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147]

UN military intervention (1962), 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 149], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 153], 332–333 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 173]

Katanga reintegration, 483–488 [Pgs. 483–488 include portions of Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 252], 515–516 [Pgs. 515–516 include portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 579–580 [Pgs. 579–580 include portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]

economic measures, 350n [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 183], 416–417 [Pgs. 416–417 include portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 485–487 [Pgs. 485–487 include portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250], 667–669 [Pgs. 667–669 include portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333], 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 334]

new U.S. policy (Dec. 2962), 737–743 [Pgs. 737–743 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, and Doc. 362]

package proposal development, 500–501 [Pgs. 500–501 include portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 512–513 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 261], 552n [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 555–556 [Pgs. 555–556 include portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

package proposal implementation, 652–654 [Pgs. 652–654 include portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325],657–659 [Pgs. 657–659 include portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 667–669 [Pgs. 667–669 include portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333], 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 334], 693–695 [Pgs. 693–695 include portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

secession collapse, 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 394], 802–803 [Pgs. 802–803 include portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 820–822 [Pgs. 820–822 include portions of Doc. 406, Doc. 407, and Doc. 408], 826–827 [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 409]

UN military presence and, 390–391 [Pgs. 390–391 include portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 224],448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 231], 458–459 [Pgs. 458–459 include portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

U.S. military aid offer, 766–768 [Pgs. 766–768 include portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 376]

resignation threat, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 301]

UN forces withdrawal, 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 263], 867–870 [Pgs. 867–870 include portions of Doc. 425, Doc. 426, and Doc. 427]

UN Security Council discussions, 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 143], 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 250]

Thompson, John, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 224]

Thompson, Llewellyn E., Jr., 99–101 [Pgs. 99–101 include portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 372], 871 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 427]

Thorneycron, Peter, 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]

Tienken, Arthur T., 852n [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 420 and Doc. 421]

Timberlake, Clare R, 12–13 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3],33–34 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 14], 87–90 [Pgs. 87–90 include portions of Doc. 39, Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 43]

Adoula government establishment, 130–132 [Pgs. 130–132 include portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63],143n [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 70]

replacement, 129n [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 61]

Stanleyville government, 102–104 [Pgs. 102–104 include portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49],121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]

UN forces, 13–14 [Pgs. 13–14 include portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 9],90–91 [Pgs. 90–91 include portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 9 9n [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 2], 119–120 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 57]

Tombelaine, Michel, 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 92], 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

Toumayan, Alec G., 876n [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430]

Toure, Sekou, 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 45]

Tribalisn, 4–5 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 33]

Tron, Rene, 47n [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 19], 135n [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 155n [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 78], 160n [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 80], 268n [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 304n [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 155], 336n [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 344n [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 359n [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 188], 363n [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 191]

Truman, Lt. Gen. Louis W. (see also Katanga reintegration: UN military intervention: U.S. military mission), 765–768 [Pgs. 765–768 include portions of Doc. 373, Doc. 374, and Doc. 375], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 376], 784–786 [Pgs. 784–786 include portions of Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385]

Tshombe, Moise (see also Katanga issue; Katanga reintegration), 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2]

Adoula government, participation in, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15],165–166 [Pgs. 165–166 include portions of Doc. 82, Doc. 83, and Doc. 84],180–181 [Pgs. 180–181 include portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Adoula government relations, 181–183 [Pgs. 181–183 include portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Belgian personnel withdrawal, 198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]

detention of, 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63],136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65],151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Katanga reintegration, 193–196 [Pgs. 193–196 include portions of Doc. 97, Doc. 98, and Doc. 99], 287–288 [Pgs. 287–288 include portions of Doc. 146, Doc. 147, and Doc. 148]

Ball meeting proposal, 534–538 [Pgs. 534–538 include portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, and Doc. 273], 549–551 [Pgs. 549–551 include portions of Doc. 275, Doc. 276, and Doc. 277]

Harriman discussions, 263–265 [Pgs. 263–265 include portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

Kitona Accord implementation, 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204],388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 205]

McGhee visit, 603–619 [Pgs. 603–619 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311]

Tshombe-Adoula meeting (Kitona), 315–316 [Pgs. 315–316 include portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Lumumba assassination, 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 44]

Round Table Conference, participation in, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 14]

Stanleyville neutral zone invasion, 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

UN military intervention (2962), 238n [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 123], 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 253–254 [Pgs. 253–254 include portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]

Tshombe, Thomas, 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

Tubby, Roger W., 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 94], 550–551 [Pgs. 550–551 include portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Tunisia, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 38]

Tweedy, Bronson, 734n [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 360], 845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 417]

Tyler, William R., 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 79], 242n [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 125], 275n [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 141], 338n [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 393n [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 208], 418n [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 218], 471–472n [Pgs. 471–472 include portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 533n [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 269], 584n [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 619n [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 760n [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 774n [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]

Adoula government economic aid, 857 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 422]

Congo National Army training, 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 429]

Katanga issue, 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 141],430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 224], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 265]

Udochi, J.M., 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

UN forces (see also Hammarskjold, Dag; UN subheadings under other subjects):

additional troops, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 12], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 13], 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17], 84–85 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 38]

Adoula government establishment and, 191–192 [Pgs. 191–192 include portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

Adoula government position, 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 223]

African states support for, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2], 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17]

Casablanca powers contingents, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 2], 15–16 [Pgs. 15–16 include portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 10], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 11], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 12]

confederation proposals and, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 2]

Congo Advisory Committee, 82–83 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 38]

contingent withdrawals, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 12], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17]

Dayal replacement: British position, 116–118 [Pgs. 116–118 include portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]

Indian position, 114–115 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 54]

UN position, 57–58 [Pgs. 57–58 include portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 38], 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 51], 115n [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 54], 121–122 [Pgs. 121–122 include portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58],126–128 [Pgs. 126–128 include portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61],139–140 [Pgs. 139–140 include portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

U.S. position, 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17], 50–51 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 20], 89–91 [Pgs. 89–91 include portions of Doc. 41, Doc. 42, and Doc. 43], 98–99 [Pgs. 98–99 include portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, and Doc. 47]

Dayal successor, 82n [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 38], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 38]

financing, 124–125 [Pgs. 124–125 include portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]

British position, 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 79],187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 94]

French position, 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 311]

UN position, 484–485 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 248], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 263]

U.S. position, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 301], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 340], 841 [Pg. 841 is part of Doc. 416], 848 [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 418], 872–874 [Pg. 872 is part of Doc. 428]

future prospects, 10–11 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 2]

Ghanaian position, 95–96 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 45]

Indian participation, 105–109 [Pgs. 105–109 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, and Doc. 51],116–118 [Pgs. 116–118 include portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 458–459 [Pgs. 458–459 include portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Indian position, 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 54]

ineffectiveness of, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2], 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 2],13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 3], 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 9], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 10]

joint control proposals, 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Katanga (see also Katanga issue; Katanga reintegration), 12–13 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3],16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15],182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 92],193n [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 97]

Indian reinforcements, 105–109 [Pgs. 105–109 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, and Doc. 51], 116–118 [Pgs. 116–118 include portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]

UN position, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 38],127–128 [Pgs. 127–128 include portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Leopoldville government and, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30], 87–88 [Pgs. 87–88 include portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]

Matadi conflict, 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43],106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50],108–109 [Pgs. 108–109 include portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 111–112 [Pgs. 111–112 include portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53],119–120 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 57],125–126 [Pgs. 125–126 include portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 61]

neutralization proposals and, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17]

Nigerian participation, 496–497 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 253]

reorganization, 128–129 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 61]

Soviet participation, 739–740 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 361]

Soviet position, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 2], 99–100 [Pgs. 99–100 include portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 59]

Soviet Stanleyville airlift and, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]

Stanleyville invasion of Katanga neutral zone and, 12–13 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3],16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

UN mandate strengthening: Belgian position, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 21], 86–87 [Pgs. 86–87 include portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]

British position, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 20]

French position, 70–73 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33], 78n [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 36]

Gardiner-Nwokedi agreement, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 60], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 61]

Leopoldville government position, 55–57 [Pgs. 55–57 include portions of Doc. 22, Doc. 23, and Doc. 24],104–106 [Pgs. 104–106 include portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50],108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

Security Council resolution (Feb. 21, 2962), 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 33], 74–79 [Pgs. 74–79 include portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, Doc. 36, and Doc. 37], 78n [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 36], 82–87 [Pgs. 82–87 include portions of Doc. 38, Doc. 39, and Doc. 40], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 45],104–106 [Pgs. 104–106 include portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50],108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

UN position, 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17], 82–85 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 38]

U.S. position, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 10],40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17], 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 19], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 20], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 140], 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 140]

U.S. criticism of, 13–14 [Pgs. 13–14 include portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

iwthdrawal: Adoula government position, 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 425], 878 [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 430]

Casablanca powers position, 685–686 [Pgs. 685–686 include portions of Doc. 338, Doc. 339, and Doc. 340]

secession collapse and, 833–834 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 413], 840–841 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 416]

Soviet position, 841 [Pg. 841 is part of Doc. 416]

UN General Assembly meeting, 870–871 [Pgs. 870–871 include portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]

UN position, 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 3], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 12], 193n [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 97], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 263], 867–870 [Pgs. 867–870 include portions of Doc. 425, Doc. 426, and Doc. 427]

U.S. position, 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 268], 748–749 [Pgs. 748–749 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 833–834 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 413], 840–841 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 416], 846–850 [Pgs. 846–850 include portions of Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419], 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 421], 866–868 [Pgs. 866–868 include portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426]

United Arab Republic (UAR) (see also Casablanca powers), 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 33], 74–75 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 34],146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 280–281 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 143], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 157]

United Kingdom (see also British, tripartite, U.S.-British, and U.S -Belgian-British subheadings under other subjects), Win, 116–118 [Pgs. 116–118 include portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]

United Nations (see also Adoula government: economic aid; UN forces; UN subheadings under other subjects):

General Assembly discussions, 123–125 [Pgs. 123–125 include portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 870–871 [Pgs. 870–871 include portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 873 [Pg. 873 is part of Doc. 428]

role expansion proposals, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 10], 37–41 [Pgs. 37–41 include portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, and Doc. 17], 44–45 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 17], 53–54 [Pgs. 53–54 include portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 60–61 [Pgs. 60–61 include portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]

Security Council discussions, 268–275 [Pgs. 268–275 include portions of Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141], 278–279 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 142], 370–372 [Pgs. 370–372 include portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, and Doc. 198], 375–376 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 200]

Security Council meeting proposal, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 11], 36–37 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15], 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 57n [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 61–62 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 26],449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 237], 484–485 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 248], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 250], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 261], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 260]

Security Council resolution (Feb. 20–21,1961), 72, 74–79 [Pgs. 74–79 include portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, Doc. 36, and Doc. 37], 77–79 [Pgs. 77–79 include portions of Doc. 35, Doc. 36, and Doc. 37], 82–87 [Pgs. 82–87 include portions of Doc. 38, Doc. 39, and Doc. 40], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 45],104–105 [Pgs. 104–105 include portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49],104–106 [Pgs. 104–106 include portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50],108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 60],128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 61]

Soviet attacks on, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 45], 99–101 [Pgs. 99–101 include portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47],123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 59]

U.S. bond issue, 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 215], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 217], 418n [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 218]

Uppers (Belgium), 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

Urquhart, Brian, 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 144]

U.S. Naval Task Force (Solant Amity), 92–93 [Pgs. 92–93 include portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

Van den Bosch, Jean, 23n [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9], 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

Van der Straeten, E., 351n [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]

Van Roey (Belgium), 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 308]

Van Weyenbergh (Union Miniere), 814 [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 403]

Vance, Sheldon B., 152n [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 155n [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 78], 160n [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 80], 169n [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 172n [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 87] 176n [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 178n [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 184n [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 93], 216n [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 220n [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 112], 221n [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 113], 223n [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 114], 227n [Pg. 227 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 232n [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 238n [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 123], 242n [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 125], 248n [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 255n [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 260n [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 135], 261n [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 136], 288n [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 304n [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 155], 306n [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 156], 320n [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 165], 336n [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 338n [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 340n [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 178], 346n [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 348n [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 182], 354n [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 185], 380n [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 399n [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 418n [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 218], 421n [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 221], 435n [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 438n [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 227], 472n [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 479n [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 246], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 255], 501n [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 534n [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 270], 535n [Pg. 535 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

Wachtmeister (UN), 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

Wachuku, Agnes, 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Wachuku, Jaja, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 24], 495–497 [Pgs. 495–497 include portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 508–510 [Pgs. 508–510 include portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 263], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 303], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 329]

Wadsworth, James J., 16n [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

Waern, CoL, 196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

Wallner, Woodruff, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11], 42n [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17], 47n [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 19], 52n [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 21], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 65n [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 29], 66n [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 30], 67n [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 31], 78n [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 36], 79n [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 98n [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 106n [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 111n [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52], 121n [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 142n [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 146n [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 148n [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 74], 152n [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 201n [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 102], 240n [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 124], 242n [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 125], 255n [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 257n [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 133], 261n [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 136], 267n [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 139], 284n [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 312n [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 160], 340n [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 178], 344n [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 346n [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 351n [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 354n [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 185], 358n [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 187], 360n [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 361n [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 363n [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 191], 365n [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 366n [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 370n [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 372n [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 399n [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 406n [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 213], 413n [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 418n [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 218], 421n [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 427n [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 435n [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 444n [Pg. 444 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 472n [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 479n [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 246], 498n [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 254], 501n [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 503n [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 570n [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 577n [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 578n [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 671n [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 674n [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 335], 699n [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 724n [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]

Belgian involvement, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 5], 26–27 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 11]

Katanga reintegration, 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 205], 390–391 [Pgs. 390–391 include portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410]

new U.S. policy (2962), 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

U.S.-Nigerian discussions, 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Weiner, Benjamin, 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]

Welensky, Sir Roy, 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 122], 258n [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 182],584n [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 302], 847 [Pg. 847 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418]

Wellings, Rear Adm. J.H., 291n [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 149]

Weregemere, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 678–679 [Pgs. 678–679 include portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

West, Robert L., 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 179], 845–846 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 417]

White, Ivan B., 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 55]

White, Lincoln, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 111]

Co Qle Whitehouse, Charles S., 338n [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 351n [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 358n [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 187], 360n [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 639n [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 318], 814n [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 403], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 410], 865n [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 425]

Wieschhoff, Heinrich A., 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 15],110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 51],145n [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 72], 193n [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 97], 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 109]

Wiggin, CD., 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 55]

Wigny, Pierre, 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Williams, G. Mermen, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11], 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11],42n [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17], 47n [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 19], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 111n [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52], 121n [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 142n [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 148n [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 74], 238n [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 123], 261n [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 136], 312n [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 160], 320n [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 165], 322n [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 166], 327n [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 340n [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 178], 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 179], 358n [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 187], 359n [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 188], 360n [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 365n [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 366n [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 399n [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 418n [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 218], 459n [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 472n [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 479n [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 246], 525n [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 267], 556n [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 558n [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 282], 561n [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 284], 570n [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 577n [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 578n [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 597n [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 640n [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 644n [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 321], 671n [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 674n [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 335], 711n [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350], 714n [Pg. 714 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 720n [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 723n [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 355], 724n [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 725n [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 752n [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 755n [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 369], 770n [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 376], 782n [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 793n [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 797n [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 392], 809n [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 814n [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 403], 815n [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 816n [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 829n [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 858n [Pg. 858 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423], 881n [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

Adoula government, 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 779–780 [Pgs. 779–780 include portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 845–846 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 417], 865–866 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 425]

Adoula government establishment, 160–161 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 80]

Africa consultations, 507–511 [Pgs. 507–511 include portions of Doc. 258, Doc. 259, and Doc. 260]

Congo National Army training, 858–859 [Pgs. 858–859 include portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]

Katanga reintegration, 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 440–442 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 228], 476–478 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 245]

new U.S. policy (Dec. 1962), 734n [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 360], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 360], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 363]

package proposal development, 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 265], 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]

package proposal implementation, 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 649–656 [Pgs. 649–656 include portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325], 653–656 [Pgs. 653–656 include portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 689–690 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 340], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

secession collapse, 839–845 [Pgs. 839–845 include portions of Doc. 415, Doc. 416, and Doc. 417], 852–856 [Pgs. 852–856 include portions of Doc. 420 and Doc. 421]

Ltopoldville-Stanleyville military conflict, 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]

Tshombe U.S. visit, 380–381 [Pgs. 380–381 include portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

UN forces withdrawal, 866–868 [Pgs. 866–868 include portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426]

Williams, Haydn, 361n [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]

Wilson, Thomas W., 535n [Pg. 535 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

Winckler, Jean-Claude, 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 265]

Woodruff, Arthur, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11], 77n [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 121n [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 142n [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 146n [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 152n [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 155n [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 78], 201n [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 102], 240n [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 124], 242n [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 125], 248n [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 257n [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 133], 261n [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 136], 284n [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 344n [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

World Health Organization (WHO), 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Yost, Charles W., 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11],68–69 [Pgs. 68–69 include portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32],192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 300n [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 153], 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 773–774 [Pgs. 773–774 include portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378]

Adoula government establishment, 145–146 [Pgs. 145–146 include portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73],150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 75]

Belgian involvement, 144–145 [Pgs. 144–145 include portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 150–151 [Pgs. 150–151 include portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 231]

Katanga issue, 202–204 [Pgs. 202–204 include portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103] 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Index]

Katanga reintegration, 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 252], 500–501 [Pgs. 500–501 include portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 515–517 [Pgs. 515–517 include portions of Doc. 262, Doc. 263, and Doc. 264], 522–524 [Pgs. 522–524 include portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361], 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 388]

economic measures, 350n [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 183], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]

Kitona Accord implementation, 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 205], 423–424 [Pgs. 423–424 include portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222]

package proposal implementation, 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 326], 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 338], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 343], 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 343]

UN military intervention, possible (2962), 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 374], 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375]

UN military presence and, 391n [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 77Sn

UN position, 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 515–517 [Pgs. 515–517 include portions of Doc. 262, Doc. 263, and Doc. 264], 522–524 [Pgs. 522–524 include portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]

Matadi conflict, 112n [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]

UN forces, 25–26 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 11],139–140 [Pgs. 139–140 include portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 868–870 [Pgs. 868–870 include portions of Doc. 425, Doc. 426, and Doc. 427], 873 [Pg. 873 is part of Doc. 428]

Youlou, Abbe Fulbert, 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 94],194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]

Yugoslavia, Tin, 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Zorin, Valerian A., 279–282 [Pgs. 279–282 include portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

Zulueta, Philip de, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 224], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]
