Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, With the Address of the President to Congress December 8, 1914 (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 1922)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1914).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

(Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 1914)

Title pagePapers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 1914,

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on May 26, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

(Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 1914)Contents

Address of the President, annual

List of papers, in chronological order, with subjects of correspondence

The World War: Editorial note (Documents 1-1)

Correspondence Circulars:Admission into the United States of adopted children of Chinese of American birth (Documents 2-2)

Third International Peace Conference (Documents 3-3)

Status of Chinese wives or widows of American citizens (Documents 4-4)

Opium laws and regulations (Documents 5-5)

Nineteenth International Congress of Americanists (Documents 6-6)

Admission and return of Chinese participating in the Panama-Pacific International Exposition and the Panama-California Exposition (Documents 7-7)

Admission and return of aliens, other than Chinese, participating in the Panama-Pacific and the Panama-California Expositions (Documents 8-8)

Immigration laws (Documents 9-9)

Third International Peace Conference (Documents 10-10)

Second Pan American Scientific Congress (Documents 11-11)

Opium laws and regulations (Documents 12-12)

Foreign naval rendezvous at Hampton Roads for participation in the celebration of the completion of the Panama Canal and the opening of the Panama-Pacific International Exposition (Documents 13-13)

Panama-Pacific International Exposition (Documents 14-14)

Regulations for the operation and navigation of the Panama Canal (Documents 15-15)

Citizenship of persons whose American fathers have never resided in the United States (Documents 16-16)

Opening of the Panama Canal (Documents 17-17)

International Dry-farming Congress (Documents 18-18)

Liability for military service in foreign countries of persons residing in the United States (Documents 19-19)

Invitation to all Governments to cooperate with the United States in regard to immigration in war time (Documents 20-21)

Nineteenth International Congress of Americanists (Documents 22-22)

Argentina:Death of the President, Roque Saenz Peña, and succession of the Vice President, Victorino de la Plaza, to the Presidency (Documents 23-27)

Austria-Hungary:Arbitration agreement between the United States and Austria-Hungary, extending the duration of the Convention of January 15, 1909 (Documents 28-28)

Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand and the Duchess of Hohenberg (Documents 29-34)

Bolivia:Boundary agreement between Bolivia and Paraguay; good offices of the United States (Documents 35-39)

Brazil:Message of the President, Marshal Hermes R. da Fonseca, to the Congress (Documents 40-40)

Assistance to American refugees in Mexico by Brazilian diplomatic and consular officers.

Bulgaria:Reception of the first Minister of Bulgaria to the United States (Documents 41-50)

Chile:Message of the President, Ramón Barros Luco, to the Congress (Documents 51-51)

China:Political affairs: Texts of the Provisional Constitution, the Presidential Election Law, and the Goodnow draft of a constitution; suspension of the National Assembly; conversion of the Political Council (Administrative Conference) into a Constitutional Convention; promulgation of the Revised Provisional Constitution (Constitutional compact); synopsis and text thereof; project for reorganization of the National Assembly (Documents 52-58)

Loan negotiations: Failure of the supplementary-reorganization-loan negotiations with the five-power banking group; currency-loan negotiations with the United States proposed by China (Documents 59-61)

Currency reform: Promulgation of a currency law (Documents 62-63)

Declaration of a moratorium (Documents 64-66)

Boxer indemnity payments: Status of the account for 1913; return to China of the remitted portion of the indemnity and of the unused portion of the claims fund; application thereof by China to educational purposes (Documents 67-82)

Claims of American citizens against China growing out of the Revolution of 1911–12 and the Revolt of 1913; undertakings of the Chinese Government and formation of the Chinese Claims Commission; £2,000,000 claims fund set aside from the Reorganization Loan; settlement of Revolution claims (Documents 83-92)

Huai River conservancy and prevention of famine; surveys initiated by the American National Red Cross; good offices of the United States; appointment of a United States Army engineer to superintend surveys. Loan proposals and contract (Documents 93-126)

Taxation of foreigners. New stamp tax. Interpretation of the Treaty of 1903 in relation to Chinese internal taxes and to the status of treaty ports (Documents 127-139)

Mining regulations affecting treaty rights; objections of the United States thereto (Documents 140-145)

Protection by the United States of Chinese—in Costa Rica. (See Costa Rica: Representation of Chinese interests, etc.) in Mexico. (See Mexico: Protection of Chinese subjects, etc.)

Third International Opium Conference; report of the American delegates.

Colombia:Message of the President, Carlos E. Restrepo, to the Congress (Documents 146-146)

Report of the Minister for Foreign Affairs to the Congress (Documents 147-147)

Conclusion of a treaty between the United States and Colombia for the settlement of their differences arising out of the events which took place on the Isthmus of Panama in November, 1903 (Documents 148-176)

Costa Rica:Message of the President, Ricardo Jiménez, to the Congress (Documents 177-177)

Boundary dispute between Costa Rica and Panama.

Protest of Costa Rica in relation to a proposed Nicaraguan canal treaty.

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, concluded between the United States and Costa Rica (Documents 178-178)

Arbitration agreement between the United States and Costa Rica, extending the duration of the Convention of January 13, 1909 (Documents 179-179)

Representation of Chinese interests by American diplomatic and consular officers (Documents 180-189)

Protest of the United States against the presence in Costa Rica of certain Nicaraguan revolutionists (Documents 190-200)

Cuba:Naval station at Guantánamo (Documents 201-203)

Cuban amnesty bill; attitude of the United States (Documents 204-210)

Pardon of Enrique Maza (Documents 211-214)

Dominican Republic:Political and financial affairs—revolution; resignation of Provisional President José Bordas Valdés; American commission sent to establish order and observe election. Appointment of Provisional President Ramón Báez; election and inauguration of President Juan Isidro Jiménez. Financial difficulties of the Dominican Government; attitude and measures taken by the United States; appointment of an American as Controller of Finances (Documents 215-369)

Protection of British interests (Documents 370-376)

Protection of Porto Rican citizens of the United States drafted into the Dominican army (Documents 377-378)

Ecuador:Message of the President, General Leónidas Plaza G., to the Congress (Documents 379-379)

Political affairs—revolution at Esmeraldas; refuge at the American Legation granted to the family of President Plaza (Documents 380-404)

Claims of the Guayaquil & Quito Railway Co. against Ecuador; arbitration proceedings; protest of the Railway Co. in relation to the J. G. White contract (Documents 405-414)

Financial affairs (Documents 415-416)

Imprisonment of Robert B. Jones, an American citizen (Documents 417-430)

Exclusion of Goo Kwai, an American citizen of Chinese birth (Documents 431-439)

France:Protection by the United States of French interests in Mexico.

Assistance to American refugees in Mexico by French diplomatic and consular officers and naval vessels.

French Protectorate in Morocco.

Liability to French military service of naturalized American citizens of French origin and of American-born persons of French parentage. Dual citizenship (Documents 440-458)

Germany:Protection by the United States of German interests in Mexico.

Assistance to American refugees in Mexico by German diplomatic and consular officers and naval vessels.

Great Britain:Arbitration agreement between the United States and Great Britain, extending the duration of the Convention of April 4, 1908 (Documents 459-459)

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, concluded between the United States and Great Britain (Documents 460-460)

Jurisdiction of the United States over foreign ships and persons on board them in United States waters; jurisdiction in foreign waters of the master or other person authorized by the United States over members of the crew of a private ship sailing under the United States flag (Documents 461-462)

Panama Canal tolls: repeal of the provision of the Panama Canal Act exempting vessels in the coastwise trade of the United States from the payment of tolls (Documents 463-464)

Presentation of a statue of Washington to Great Britain by the State of Virginia (Documents 465-469)

Colonization of the Gold Coast, West Africa, by American Negroes (Documents 470-476)

Protection by the United States of British interests—in the Dominican Republic and in Mexico.

Assistance to American refugees in Mexico by British diplomatic and consular officers.

Agreement between the United States and Great Britain in relation to oil interests in Mexico.

Greece:Inviolability of correspondence of consular officers; interpretation of the Consular Convention between the United States and Greece (Documents 477-484)

Guatemala:Treaty for the advancement of general peace, concluded between the United States and Guatemala (Documents 485-485)

Message of the President, Manuel Estrada Cabrera, to the Congress (Documents 486-486)

Haiti:Political and financial affairs:—revolution, with Dominican aid; measures taken by the United States to restore order; resignation of President Oreste; election of President Zamor; recognition of his Government by the United States; resignation of President Zamor; election of President Theodore; proposal by the United States of a customs convention and other conditions precedent to recognition of his Government. Protest of Haiti against shipment abroad on the U. S. S. Machias of Government funds on deposit in the Banque Nationale (Documents 487-586)

Ineffective blockade of Cape Haitien (Documents 587-592)

Haitian aid to revolutionists in the Dominican Republic; attitude of the United States.

Protection of Haitian officials and their families by American diplomatic and consular officers (Documents 593-599)

Honduras:Message of the President, Francisco Bertrand, to the Congress (Documents 600-600)

Italy:Arbitration agreement between the United States and Italy, extending the duration of the Convention of March 28, 1908 (Documents 601-601)

Liability to military service, upon return to Italy, of (1) naturalized American citizens of Italian birth; (2) persons born in the United States of Italian parents before the naturalization of the parents; (3) persons so born after such naturalization. Dual citizenship. Correspondence relating to negotiation of a naturalization convention (Documents 602-632)

Japan:Arbitration agreement between the United States and Japan, extending the duration of the Convention of May 5, 1908 (Documents 633-633)

Protest of Japan against certain land laws of the State of California (Documents 634-636)

Abolition of foreign settlements in Chosen (Korea) (Documents 637-641)

Liberia:Financial affairs (Documents 642-650)

Mexico:Political affairs: Constitutionalist revolution against Gen. Huerta’s dictatorship, led by Carranza and Villa. Arrest by Huertista officer at Tampico of an officer and men of the U. S. S. Dolphin (Documents 651-984)

Severance of diplomatic relations between the United States and Mexico; representation of American interests by the Brazilian Legation; withdrawal of consular officers; good offices of British Minister to Mexico and of British and French consular officers (Documents 985-1011)

Exportation of arms and munitions of war to Mexico, and exceptions thereto

Firing across the boundary line by Mexican troops; preventive measures taken by the United States (Documents 1012-1020)

Claims of American citizens against Mexico for damages arising from revolutionary disturbances (Documents 1021-1023)

Arrest and imprisonment of American Consular officers:Consular Agent Edward A. Powers, at Parral (Documents 1024-1027)

Consul General Philip C. Hanna, at Monterey (Documents 1028-1029)

Vice Consul John R. Silliman, at Saltillo (Documents 1030-1052)

Protection of American citizens and interests. Withdrawal of Americans from Mexico. Assistance to American refugees by Brazilian, British, French and German diplomatic and consular officers and French and German naval vessels (Documents 1053-1115)

Protection of American oil interests in Mexico. Agreements by exchange of notes with Great Britain and the Netherlands to preserve the status quo (Documents 1116-1170)

Protection of American mining interests. Agreement by exchange of notes with Great Britain and Spain to preserve the status quo (Documents 1171-1190)

Confiscatory taxation of American citizens (Documents 1191-1262)

Forced loans imposed on American citizens (Documents 1263-1335)

Protection by the United States of Spanish, British, French, German, and Chinese subjects and interests in Mexico; attitude of Gen. Carranza toward unofficial representations in behalf of non-American foreign persons and interests by American officials—Protection of Spanish subjects and interests (Documents 1336-1464)

Protection of British subjects and interests. Execution of William S. Benton, a British subject; good offices of the United States (Documents 1465-1527)

Protection of French citizens and interests; treatment of religious orders (Documents 1528-1568)

Protection of German subjects and interests (Documents 1569-1602)

Protection of Chinese; admission of refugees to the United States (Documents 1603-1615)

Kidnapping of Samuel Cantú, a Mexican citizen, on American territory by Mexican officers (Documents 1616-1627)

Morocco:French Protectorate in Morocco. Relinquishment of extraterritorial jurisdiction by certain foreign powers. Attitude of the United States (Documents 1628-1639)

Netherlands:Second International Opium Conference: final protocol. Third International Opium Conference: report of the American delegates; final protocol; protocol for putting into effect the International Opium Convention (Documents 1640-1654)

Agreement between the United States and the Netherlands in relation to oil interests in Mexico.

Nicaragua:Political affairs: Attack on the barracks at Bluefields and other insurrections implicating American citizens; asylum sought at American Consulate; attitude of the United States (Documents 1655-1664)

Financial affairs: Good offices of the United States in securing a loan for current expenses (Documents 1665-1686)

Proposed interoceanic canal treaty between the United States and Nicaragua, and protests of Salvador and Costa Rica in relation thereto (Documents 1687-1704)

Protest of the United States against the presence in Costa Rica of certain Nicaraguan revolutionists.

Norway:Arbitration agreement between the United States and Norway, extending the duration of the Convention of April 4, 1908 (Documents 1705-1705)

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, concluded between the United States and Norway (Documents 1706-1706)

International Conference on Spitzbergen (Documents 1707-1718)

Panama:Message of the President, Belisario Porras, to the National Assembly (Documents 1719-1719)

Neutrality in the waters of the Isthmus of Panama: Protocol of an agreement between the United States and Panama, signed at Washington October 10, 1914 (Documents 1720-1720)

Assault on American citizens in Panama (Documents 1721-1735)

Boundary dispute between Costa Rica and Panama; award made by the Chief Justice of the United States; refusal of Panama to accept the award; acceptance by Costa Rica of the good offices of the United States tendered to both parties (Documents 1736-1754)

Railroad construction in Panama; attitude of the United States (Documents 1755-1766)

Control by the United States of wireless telegraph stations in Panama (Documents 1767-1788)

Panama Canal tolls.

Paraguay:Boundary agreement between Bolivia and Paraguay

Extradition treaty between the United States and Paraguay (Documents 1789-1789)

Persia:Coronation of Sultan Ahmad Kadjar, Shah of Persia (Documents 1790-1794)

Peru:Political affairs: Revolution; resignation of President Billinghurst; recognition by the United States of the Government Junta and of the Provisional President, Oscar Benavides (Documents 1795-1813)

Portugal:Treaty for the advancement of general peace, concluded between the United States and Portugal (Documents 1814-1814)

Arbitration agreement between the United States and Portugal, extending the duration of the Convention of April 6, 1908 (Documents 1815-1815)

Roumania:Death of King Carol I and accession to the throne of King Ferdinand I (Documents 1816-1822)

Salvador:Message of the President, Carlos Meléndez, to the National Assembly (Documents 1823-1823)

Arbitration agreement between the United States and Salvador, extending the duration of the Convention of December 21, 1908 (Documents 1824-1824)

Transfer of the presidency by President Meléndez to the First Designado, Alfonso Quiñónez (Documents 1825-1831)

Protest of Salvador in relation to a proposed Nicaraguan canal.

Spain:Arbitration agreement between the United States and Spain, extending the duration of the Convention of April 20, 1908 (Documents 1832-1832)

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, concluded between the United States and Spain (Documents 1833-1833)

Protection by the United States of Spanish interests in Mexico.

Sweden:Arbitration agreement between the United States and Sweden, extending the duration of the Convention of May 2, 1908 (Documents 1834-1834)

Switzerland:Arbitration agreement between the United States and Switzerland, extending the duration of the Convention of February 29, 1908 (Documents 1835-1835)

Turkey:Treaty of peace between Turkey and Serbia (Documents 1836-1836)

Abrogation by Turkey of the Capitulations. Refusal of the United States to recognize executory force therein (Documents 1837-1842)

Protection of American educational institutions.

Agreement of the Powers to the increase of the Turkish customs tariff.

Venezuela:Constitution of Venezuela (Documents 1843-1843)

Authorization of American consular officers to visit vessels bound for the United States, Porto Rico, and Colon (Documents 1844-1845)

Certificate of good conduct required of immigrants to Venezuela; protest of the United States (Documents 1846-1849)

Application of the law of ecclesiastical patronage to foreign missionary societies (Documents 1850-1855)

Death of Dr. Pedro Ezequiel Rojas, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Venezuela to the United States (Documents 1856-1862)

International conventions; texts:Convention between the United States and other powers on literary and artistic copyright; signed at Buenos Aires, August 11, 1910 (Documents 1863-1863)

Convention between the United States and other powers for the arbitration of pecuniary claims; signed at Buenos Aires, August 11, 1910 (Documents 1864-1864)

Convention between the United States and other powers for the protection of inventions, patents, designs, and industrial models; signed at Buenos Aires, August 20, 1910 (Documents 1865-1865)

Index

Address of the President, annual Address of the President, annual

Gentlemen of the Congress:

The session upon which you are now entering will be the closing session of the Sixty-third Congress, a Congress, I venture to say, which will long be remembered for the great body of thoughtful and constructive work which it has done, in loyal response to the thought and needs of the country. I should like in this address to review the notable record and try to make adequate assessment of it; but no doubt we stand too near the work that has been done and are ourselves too much part of it to play the part of historians toward it.

Our program of legislation with regard to the regulation of business is now virtually complete. It has been put forth, as we intended, as a whole, and leaves no conjecture as to what is to follow. The road at last lies clear and firm before business. It is a road which it can travel without fear or embarrassment. It is the road to un-grudged, unclouded success. In it every honest man, every man who believes that the public interest is part of his own interest, may walk with perfect confidence.

Moreover, our thoughts are now more of the future than of the past. While we have worked at our tasks of peace the circumstances of the whole age have been altered by war. What we have done for our own land and our own people we did with the best that was in us, whether of character or of intelligence, with sober enthusiasm and a confidence in the principles upon which we were acting which sustained us at every step of the difficult undertaking; but it is done. It has passed from our hands. It is now an established part of the legislation of the country. Its usefulness, its effects will disclose themselves in experience. What chiefly strikes us now, as we look about us during these closing days of a year which will be forever memorable in the history of the world, is that we face new tasks, have been facing them these six months, must face them in the months to come,—face them without partisan feeling, like men who have forgotten everything but a common duty and the fact that we are representatives of a great people whose thought is not of us but of what America owes to herself and to all mankind in such circumstances as these upon which we look amazed and anxious.

War has interrupted the means of trade not only but also the processes of production. In Europe it is destroying men and resources wholesale and upon a scale unprecedented and appalling. There is reason to fear that the time is near, if it be not already at hand, when several of the countries of Europe will find it difficult to do for their people what they have hitherto been always easily able to do,—many essential and fundamental things. At any rate, they will need our help and our manifold services as they have never needed them before; and we should be ready, more fit and ready than we have ever been.

It is of equal consequence that the nations whom Europe has usually supplied with innumerable articles of manufacture and commerce of which they are in constant need and without which their economic development halts and stands still can now get only a small part of what they formerly imported and eagerly look to us to supply their all but empty markets. This is particularly true of our own neighbors, the States, great and small, of Central and South America. Their lines of trade have hitherto run chiefly athwart the seas, not to our ports but to the ports of Great Britain and of the older continent of Europe. I do not stop to inquire why, or to make any comment on probable causes. What interests us just now is not the explanation but the fact, and our duty and opportunity in the presence of it. Here are markets which we must supply, and we must find the means of action. The United States, this great people for whom we speak and act, should be ready, as never before, to serve itself and to serve mankind; ready with its resources, its energies, its forces of production, and its means of distribution.

It is a very practical matter, a matter of ways and means. We have the resources, but are we fully ready to use them? And, if we can make ready what we have, have we the means at hand to distribute it? We are not fully ready; neither have we the means of distribution. We are willing, but we are not fully able. We have the wish to serve and to serve greatly, generously; but we are not prepared as we should be. We are not ready to mobilize our resources at once. We are not prepared to use them immediately and at their best, without delay and without waste.

To speak plainly, we have grossly erred in the way in which we have stunted and hindered the development of our merchant marine. And now, when we need ships, we have not got them. We have year after year debated, without end or conclusion, the best policy to pursue with regard to the use of the ores and forests and water powers of our national domain in the rich States of the West, when we should have acted; and they are still locked up. The key is still turned upon them, the door shut fast at which thousands of vigorous men, full of initiative, knock clamorously for admittance. The water power of our navigable streams outside the national domain also, even in the eastern States, where we have worked and planned for generations, is still not used as it might be, because we will and we won’t; because the laws we have made do not intelligently balance encouragement against restraint. We withhold by regulation.

I have come to ask you to remedy and correct these mistakes and omissions, even at this short session of a Congress which would certainly seem to have done all the work that could reasonably be expected of it. The time and the circumstances are extraordinary, and so must our efforts be also.

Fortunately, two great measures, finely conceived, the one to unlock, with proper safeguards, the resources of the national domain, the other to encourage the use of the navigable waters outside that domain for the generation of power, have already passed the House of Representatives and are ready for immediate consideration and action by the Senate. With the deepest earnestness I urge their prompt passage. In them both we turn our backs upon hesitation and makeshift and formulate a genuine policy of use and conservation, in the best sense of those words. We owe the one measure not only to the people of that great western country for whose free and systematic development, as it seems to me, our legislation has done so little, but also to the people of the Nation as a whole; and we as clearly owe the other in fulfillment of our repeated promises that the water power of the country should in fact as well as in name be put at the disposal of great industries which can make economical and profitable use of it, the rights of the public being adequately guarded the while, and monopoly in the use prevented. To have begun such measures and not completed them would, indeed mar the record of this great Congress very seriously. I hope and confidently believe that they will be completed.

And there is another great piece of legislation which awaits and should receive the sanction of the Senate: I mean the bill which gives a larger measure of self-government to the people of the Philippines. How better, in this time of anxious questioning and perplexed policy, could we show our confidence in the principles of liberty, as the source as well as the expression of life, how better could we demonstrate our own self-possession and steadfastness in the courses of justice and disinterestedness than by thus going calmly forward to fulfill our promises to a dependent people, who will now look more anxiously than ever to see whether we have indeed the liberality, the unselfishness, the courage, the faith we have boasted and professed. I can not believe that the Senate will let this great measure of constructive justice await the action of another Congress. Its passage would nobly crown the record of these two years of memorable labor.

But I think that you will agree with me that this does not complete the toll of our duty. How are we to carry our goods to the empty markets of which I have spoken if we have not the ships? How are we to build up a great trade if we have not the certain and constant means of transportation upon which all profitable and useful commerce depends? And how are we to get the ships if we wait for the trade to develop without them? To correct the many mistakes by which we have discouraged and all but destroyed the merchant marine of the country, to retrace the steps by which we have, it seems almost deliberately, withdrawn our flag from the seas, except where, here and there, a ship of war is bidden carry it or some wandering yacht displays it, would take a long time and involve many detailed items of legislation, and the trade which we ought immediately to handle would disappear or find other channels while we debated the items.

The case is not unlike that which confronted us when our own continent was to be opened up to settlement and industry, and we needed long lines of railway, extended means of transportation prepared beforehand, if development was not to lag intolerably and wait interminably. We lavishly subsidized the building of transcontinental railroads. We look back upon that with regret now, because the subsidies led to many scandals of which we are ashamed; but we know that the railroads had to be built, and if we had it to do over again We should of course build them, but in another way. Therefore I propose another way of providing the means of transportation, which must precede, not tardily follow, the development of our trade with our neighbor states of America. It may seem a reversal of the natural order of things, but it is true, that the routes of trade must be actually opened—by many ships and regular sailings and moderate charges—before streams of merchandise will flow freely and profitably through them.

Hence the pending shipping bill, discussed at the last session but as yet passed by neither House. In my judgment such legislation is imperatively needed and can not wisely be postponed. The Government must open these gates of trade, and open them wide; open them before it is altogether profitable to open them, or altogether reasonable to ask private capital to open them at a venture. It is not a question of the Government monopolizing the field. It should take action to make it certain that transportation at reasonable rates will be promptly provided, even Where the carriage is not at first profitable; and then, when the carriage has become sufficiently profitable to attract and engage private capital, and engage it in abundance, the Government ought to withdraw. I very earnestly hope that the Congress will be of this opinion, and that both Houses will adopt this exceedingly important bill.

The great subject of rural credits still remains to be dealt with, and it is a matter of deep regret that the difficulties of the subject have seemed to render it impossible to complete a bill for passage at this session. But it can not be perfected yet, and therefore there are no other constructive measures the necessity for which I will at this time call your attention to; but I would be negligent of a very manifest duty were I not to call the attention of the Senate to the fact that the proposed convention for safety at sea awaits its confirmation and that the limit fixed in the convention itself for its acceptance is the last day of the present month. The conference in which this convention originated was called by the United States; the representatives of the United States played a very influential part indeed in framing the provisions of the proposed convention; and those provisions are in themselves for the most part admirable. It would hardly be consistent with the part we have played in the whole matter to let it drop and go by the board as if forgotten and neglected. It was ratified in May last by the German Government and in August by the Parliament of Great Britain. It marks a most hopeful and decided advance in international civilization. We should show our earnest good faith in a great matter by adding our own acceptance of it.

There is another matter of which I must make special mention, if I am to discharge my conscience, lest it should escape your attention. It may seem a very small thing. It affects only a single item of appropriation. But many human lives and many great enterprises hang upon it. It is the matter of making adequate provision for the survey and charting of our coasts. It is immediately pressing and exigent in connection with the immense coast line of Alaska, a coast line greater than that of the United States themselves, though it is also very important indeed with regard to the older coasts of the continent. We can not use our great Alaskan domain, ships will not ply thither, if those coasts and their many hidden dangers are not thoroughly surveyed and charted. The work is incomplete at almost every point. Ships and lives have been lost in threading what were supposed to be well-known main channels. We have not provided adequate vessels or adequate machinery for the survey and charting. We have used old vessels that were not big enough or strong enough and which were so nearly unseaworthy that our inspectors would not have allowed private owners to send them to sea. This is a matter which, as I have said, seems small, but is in reality very great. Its importance has only to be looked into to be appreciated.

Before I close may I say a few words upon two topics, much discussed out of doors, upon which it is highly important that our judgments should be clear, definite, and steadfast?

One of these is economy in government expenditures. The duty of economy is not debatable. It is manifest and imperative. In the appropriations we pass we are spending the money of the great people whose servants we are,—not our own. We are trustees and responsible stewards in the spending. The only thing debatable and upon which we should be careful to make our thought and purpose clear is the kind of economy demanded of us. I assert with the greatest confidence that the people of the United States are not jealous of the amount their Government costs if they are sure that they get what they need and desire for the outlay, that the money is being spent for objects of which they approve, and that it is being applied with good business sense and management.

Governments grow, piecemeal, both in their tasks and in the means by which those tasks are to be performed, and very few Governments are organized, I venture to say, as wise and experienced business men would organize them if they had a clean sheet of paper to write upon. Certainly the Government of the United States is not. I think that it is generally agreed that there should be a systematic reorganization and reassembling of its parts so as to secure greater efficiency and effect considerable savings in expense. But the amount of money saved in that way would, I believe, though no doubt considerable in itself, running, it may be, into millions, be relatively small,—small, I mean, in proportion to the total necessary outlays of the Government. It would be thoroughly worth effecting, as every saving would, great or small. Our duty is not altered by the scale of the saving. But my point is that the people of the United States do not wish to curtail the activities of this Government; they wish, rather, to enlarge them; and with every enlargement, with the mere growth, indeed, of the country itself, there must come, of course, the inevitable increase of expense. The sort of economy we ought to practice may be effected, and ought to be effected, by a careful study and assessment of the tasks to be performed; and the money spent ought to be made to yield the best possible returns in efficiency and achievement. And, like good stewards, we should so account for every dollar of our appropriations as to make it perfectly evident what it was spent for and in what way it was spent.

It is not expenditure but extravagance that we should fear being criticized for; not paying for the legitimate enterprises and undertakings of a great Government whose people command what it should do, but adding what will benefit only a few or pouring money out for what need not have been undertaken at all or might have been postponed or better and more economically conceived and carried out. The Nation is not niggardly; it is very generous. It will chide us only if we forget for whom we pay money out and whose money it is we pay. These are large and general standards, but they are not very difficult of application to particular cases.

The other topic I shall take leave to mention goes deeper into the principles of our national life and policy. It is the subject of national defense.

It can not be discussed without first answering some very searching questions. It is said in some quarters that we are not prepared for war. What is meant by being prepared? Is it meant that we are not ready upon brief notice to put a nation in the field, a nation of men trained to arms? Of course we are not ready to do that; and we shall never be in time of peace so long as we retain our present political principles and institutions. And what is it that it is suggested we should be prepared to do? To defend ourselves against attack? We have always found means to do that, and shall find them whenever it is necessary without calling our people away from their necessary tasks to render compulsory military service in times of peace.

Allow me to speak with great plainness and directness upon this great matter and to avow my convictions with deep earnestness. I have tried to know what America is, what her people think, what they are, what they most cherish and hold dear. I hope that some of their finer passions are in my own heart,—some of the great conceptions and desires which gave birth to this Government and which have made the voice of this people a voice of peace and hope and liberty among the peoples of the world, and that, speaking my own thoughts, I shall, at least in part, speak theirs also, however faintly and inadequately, upon this vital matter.

We are at peace with all the world. No one who speaks counsel based on fact or drawn from a just and candid interpretation of realities can say that there is reason to fear that from any quarter our independence or the integrity of our territory is threatened. Dread of the power of any other nation we are incapable of. We are not jealous of rivalry in the fields of commerce or of any other peaceful achievement. We mean to live our own lives as we will; but we mean also to let live. We are, indeed, a true friend to all the nations of the world, because we threaten none, covet the possessions of none, desire the overthrow of none. Our friendship can be accepted and is accepted without reservation, because it is offered in a spirit and for a purpose which no one need ever question or suspect. Therein lies our greatness. We are the champions of peace and of concord. And we should be very jealous of this distinction which we have sought to earn. Just now we should be particularly jealous of it, because it is our dearest present hope that this character and reputation may presently, in God’s providence, bring us an opportunity such as has seldom been vouchsafed any nation, the opportunity to counsel and obtain peace in the world and reconciliation and a healing settlement of many a matter that has cooled and interrupted the friendship of nations. This is the time above all others when we should wish and resolve to keep our strength by self-possession, our influence by preserving our ancient principles of action.

From the first we have had a clear and settled policy with regard to military establishments. We never have had, and while we retain our present principles and ideals we never shall have, a large standing army. If asked, Are you ready to defend yourselves? we reply, Most assuredly, to the utmost; and yet we shall not turn America into a military camp. We will not ask our young men to spend the best years of their lives making soldiers of themselves. There is another sort of energy in us. It will know how to declare itself and make itself effective should occasion arise. And especially when half the world is on fire we shall be careful to make our moral insurance against the spread of the conflagration very definite and certain and adequate indeed.

Let us remind ourselves, therefore, of the only thing we can do or will do We must depend in every time of national peril, in the future as in the past, not upon a standing army, nor yet upon a reserve army, but upon a citizenry trained and accustomed to arms. It will be right enough, right American policy, based upon our accustomed principles and practices, to provide a system by which every citizen who will volunteer for the training may be made familiar with the use of modern arms, the rudiments of drill and maneuver, and the maintenance and sanitation of camps. We should encourage such training and make it a means of discipline which our young men will learn to value. It is right that we should provide it not only, but that we should make it as attractive as possible, and so induce our young men to undergo it at such times as they can command a little freedom and can seek the physical development they need, for mere health’s sake, if for nothing more. Every means by which such things can be stimulated is legitimate, and such a method smacks of, true American ideas. It is right, too, that the National Guard of the States should be developed and strengthened by every means which is not inconsistent with our obligations to our own people or with the established policy of our Government. And this, also, not because the time or occasion specially calls for such measures, but because it should be our constant policy to make these provisions for our national peace and safety.

More than this carries with it a reversal of the whole history and character of our polity. More than this, proposed at this time, permit me to say, would mean merely that we had lost our self-possession, that we had been thrown off our balance by a war with which we have nothing to do, whose causes can not touc0h us, whose very existence affords us opportunities of friendship and disinterested service which should make us ashamed of any thought of hostility or fearful preparation for trouble. This is assuredly the opportunity for which a people and a government like ours were raised up, the opportunity not only to speak but actually to embody and exemplify the counsels of peace and amity and the lasting concord which is based on justice and fair and generous dealing.

A powerful navy we have always regarded as our proper and natural means of defense; and it has always been of defense that we have thought, never of aggression or of conquest. But who shall tell us now what sort of navy to build? We shall take leave to be strong upon the seas, in the future as in the past; and there will be no thought of offense or of provocation in that. Our ships are our natural bulwarks. When will the experts tell us just what kind we should construct—and when will they be right for ten years together, if the relative efficiency of craft of different kinds and uses continues to change as we have seen it change under our very eyes in these last few months?

But I turn away from the subject. It is not new. There is no new need to discuss it. We shall not alter our attitude toward it because some amongst us are nervous and excited. We shall easily and sensibly agree upon a policy of defense. The question has not changed its aspects because the times are not normal. Our policy will not be for an occasion. It will be conceived as a permanent and settled thing, which we will pursue at all seasons, without haste and after a fashion perfectly consistent with the peace of the world, the abiding friendship of states, and the unhampered freedom of all with whom we deal. Let there be no misconception. The country has been misinformed. We have not been negligent of national defense. We are not unmindful of the great responsibility resting upon us. We shall learn and profit by the lesson of every experience and every new circumstance; and what is needed will be adequately done.

I close, as I began, by reminding you of the great tasks and duties of peace which challenge our best powers and invite us to build what will last, the tasks to which we can address ourselves now and at all times with free-hearted zest and with all the finest gifts of constructive wisdom we possess. To develop our life and our resources; to supply our own people, and the people of the world as their need arises, from the abundant plenty of our fields and our marts of trade; to enrich the commerce of our own States and of the world with the products of our mines, our farms, and our factories, with the creations of our thought and the fruits of our character,—this is what will hold our attention and our enthusiasm steadily, now and in the years to come, as we strive to show in our life as a nation what liberty and the inspirations of an emancipated spirit may do for men and for societies, for individuals, for states, and for mankind.

Woodrow Wilson.
December 8, 1914.

List of papers, in chronological order, with subjects of correspondence List of papers, in chronological order, with subjects of correspondence

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

Circular 1914. Jan. 12 Admission into the United States of adopted children of Chinese of American birth. Instruction in regard to the kind of certificate required. 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2]

Do Jan. 31 Third International Peace Conference. Instruction to propose that the duties of the international preparatory committee be committed to the Administrative Council of the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague. 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

Do Feb. 21 Status of Chinese wives or widows of American citizens. Instruction in regard to the registration of such persons. 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

Do May 15 Nineteenth International Congress of Americanists. Instruction extend invitation thereto 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8]

Do May 16 Admission and return of Chinese participating in the Panama-Pacific International Exposition and the Panama-California Exposition. Transmits regulations in regard thereto. 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8]

Do May 27 Admission and return of aliens, other than Chinese, participating in the Panama-Pacific Exposition and the Panama-California Exposition. Transmits regulations governing the same. 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8]

Do June 18 Immigration laws. Instruction to bring to the attention of the Government the fact that falsely testifying before an immigrant inspector is perjury under Sec. 24 of the Immigration Act, and that under Sec. 2 thereof the immigration officials are required to exclude aliens who admit the commission of a crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]

Do June 22 Third International Peace Conference. Instruction to propose as a substitute for the proposal contained in the circular instruction of Jan. 31, 1914, that the duties of the International Preparatory Committee be committed to a committee to be selected from among the members of the Administrative Council of the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague by the members of the Council; and that the date for the meeting of the Third Peace Conference by fixed for the month of June, 1916. 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 10]

Do July 7 Second Pan American Scientific Congress. Instruction to extend an official invitation to the Government to send delegates to the Congress which will meet at Washington in October, 1915. Gives personnel of the program committee of the Congress. 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]

Do July 8 Opium laws and regulations. Instruction to communicate to the Government the conditions under which opium, cocaine, etc., may be imported into the United States. States those conditions. Instruction to request the Government to advise him of its own conditions. 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 12 [Pg. 12 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]

Do July 13 Foreign naval rendezvous at Hampton Roads for participation in the celebration of the completion of the Panama Canal and the opening of the Panama-Pacific International Exposition. Instruction as to program. 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 13]

Do July 16 Panama-Pacific International Exposition. Informs him of the great interest taken by this Government in the Exposition, and of rumors to the contrary which he will seek to overcome. 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]

Do July 25 Regulations for the operation and navigation of the Panama Canal. Instruction in regard thereto. 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]

Do July 27 Citizenship of children born of American fathers who have never resided in the United States. Instruction in regard to the registration of and issuance of passports to such persons. 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]

Do July 31 Opening of the Panama Canal, instruction m regard to the date of the opening. 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

Do Aug. 3 International Dry-farming Congress. Instructs him to invite the Government to send delegates to the Congress, to be held at Wichita, Kans., October 7–17, 1914, and to explain the objects or the Congress. In connection therewith there will be held the International Soil Products Exposition, participation in which will be welcomed. 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

Do Aug. 29 Invitation to all Governments to cooperate with the United States in regard to immigration in war time. 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

Do Sept. 5 Nineteenth International Congress of Americanists. Instruction to inform the Foreign Office of the indefinite postponement thereof. 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

argentina

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

Mr. Lorillard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Aug. 9 Death of President Saenz Pena and succession to the presidency of Vice President de la Plaza. Reports the death of President Saenz Pena on Aug. 9. 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26]

President Wilson to Vice President de la Plaza (telegram). Aug. 10 Same subject. Message of condolence 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Murature (telegram). do Same subject. Message of condolence 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26]

332 Mr. Lorillard to Mr. Bryan Aug. 14 Same subject. Reports the succession to the presidency of the Vice President doctor Victorino de la Plaza. 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26]

Mr. Naón to Mr. Bryan Dec. 20 Same subject. Transmits autograph letter of President de la Plaza to President Wilson. 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

austria-hungary.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

1914.May 28 Arbitration agreement between the United States and Austria-Hungary extending the duration of the convention of Jan. 15. 1909. Text. 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 28]

Mr. Penfield to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 28 Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand and the Duchess of Hohenberg. Reports the assassination of the Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir apparent, to the throne of Austria-Hungary, and of his wife, the Duchess of Hohenberg, by a student, June 28, at Sarajevo. 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

The President to the Emperor (telegram). June 29 Same subject. Expression of condolence 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 30, Doc. 31, Doc. 32, and Doc. 33]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Dumba. June 30 Same subject. Expression of condolence. 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 30, Doc. 31, Doc. 32, and Doc. 33]

The Emperor to the President (telegram) do Same subject. Expression of thanks for his message of June 29. 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 30, Doc. 31, Doc. 32, and Doc. 33]

The Emperor to the President. Aug. 2 Same subject. Formal notification of the assassination of the Archduke. 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 30, Doc. 31, Doc. 32, and Doc. 33]

The President to the Emperor. Oct. 20 Same subject. Acknowledgment of the formal notification of Aug. 2. 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]

bolivia.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

66 Mr. Grevstad to Mr. Bryan. 1913. July 9 Boundary agreement between Bolivia and Paraguay. The secret protocol establishing a modus vivendi has not yet been accepted by Bolivia. Further treaty negations are probable 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Mooney (telegram). 1914. Nov. 20 Same subject. Bolivia fears that the protocol mentioned in the preceding paper is being violated by Paraguay, and requests the United States unofficially to represent to Paraguay the necessity of preserving peace in the disputed region, which has been entered by Paraguayan troops. Instructions as to such representations. 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]

Mr. Mooney to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 28 Same subject. Reports results of interview at the Paraguayan Foreign Office in pursuance of instructions of Department’s telegram of Nov. 20. Paraguay denies having violated the protocol. 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Calderon. Nov. 30 Same subject. The Bolivian Minister is informed of Mr. Mooney’s report. 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]

Mr. Calderon to Mr. Lansing. Dec. 1 Same subject. Express Bolivia’s thanks for the good offices of the Department, which have dispelled Bolivia’s fears as to the purposes of Paraguay. 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]

brazil.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

377 Mr. Morgan to Mr. Bryan 1914. May 19 Message of President da Fonseca to the Congress Transmits copies of the message. Extracts there from. 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 40]

bulgaria

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

65 Mr. Vopicka to Mr. Bryan. 1914. Apr. 4 Reception of the first Minister of Bulgaria to the United States. The Bulgarian Government is considering the establishment of a legation at Washington 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 41, Doc. 42, and Doc. 43]

Same to same (telegram). Sept. 3 Same subject. Mr. S. Panaretoff has been chosen as the first Bulgarian Minister to the United States. 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 41, Doc. 42, and Doc. 43]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Vopicka (telegram) Sept. 10 Same subject. Mr. Panaretoff is entirely acceptable to this Government. 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 41, Doc. 42, and Doc. 43]

128 Mr. Vopicka to Mr. Bryan. Oct. 1 Same subject. The new Minister will soon proceed to Washington. 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 44, Doc. 45, and Doc. 46]

Mr. Rockhill to Mr. Bryan. Dec. 1 Same subject. Offers to convey to the newly appointed. Minister any message to him from the Department on his arrival at New York. 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 44, Doc. 45, and Doc. 46]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Rockhill (telegram) Dec. 3 Same subject. Requests him to express to Mr. Panaretoff the Department’s welcome. 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 44, Doc. 45, and Doc. 46]

Mr. Panaretoff to Mr. Bryan. Dec. 15 Same subject. Requests an audience. 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Panaretoff. Dec. 16 same subject. Appoints an hour on Dec. 17 for an interview at the Department. 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50]

Same to same Dec. 18 Same subject. Advises him of the date for his reception by the President. 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50]

Mr. Panaretoff to the President. Dec. 22 Same subject. Remarks by the Minister at his reception by the President. 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50]

chile.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

490 Mr. Fletcher to Mr. Bryan. 1914. June 8 Message of the President. Transmits copies of the message of June 1, 1914, and calls attention to certain passages. 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 51]

china.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

Mr. Knox to Mr. Calhoun (telegram). 1911. May 16 Huai River conservancy. Instruction to ascertain views of Chinese Government as to offer of American Red Cross to send an engineer to study the problem. 95 [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

Mr. Calhoun to Mr. Knox (telegram) May 25 Same subject. Red Cross offer gladly accepted by Chinese government 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 94, Doc. 95, Doc. 96, and Doc. 97]

Mr. Knox to Mr. Calhoun (telegram). May 27 Same subject. The Red Cross engineer will be chosen soon. 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 94, Doc. 95, Doc. 96, and Doc. 97]

Mr. Wilson to Mr. Calhoun (telegram). June 12 same subject. Red Cross has engaged Charles Davis Jameson to study and report upon river conservancy. Instruction to give him every possible facility on his arrival in China. 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 94, Doc. 95, Doc. 96, and Doc. 97]

482 Mr. Calhoun to Mr. Knox 1912. Mar. 20 Political affairs. Incloses copy in translation of the Provisional Constitution of China. 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 52]

828 Mr. Williams to Mr. Bryan. 1913. Apr. 28 Huai River conservancy. Transmits Mr. Jameson’s conservancy report. 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 94, Doc. 95, Doc. 96, and Doc. 97]

1048 Same to same Oct. 11 Political affairs. Incloses translation of the Presidential population law. 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

7 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Reinsch. Dec 2 Loan Negotiations. Replies to Legation’s No. 1067 of Oct. 21, 1913, on the subject of a loan by American capitalists to China; approves action by Legation. The Department assumes that the Currency Loan has been merged with the Reorganization Loan. Requests information. 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59]

Mr. Reinsch to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Dec. 19 Huai River conservancy. Chinese Government, being obliged to seek abroad for funds for Huai River project, invites American capital. Mr. Jameson will proceed to the United States with engineering plans to assist in loan negotiations if Red Cross will continue endeavor to interest American financiers. 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

57 Same to same 1914. Jan. 2 Claims. Incloses a dispatch from Consul Greene, Hankow, discussing various aspects of the claims presented by several nations against China for losses to their nationals consequent upon the Revolution of 1911–12; and Mr. Reinsch’s reply thereto. 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 83]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Reinsch (telegram). 1914. Jan. 13 Boxer Indemnity. Instruction to inquire of Foreign Office as to method of repayment to China of balance of indemnity payments to China’s credit in the Treasury. 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and Doc. 68]

73 Mr. Reinsch to Mr. Bryan Jan. 15 Claims. Review of the character, functions, and procedure of the several bodies dealing with claims during the past two years. 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]

Mr. Moore to Mr. Yung Kwai. Jan. 16 Boxer Indemnity. Incloses Treasury letter and Treasury statement relating to payments by China on account of the 1913 quota of the indemnity. The Department has inquired of the Chinese Government as to its preference as to method of repayment to China of balance to its credit in the U. S. Treasury. 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and Doc. 68]

75 Mr. Reinsch to Mr. Bryan. Jan. 16 Political affairs. Reports the suspension of the National Assembly and other political news. Incloses copy of Dr. Goodnow’s draft of a constitution for China. 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]

Chinese Legation to Department of State. Jan. 20 Boxer Indemnity. The Foreign Office cabled Chinese Legation to receive indemnity balance in the same manner as it did last August. 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Reinsch (telegram). Jan. 20 Same subject. Quotes foregoing. Department will accordingly remit check for balance to Chinese Legation tomorrow. Advise Foreign Office. 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72]

Mr. Moore to Mr. McAdoo. Jan. 22 Same subject. Requests that Treasury remit by check, through Department of State, to the Chinese Charge” d’Affaires, the $543,007.63 refundable to China. 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72]

Mr. Reinsch to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Jan. 23 Huai River conservancy. Requests instruction as to accepting preliminary agreement giving the Red Cross exclusive right to undertake conservancy work. 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

89 Same to same. Jan. 26 Currency reform. Transmits copy of new Chinese Currency law. China is still anxious to secure money from the United States to support currency reform. Requests instructions. 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 62]

Mr. Moore to the President do Huai River conservancy. Reviews the history of the conservancy negotiations. Informs the Department that Red Cross desires the support of this Government in behalf of the American contractor selected (White & Co.), and is considering employment of an engineer from Panama canal corps 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 100]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Reinsch (telegram). Jan. 27 Same subject. Reply to his Jan. 23. The Red Cross will accept the exclusive authority over conservancy work and has secured J. G. White & Co. as contractors and to assist in negotiating the necessary loan; stipulations as to engineer in chief; other recommendations. 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

Same to same (telegram). Jan. 28 Same subject. Supplementing the telegram of Jan. 27; gives preamble of the agreement. 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 10]

Mr. Reinsch to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Jan 30 Same subject. Reports signing of agreement with Red Cross. 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104]

Mr. Williams to Mr. Bryan do Boxer indemnity. Refers to Department’s Jan. 22 and incloses check as requested. 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72]

18 Mr. Reinsch to Mr. Bryan. Feb. 3 Huai River conservancy. Transmits copies of the agreement-memorandum signed Jan. 30, 1914. 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104]

Mr. Moore to the President Feb. 4 Same subject. The Chinese Government has given the Red Cross formal authority to secure an American contractor and perform the engineering work. Requests that Red Cross be informed as to what this Government will do in support of the enterprise. 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

38 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Reinsch. do Claims. Acknowledges his No. 57 of Jan. 2; authorizes him to endeavor to induce the Diplomatic Body to consent to such limitation of claims as will prevent injustice to China; refers him to instruction of Dec. 20, 1913. 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]

The President to Mr. Moore Feb. 6 Huai River conservancy. The Government will give assurance of its good offices and diplomatic support. 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

105 Mr. Reinsch to Mr. Bryan. do Loan negotiations. Replies to Department’s No. 7 of Dec. 2, 1913. Currency-reform Loan was not merged in the Reorganization Loan issued last April by quintuple group, which is now negotiating with China for a supplementary reorganization loan which will include a sum for currency reform. The Chinese Government would welcome resumption of currency-loan negotiations with the United States. 62 [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]

113 Mr. Reinsch to Mr. Bryan. 1914. Feb. 12 Currency reform. Refers to his No. 89 and incloses copy of amended currency law. 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 63]

149 Same to same Mar. 10 Taxation of foreigners. Submits the question of the relation of the new Chinese stamp law to the rights of this Government under the treaty of 1903. 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Reinsch (telegram). Mar. 16 Boxer indemnity. Instructs him to inquire whether this Government is to pay the remitted portion of the January 1914 quota to the Chinese legation 75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75]

159 Mr. Reinsch to Mr. Bryan. Mar. 18 Claims. Reports stoppage of the negotiations due French insistence on payment of claims for indirect losses, which question China desires to submit to arbitration. Inquires whether this Government will support China’s desire. 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]

166 Same to same Mar. 24 Mining regulations. Incloses Chinese Mining Regulations of Mar. 11, 1914, and points out objections to certain of their features, with recommendation of explicit reservation, upon accepting the regulations, of extraterritorial rights. 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 140]

165 Same to same do Claims. Great Britain, Germany, and perhaps other powers may refuse to present claims for indirect damages. Requests instruction as to whether he shall join these. 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]

Same to same (telegram). Mar. 30 Boxer indemnity. The Chinese Government desires the payment to be made to its Legation. Mr. Reinsch has impressed on the Foreign Office the desirability of the Chinese Legation’s retaining the remitted sum for the support of the indemnity students in the United States. 75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75]

Mr. Williams to Mr. Lansing. Apr. 1 Huai River conservancy, The Bankers upon whom the contractors depend for funds require certain assurances as to security; this requires a new survey, the expense of which is now being considered. The Red Cross will ask Congress to authorize the detail of an American Army engineer to make the survey. 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 107]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Yung Kwai. Apr. 11 Boxer indemnity. Incloses check for $15,147.97 in payment of remitted portion of January, 1914, indemnity. 75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75]

80 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Reinsch. Apr. 23 Claims. Acknowledges his No. 159 of Mar. 18 and No. 165 of Mar. 24; instructs him to refuse to present claims of the kind mentioned in case either Great Britain or Germany is willing to do the same. 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]

87 Same to same May. 1 Mining regulations. Reply to his No. 166 of Mar. 24, giving this Government’s views of certain objectionable features of the regulations, with instruction to transmit such views to the Foreign Office. 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

90 Same to same. May 4 Taxation of foreigners. Reply to his Mar. 10. This Government is disposed to consent in principle to the imposition of the stamp tax provided other foreign governments assent thereto. Instruction to so state to the Chinese Government, but to endeavor to secure advisable revision of the regulations and to make certain stipulations. 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

211 Same to same. May 5 Political affairs. Incloses a memorandum on the Revised Provisional Constitution, with a synopsis thereof. 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Mr. Reinsch to Mr. Bryan (telegram). May 8 Huai River conservancy. Foreign Office favors assumption by China of cost of the survey; speedy sending of engineering board desired. 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Reinsch (telegram). May 9 Same subject. The Red Cross will immediately organize and send to China the engineering board to make the supplemental survey, and will try to float the conservancy loan. 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110]

Mr. Reinsch to Mr. Bryan (telegram). May 12 Same subject. The Chinese Government will guarantee payment of cost of supplemental survey up to $100,000 if the funds are advanced by the Red Cross and the White Co.; subject to approval by the Minister of Agriculture and Commerce, Chang Chien. 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110]

5 Mr. Shah to Mr. Bryan do Taxation of foreigners. Requests the views of this Government on the stamp tax law and its assistance in obtaining compliance therewith of its nationals and of other governments 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Reinsch (telegram). May 13 Huai River conservancy. The White Co. and the Red Cross will share in making the $100,000 advance, on certain conditions. Instruction to obtain acceptance of the conditions. 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112]

15 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Shah. May 15 Taxation of foreigners. Replies to his May 12 and informs him of the substance of the Department’s May 4 to Mr. Reinsch. 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 129, Doc. 130, and Doc. 131]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Reinsch (telegram). 1914. May 18 Huai River conservancy. Instruction to inform the Chinese Government of the Red Cross terms as to advance and its relation to the proposed loan. Informs him of early departure of the engineering board, with Col. Sibert as its Chairman. 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112]

Mr. Reinsch to Mr. Bryan (telegram). May 18 Same subject. The Chinese Government will assume responsibility for survey up to $50,000. Requests instructions. 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, and Doc. 115]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Reinsch (telegram). May 19 Same subject. Instruction to suggest that Chinese Minister at Washington be empowered to act in regard to conservancy negotiations. Congress has authorized employment of an American Army engineer. Red Cross intends to make Col. Sibert chairman of the board of engineers. 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, and Doc. 115]

6 Mr. Shah to Mr. Bryan May 23 Same subject. The Chinese Government desires that the engineering board come to China as soon as possible. 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, and Doc. 115]

Mr. Reinsch to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Transmits the expression of the Chinese Government’s thanks for the good offices of the States in the conservency matter. 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

248 Same to Same June 1 Mining regulations. Refers to Department’s No. 87 of May 1 and incloses note of the Diplomatic Body to the Foreign Office embodying the Department’s instructions. 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]

255 Same to Same June 5 Political affairs. Refers to his No. 211 of May 5 and transmits memorandum on development of government organization; incloses translation of the Constitutional Compact (Revised Provisional Constitution). 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]

266 Same to Same June 13 Claims. In pursuance of Department’s instruction No. 80 of Apr. 23 and in company with the British and German Legations, he has orally informed the Foreign Office that this Government considers that China is not liable for indirect losses and did not assume that liability. 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

281 Same to same June 24 Political affairs. Refers to his No. 255 of June 5 and incloses memorandum on government development. 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

299 Mr. MacMurray to Mr. Bryan. July 8 Claims. Incloses Consul Williams’s report on the status of American claims. 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

Same to same (telegram). July 18 Loan negotiations. Loan negotiations with the quintuple group have reached deadlock; reasons given. 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Same to same (telegram). July 20 Taxation of foreigners. The Chinese Government seems to be countenancing violations of treaty stipulations regarding exemption from internal taxes. Suggests instruction to advise the Foreign Office that this Government can not forego its treaty rights. 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 129, Doc. 130, and Doc. 131]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. MacMurray (telegram). July 21 Same subject. Approves suggestion. 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133]

314 Mr. MacMurray to Mr. Bryan. July 23 Mining regulations. Refers to Department’s No. 87 of May 1 and Legation’s No. 248 of June 1;incloses reply of the Foreign Office to the note of the Diplomatic Body; incloses also the Legation’s note to the Foreign Office in pursuance of Department’s instructions May 1. 136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

Same to same (telegram) Aug. 8 Moratorium. The Chinese Government is unable at present to meet its obligations. Reasons given. Suggestion that this Government recognize the necessity and accept it subject to reservation of American rights involved. 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65]

6 Mr. Williams to Mr. Bryan. do Taxation of foreigners. Incloses his No. 5 of Aug. 7 to the Legation at Peking respecting the collection of internal taxes in relation to treaty rights and open ports. 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. MacMurray (telegram). Aug. 10 Moratorium. This Government recognizes the difficulty in which China is placed and, while reserving all its rights, suggests that China declare a moratorium. 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65]

Same to same Aug. 11 Claims. Acknowledges receipt of his No. 299 of July 8; commends Mr. Williams for his excellent work as claims delegate. 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

10 Mr. Williams to Mr. Bryan. Aug. 13 Taxation of foreigners. Incloses his No. 6 of Aug. 11 to the Legation regarding a consumption tax on liquor and tobacco in relation to treaty rights at a treaty part. 127 [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]

338 Mr. MacMurray to Mr. Bryan. Aug. 17 Moratorium. Incloses Foreign Office notes 202 and 203 in regard to proclamation of a moratorium on certain of China’s debts; and Legation’s reply in pursuance of Department’s Aug. 10. ■

Mr. MacMurray to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Aug. IS ) Boxer Indemnity. The Foreign Office asks consent to China’s awaiting conclusion of the war to make up deficiency in Boxer Indemnity payments. 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 76, Doc. 77, and Doc. 78]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. MacMurray (telegram). Aug. 20 Same subject. If the majority of the powers interested in indemnity payments agree to wait until the end of the war, it is extremely unlikely that this Government will demand immediate payment. 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 76, Doc. 77, and Doc. 78]

352 Mr. MacMurray to Mr. Bryan. Sept. 3 1 Same subject. Refers fro Legation’s dispatch No. 338 of Aug. 17: transmits Foreign Office notes of Aug. 18 and 21 and Legation’s reply of Aug. 22, in pursuance of Department’s instruction of Aug. 20. Foreign Office states that maintenance of the Tsing Hua College and support of indemnity students in the U. S. would be allowed to suffer from China’s financial difficulties. Inquiries as to the method to be followed in refunding a portion of the indemnity in case of a shortage in the indemnity payments. 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 76, Doc. 77, and Doc. 78]

364 Same to same. Sept. 11 Mining regulations. Incloses note from the Foreign Office in reply to his note, inclosed with his No. 314 of July 23. Suggests that no further rejoinder need be made at present. 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

367 Same to same Sept. 12 Claims. Incloses copies of correspondence regarding payment by China of interest on allowed claims. 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

366 Same to same do Taxation of foreigners. Refers to Mr. Williams’s No. 6 to the Legation and incloses Mr. Williams’s note to the Chinese authorities at Wuhu, and his own note to the Foreign Office. Requests instructions. 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

7 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Williams. Sept. 23 Same subject. Acknowledges receipt of his No. 6 of Aug. 8; instructs him as to the character of an open port and as to the internal taxes allowable in view of treaty provisions. 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

386 Mr. MacMurray to Mr. Bryan. Sept. 29 Huai River conservancy. Reports on the survey work. The board of engineers is preparing its report to the Red Cross. 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

161 Mr. Bryan to Mr. MacMurray. Sept. 30 Taxation of foreigners. Incloses copy of instruction No. 7 of Sept. 23 to Mr. Williams; refers to the Legation’s telegram of July 20; instructs him to agree to an internal tax on liquor and tobacco in return for China’s yielding on the question of Nanking being an open port. 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

182 Mr. Lansing to Mr. Reinsch. Oct. 23 Same subject. Acknowledges receipt of the Legation’s No. 366 of Sept. 12 and inclosures, which are approved. Refers to Department’s No. 161 of Sept. 30. 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

179 Same to same. do Mining regulations. Approves Legation’s No. 364 of Sept. 11. 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]

424 Mr. Reinsch to Mr. Bryan. Oct. 28 Huai River conservancy. Incloses letter to the Legation from the Chinese Government requesting an advance on the conservancy loan account; and his reply thereto. Requests that this correspondence be forwarded to the Red Cross. 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]

189 Mr. Lansing to Mr. Reinsch Oct. 31 Boxer Indemnity. Acknowledges his No. 352. As the Department holds to the credit of the Chinese Government a balance of $1,175,835.64 of the $2,000,000 claims fund, and as the Chinese Government has decided to use this sum in support of Tsing Hua College and the Chinese Government students, this would seem to remove all cause for anxiety in this connection. 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

Mr. Reinsch to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 2 Huai River conservancy. Transmits request of Chinese Government that conservancy loan be consummated immediately and advance be made so that relief work may begin. 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120]

Mr. Lansing to the Red Cross. do Same subject. Transmits the foregoing to the Red Cross. 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120]

Mr. Shah to Mr. Lansing Nov. 10 Boxer Indemnity. Expresses the gratitude of China for the contemplated action of this Government in returning to China the unused portion of the indemnity payments for the maintenance of the student movement between China and the United States. The provisions thus made are amply sufficient the next two years 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 79, Doc. 80, and Doc. 81]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. McAdoo. Nov. 10 Same subject. Requests that check be drawn in favor of the Minister of China for $200,000 on account of the unexpended balance of the $2,000,000 fund. 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 79, Doc. 80, and Doc. 81]

197 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Reinsch. Nov. 13 Huai River conservancy. In reply to his Nov. 2. incloses Red Cross correspondence for communication to the Chinese Government. 114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

24 Mr. Williams to Mr. Bryan 1914. Nov. 23 Taxation of foreigners. Refers to Department s No. 7 of Sept. 23 and incloses copy of his report No. 26 of Nov. 21 to the Legation respecting the status of Nanking as a treaty port. 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

Mr Yung Kwa to Mr. Bryan Nov. 30 Boxer Indemnity. Informs him of receipt from the Treasurer of the United States of check for $200,000, part payment of the balance of the Chinese Indemnity of 1900, returnable to the Chinese Government. 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Reinsch. Dec. 11 Huai River conservancy. Acknowledges receipt of his No. 424 of Oct. 28 and refers to Department’s No. 197 of Nov. 13. 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, Doc. 123, and Doc. 124]

Mr. Bryan to the Red Cross. do Same subject. Transmits Mr. Reinsch’s No. 424 to Red Cross. 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, Doc. 123, and Doc. 124]

471 Mr. Reinsch to Mr. Bryan. Dec. 17 Political affairs. Reports the draft of a law for the organization of the National Assembly. 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59]

Mr. Davis to Mr. Bryan Dec. 19 Huai River conservancy. Acknowledges receipt of Department’s Dec. 11. Explains that, on account of the war in Europe, it is impossible to obtain funds for the conservancy project. Requests that the Chinese Government be so informed. 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, Doc. 123, and Doc. 124]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Reinsch (telegram). Dec. 22 Same subject. Transmits substance of Red Cross letter of Dec. 19. Asks whether China wishes Red Cross to continue working out the matter when war conditions permit. 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 124]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Davis Dec. 23 Same subject. Acknowledges the letter of Dec. 19 and incloses paraphrase of Department’s instruction of Dec. 22 to Mr. Reinsch. 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

colombia.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

Mr. Harrison to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Jan. 9 . Treaty between the United States and Colombia for the settlement of their differences arising out of events which took place on the Isthmus of Panama in November, 1903. Explains the delay of the Foreign Office in replying to Department’s Dec. 19, 6 p.m. 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

Same to same (telegram). Jan. 17 Same subject. Summarizes counterproposal received from the Foreign Office. Inquiries relating to the amount of indemnity and Colombia-Panama boundary. 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

Same to same (telegram) Feb. 5 Same subject. Summarizes counterproposal received from the Foreign Office. 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Harrison (telegram). Feb. 28 Same subject. Answer to Colombia’s counterproposal summarized in Mr. Thomson’s Feb. 5. 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Mr. Thomson to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 7 Same subject. Summarizes Colombia’s reply to Department’s Feb. 28. 149 [Pg. 149 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Thomson (telegram). Mar. 10 Same subject. Inquires meaning of provision affecting Panama contained in his Mar. 7. 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154]

Mr. Thomson to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 11 Same subject. Reply to Department’s Mar. 10. 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Thomson (telegram). Mar. 13 Same subject. Reply to his Mar.7. 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]

Mr. Thomson to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 24 Same subject. Summarizes the Colombian counter-memorandum to his memorandum based on Department’s Mar. 13. 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Thompson (telegram). Mar. 27 same subject, instruction to accept 2d paragraph of the counter-memorandum with certain amendments. 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158]

Mr. Thomson to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 31 Same subject. Colombia agrees to settle for $25,000,000 and submits proposal for text of provision relating to relations with Panama. 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Thomson (telegram). Apr. 2 Same subject. Reply to his Mar. 31, and accepts the submitted proposal. 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 158, Doc. 159, and Doc. 160]

Mr. Thomson to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Apr. 6 Same subject. The treaty has been concluded. Gives names of the plenipotentiaries. The text of the treaty will be published officially about the 15th. 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 158, Doc. 159, and Doc. 160]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Thomson (telegram). Apr. 8 Same subject. Congratulations. Instruction to express his satisfaction to the Foreign Office. 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163]

Mr. Betancourt to Mr. Bryan. Apr. 9 Same subject. Congratulations, with reservations. 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163]

59 Mr. Thomson to Mr. Bryan. Apr. 15 Same subject. Incloses (1) translation of Colombian memorandum of Mar. 7 in reply to the counter-proposition of Department’s Feb. 28; (2) his memorandum of Mar. 16 in reply to the above; (3) translation of Colombian counter memorandum of Mar. 21 in reply to his Mar. 16; and (4) text of the treaty as signed on Apr. 6. Remarks on the signing. 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Betancourt. 1914. Apr. 18 Same subject. Reply to his Apr. 9 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]

Mr. Thomson to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 8 Same subject. The treaty has been approved without amendment by the Colombian Congress. When will it be submitted to the Senate? 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Thomson (telegram). June 10 Same subject. Congratulations. Hopes to submit treaty next week. 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166]

The President to the Senate. June 16 Same subject. Message transmitting the treaty of Apr. 6, 1914, for the Senate’s action. 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166]

Mr. Thomson to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 17 Same subject. Colombian authorities hope the indemnity will be used for public works. 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]

Same to same (telegram) do Same subject. Proceedings to test the constitutionality of the law approving the treaty have been instituted in the Supreme Court. 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 167, Doc. 168, and Doc. 169]

77 Same to same June 19 Same subject. Incloses Foreign Office note on the subject of next above, and his reply. 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 167, Doc. 168, and Doc. 169]

26 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Thomson. June 24 Same subject. Refers to his first telegram of June 17. Requests to be kept advised on this point. 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 169, Doc. 170, and Doc. 171]

Mr. Thomson to Mr. Bryan (telegram). July 7 Same subject. The Supreme Court has decided that it is without jurisdiction in the matter of the constitutionality of the law approving the treaty. 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 169, Doc. 170, and Doc. 171]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Betancourt. July 19 Same subject. Points out possible objections to paragraph 5 of article II of the treaty. Suggests that the Colombian Government agree, by means of a note from its Minister, to interpret the paragraph as herein outlined. 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

24 Mr. Betancourt to Mr. Bryan. July 22 Same subject. Reply to Department’s July 19, making the statement therein suggested. 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

95 Mr. Thomson to Mr. Bryan. Aug. 15 Message of the President. Transmits translation. 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 146]

98 Same to same. Aug. 22 Report of Minister for Foreign Affairs. Transmits translation. 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

Mr. Thomson to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Aug. 29 Treaty for the settlement of differences. Informs the Department of the financial stringency in Colombia and its bearing on the ratification of the treaty; suggests payment of the indemnity in installments as a desirable amendment to the treaty. The Colombian Congress will adjourn Oct. 20 and will not convene till July, 1915. Action by the Senate at the present session is therefore desirable. 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Thomson (telegram). Sept. 5 Same subject. There is nothing new to report as to the progress of the treaty through the Senate; the chances are against its ratification at the present session. 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175]

Same to same (telegram). Sept. 24 Same subject. Informs him that he has told the Colombian Minister that he is convinced that it will be impossible to secure a report on the treaty at this session of Congress; reasons therefor. 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 176]

costa rica.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

17 Mr. Hale to Mr. Bryan 1914. May 2 Message of the President. Incloses copies of the message read by President Jimenez to the Congress on May 1. 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 177]

Same to same (telegram) Aug. 25 Representation of Chinese interests. Chinese at Punta Arenas request protection of American flag, there being no Chinese consul in Costa Rica. Requests instructions. 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

19 Mr. Shah to Mr. Bryan. Sept. 1 Same subject. As China has no diplomatic or consular representatives in Costa Rica, the good offices of this government are desired in case of need 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, and Doc. 183]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hale (telegram). Sept. 2 Same subject. Reply to his telegram of Aug. 25. Instruction to inquire of the Costa Rican Government whether it will be agreeable to permit this Government to exercise its good offices in behalf of Chinese in Costa Rica in case of need, and if so to use his good offices for such Chinese. 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, and Doc. 183]

Sept. 4 Same subject. Reply to his Sept. 1. The American Minister at San Jose has been instructed as desired. 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, and Doc. 183]

21 Mr Shah to Mr Bryan Sept 10 Same subject. Expresses thanks for his Sept 4 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 183, Doc. 184, and Doc. 185]

34 Mr. Hale to Mr. Bryan. Sept. 12 Same subject. Incloses his note of Sept. 3 to the Foreign Office in pursuance of Department’s Sept. 2; and the reply of the Foreign Office of Sept. 9, declining to grant the request. 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 183, Doc. 184, and Doc. 185]

22 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hale 1914. Sept. 30 Same subject. Refers to Legation’s No. 34 of Sept. 12, which suggests that Department’s instruction of Sept. 2 may not have been explicit enough. Instructs him to make fresh representations to the Foreign Office explaining that this Government had no intention of interfering in Costa Rica’s internal affairs and desired only to comply with a request made by China similar to others heretofore granted by other Central American governments. 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]

45 Mr. Hale to Mr. Bryan Nov. 5 Same subject. Incloses his note of Oct. 22 to the Foreign Office in pursuance of Department’s No. 22 of Sept. 30; and the Foreign Office’s reply granting the request of the United States to represent Chinese interests in case of need in behalf of Chinese lawfully resident in Costa Rica. 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]

Nov. 13 Arbitration agreement between the United States and Costa Rica extending the duration of the Convention of Jan. 13, 1909; signed at Washington Mar. 16 1914–. Proclamation. 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

Do Treaty for the advancement of general peace, signed at Washington, Feb. 13, 1914. Proclamation. 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 178]

47 Mr. Hale to Mr. Bryan. Nov. 30 Protest against presence in Costa Rica of Nicaraguan revolutionists. Reports Julian Irias et al. in conference. 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hale (telegram). Dec. 4 Same subject. Instruction to investigate the possibility of Gen. Luis Mena receiving aid from Costa Rican Government; Mena is said to be engaged in revolutionary propaganda. 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Gonzales (telegram). do Same subject. Instruction to request Cuban Government to furnish all obtainable information about Mena. 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193]

Mr. Hale to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Dec. 7 Same subject. Reply to Department’s Dec. 4. There is no reason to believe Costa Rican Government to be aiding Mena. No further information as to purpose of Irias et al. in Costa Rica. 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 193, Doc. 194, and Doc. 195]

Same to same (telegram). Dec. 11 Same subject. It is reported that Irias and colleagues have tied the hands of Mena and declared against revolution. 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 193, Doc. 194, and Doc. 195]

41 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Shah Dec. 15 Representation of Chinese interests. Communicates to the Chinese Minister the assent of Costa Rica to the exercise by this Government of its good offices in behalf of Chinese lawfully resident in Costa Rina. 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 187, Doc. 188, and Doc. 189]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hale (telegram). Dec. 18 Protest against presence in Costa Rica of Nicaraguan revolutionists. Instruction to approach the President of Costa Rica and formally and with emphasis request that, to preserve peace in Central America, the Government of Costa Rica request the departure from that country of Irias, Mena, Chavez, and Zelaya. 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 193, Doc. 194, and Doc. 195]

Mr. Gonzales to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Dec. 19 Same subject. Reply to Department’s Dec. 4. Nothing suspicious observed during Mena’s presence in Cuba. 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, and Doc. 197]

40 Mr. Shah to Mr. Bryan Dec. 21 Representation of Chinese interests. Expresses his thanks for the action taken by this Government in behalf of Chinese in Costa Rica. 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 187, Doc. 188, and Doc. 189]

Mr. Hale to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Dec. 24 Protest against presence in Costa Rica of Nicaraguan revolutionists. Instruction of Dec. 18 executed; summary of response of the President through Foreign Office, declining to accede to the “demand” made in the Minister’s note. 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, and Doc. 197]

51 Same to same Dec. 25 Same subject. Incloses copies of his note and reply of foreign office outlined in his Dec. 24. 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 198]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hale (telegram). Dec. 29 Same subject. Answering his Dec. 24. Our representations were not in the form of a demand, but merely informative and transmitted in a friendly spirit in the interest of peace in Central America. Having done this much our responsibility ends. 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 198, Doc. 199, and Doc. 200]

52 Mr. Hale to Mr. Bryan Dec. 31 Same subject. Reply to Department’s Dec. 29. Incloses note to Foreign Office in compliance therewith. 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 198, Doc. 199, and Doc. 200]

cuba.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

Mr. Gonzales to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Jan. 7 Guantanamo Naval Station. The Cuban Senate being now ready to ratify the treaty for the enlargement of the naval station, which, however, has expired, instruction? as to the Department’s desires are requested. 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Daniels. 1914. Jan. 19 Same subject. Informs him of the substance of Mr. Gonzales’s telegram of Jan. 7 and inquires what suggestions the Navy Department has to make. 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Gonzales (telegram). Jan. 22 Same subject. Replies to his Jan. 7 and informs him that the Navy Department has under consideration a complete change of plans in regard to the enlargement of the naval station, of which he will be informed in due time. 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, and Doc. 205]

116 Mr. Gonzales to Mr. Bryan. June 16 Pardon of Maza. Requests authority to ask President Menocal to pardon Maza, who is serving a sentence in jail for assault on the Secretary of the American Legation, Mr. Gibson, in 1912. 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Gonzales (telegram). June 23 Same subject. Refers to his June 16 and instructs him to say to the Cuban Government that this Government would feel no pleasure in Maza’s further confinement. 190 [Pg. 190 includes portions of Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213]

123 Mr. Gonzales to Mr. Bryan. July 11 Same subject. Incloses his letter to the President of Cuba in pursuance of Department’s instruction of June 23. 190 [Pg. 190 includes portions of Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213]

98 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Gonzales. July 28 Same subject. Approves his July 11 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 214]

Mr. Scholle to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Oct. 1 Amnesty bill. The House has passed the bill providing for amnesty for all accused of murder or assault who are veterans of the war for independence; this would result in freeing the murderers of Chief of Police Rivas. 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, and Doc. 205]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Scholle (telegram). Oct. 3 Same subject. Replying to his Oct. 1, instructs him to say to the President that this Government would regard it as unfortunate if the act should become law. 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, and Doc. 205]

Mr. Scholle to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Oct. 4 Same subject. In pursuance of the instructions of Oct. 3, he has seen the President, who assured him he would veto the bill. 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, and Doc. 208]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Scholle. Oct. 9 Same subject. Refers to his Oct. 4; the Department is pleased with the President’s attitude. 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, and Doc. 208]

Mr. Gonzales to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov, 27 Amnesty bill. Reports a movement to secure the pardon of Asbert, one of those implicated in the murder of the Chief of Police, Rivas. 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, and Doc. 208]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Gonzales (telegram). Dec. 4 Same subject. Reply to his Nov. 27. The Department is not especially interested in the matter. 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211]

Mr. Gonzales to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Dec. 27 Same subject. The President has vetoed amnesty bill for Asbert. There are threats of revolution by Asbertistas if Congress fails next month to pass the Amnesty Bill over the President’s veto. 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211]

Dominican republic.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). 1913. Dec. 31 Political and financial affairs. Instructions to forward financial statement for use of the Department in its study of Dominican needs; comments on the financial situation. 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 215]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan 1914. Jan. 5 Same subject. Reply to the above. 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 215, Doc. 216, and Doc. 217]

Same to same (telegram) Jan. 7 Same subject. Urges that the Department order $20,000 advance of Dominican funds to the Minister of Finance to relieve the critical situation 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 215, Doc. 216, and Doc. 217]

Mr. Moore to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). do Same subject. Notice of compliance with above request. 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, and Doc. 221]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Jan. 9 Same subject. Dominican Government has complied with the Department’s demands in regard to political prisoners; the only imperative question is that of the financial relief; comments thereon. 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, and Doc. 221]

Mr. Moore to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). Jan. 10 Same subject, inquires concerning various phases of the financial situation. 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, and Doc. 221]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Jan. 11 Same subject. Requests instructions in regard to proposed loan; situation critical. 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, and Doc. 221]

Same to same (telegram) Jan. 12 Same subject. Reply to his Jan. 10. Adds that it is opportune to demand increased powers for the receivership in the collection of customs 196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]

43 Same to same do Same subject. Incloses note from Foreign Office pledging abandonment of practice of imprisonment without due process of law. Will urge the coming constitutional convention to incorporate in the organic law the right of habeas corpus. 196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]

46 Same to same do Same subject. Incloses Foreign Office note pledging the Government to place control of Dominican expenditures under supervision of the American Legation; under this plan there will be need of a commercial attache. 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 223, Doc. 224, and Doc. 225]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). 1914. Jan. 12 Same subject. Refers to his Jan. 9 and Jan. 11. A second advance of $20,000 has been ordered, which should render a loan unnecessary and cover the Dominican needs up to Jan. 15. Instructs to obtain a list of small loans already made and to discourage further loans on disadvantageous terms. 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 223, Doc. 224, and Doc. 225]

Same to same (telegram). Jan. 18 Same subject. Reply to his Jan. 11; specifies reforms advisable in the new constitution. 198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, and Doc. 227]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Jan. 22 Same subject. Reply to Department’s Jan. 12; there are no short-time loans. Reply to Department’s Jan. 18; reforms suggested will be made. Constitutional convention is under way. The situation of the Government is desperate owing to financial crisis. Inquires whether it may release Dominican share of customs receipts for application to current needs. 198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, and Doc. 227]

Same to same (telegram). Jan. 26 Same subject. Important convention of leaders to choose presidential candidates about to be held. A representative of the Legation should be present. Requests instructions. 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 227, Doc. 228, and Doc. 229]

Mr. Moore to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). do Same subject. In order to avoid the collapse of the present administration, the Department suggests a plan involving (1) negotiating certain bonds so as to produce $1,200,000 with which to pay claims and salaries; (2) increasing certain taxes so as to release said bonds within five years (methods suggested); and (3) employing a financial expert (American) to assist in reforming finances so as to fulfill the convention of 1907. Instruction to present this plan to the Government. 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 227, Doc. 228, and Doc. 229]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). Jan. 27 Same subject. Refers to Department’s Jan. 18; suggests further reforms to be incorporated in the constitution and invites suggestions. 201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 230, Doc. 231, and Doc. 232]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Replies to his No. 46 of Jan. 12 and awaits request of the Minister for Foreign Affairs as to appointment of American commercial attache” in that connection. Instructs to change the $1,200,000 in telegram of Jan. 26 to $1,342,38–5. 201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 230, Doc. 231, and Doc. 232]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Jan. 28 Same subject. Refers to Department’s Jan. 26 and reports certain modifications of the plan therein, suggested by the Government. Asks what immediate relief the Department can suggest. The Government wishes to increase amount of loan to $1,650,000. 201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 230, Doc. 231, and Doc. 232]

Same to same (telegram). Jan. 29 Same subject. Reply to Department’s Jan. 27. Suggests that the amount be left indefinite until satisfactorily ascertained. The Government desires appointment of commercial at cache” as suggested by the Department. 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, and Doc. 235]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram), do Same subject. Reply to his Jan. 26; consents to his suggestion. 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, and Doc. 235]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Refers to Department’s Jan. 27; on receipt of request from the Foreign Office the Department will send commercial attach. Acknowledges receipt of his Jan. 28. 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, and Doc. 235]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. The Legation has induced the Government to release all political prisoners, including Velasquez, who is a candidate for the presidency. 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 236, Doc. 237, and Doc. 238]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). Jan. 30 Same subject. Refers to his Jan. 28; relief will be given to the extent of $5,000 a day under certain conditions. Refers to his Jan. 29 and makes stipulations as to the commercial attache. 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 236, Doc. 237, and Doc. 238]

Same to same (telegram). Jan. 31 Same subject. The Department is gratified by the news as to political prisoners contained in his Jan. 29. 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 236, Doc. 237, and Doc. 238]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Feb. 1 Same subject. Reply to Department’s Jan. 30. $5,000 will be sufficient. Requests further instruction as to commercial attaché. 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, and Doc. 242]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Critical political situation has developed into an attempt to impeach and oust President Bordas. 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, and Doc. 242]

Same to same (telegram). Feb. 3 Same subject. Attempt to impeach Bordas defeated in the Senate. 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, and Doc. 242]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). do Same subject. Reply to his Feb. 1; Department desires commercial attache to be in effect a financial expert and virtual comptroller but gives him title of attaché in deference to Dominican susceptibilities; instruction to specify attache’s powers desired. The $5,000 daily can probably be supplied. 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, and Doc. 242]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Feb. 5 Same subject. Discusses powers to be given commercial attach, in reply to Department’s Feb. 3. 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 242, Doc. 243, and Doc. 244]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Feb. 5 Same subject. Reports in detail on the political situation, which is complicated with the financial difficulties; he succeeded in preventing impeachment of Bordas. Desires one war vessel sent, to remain till after the election. 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 242, Doc. 243, and Doc. 244]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). Feb. 12 Same subject. Reply to his Feb. 5, as to war vessel, which will be sent to Cape Haitien for some weeks and may be ordered to Puerto Plata if necessary. 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Owing to the critical political situation, he urges encouragement of the Government to proclaim Arias an outlaw, and support of the Government in its financial plans. Suggests his personal report at the Department in order to assist in deciding on a course of action. 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). do Same subject. Refers to his first Feb. 5; suggests draft of note which the Foreign Office might send to the Dominican Legation relative to financial expert as commercial attaché 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

31 Same to same Feb. 13 Same subject. Incloses three forms to be executed by the Minister of Finance, with explanations. 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 247, Doc. 248, and Doc. 249]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Feb. 18 Same subject. The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Grullon, intends to resign at once, on account of the serious financial situation; requests instruction as to negotiation of a short loan to ease the situation. 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 247, Doc. 248, and Doc. 249]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Dangerous situation results from stoppage of $5,000 daily advance by General Receiver. Banco Nacional will advance for a time with Department’s cooperation. Requests instructions. 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, and Doc. 253]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). Feb. 19 Same subject. Reply to his Feb. 12, with instructions. 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, and Doc. 253]

Same to same (telegram). do. Same subject. Reply to his Feb. 18; Insular Bureau will call Vick’s attention to previous orders to grant the $5,000 daily, which will probably insure this advance temporarily. 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, and Doc. 253]

Same to same (telegram). Do Same subject. Reply to his Feb. 18. Insular Bureau will request Vick to advance $35,000 to be deducted from Dominican portion of customs. 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, and Doc. 253]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Feb. 21 Same subject. Reply to Department’s Fob. 19. President Bordas can not undertake to suppress Arias without the material assistance of the United States in the inevitable armed conflict, and asks for an immediate decision. 210 [Pg. 210 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). Feb. 24 Same subject. His Feb. 21 will be laid before the President; instruction to send further information as to the Government’s plans and the assistance necessary. 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 254, Doc. 255, and Doc. 256]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Feb. 25 Same subject. Reply to Department’s Feb. 24. President Bordas requests permission to pay back salaries and negotiate a loan, which will enable him to suppress Arias. 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 254, Doc. 255, and Doc. 256]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). Feb. 27 Same subject. Reply to his Feb. 25; instruction to present in person to all factional leaders a statement (text given) of this Government’s attitude; suggests local loans to meet the present situation, to be repaid from negotiation of bonds, up to $500,000; the Department is disposed to authorize increase of the Dominican debt. Suggests that he personally interview Arias and impress him with the necessity for a peaceful arrangement. 212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]

Same to same (telegram). Mar. 1 Same subject. Refers to Department’s Feb. 27. Retracts instruction to interview Arias in person. If the Commission sent by Bordas to Arias (which will be conveyed by the Petrel) is not successful, have commander of Petrel notify Arias to confer with you in the capital; if he refuses, have him understand that appropriate action will be taken by the United States. Arrange for safe conduct for Arias. 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 2 Same subject. Reply to Department’s Feb. 27. Department’s proposition too tentative and uncertain to give Bordas the necessary support; requests more specific assurances. 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Daniels. do Same subject. Requests order to war vessel to convey President Bordas’s commission to and from the conference with Arias, and safe conduct for Arias if he wishes transportation to Santo Domingo. 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 260, Doc. 261, and Doc. 262]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Mar. 4 Same subject. Arias sends ultimatum which probably means war; banks will not lend on Department’s proposition; without funds chaos will reign; recommends instant substantial support of the Government, which asks for immediate sale of half million bonds. 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 260, Doc. 261, and Doc. 262]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. The Petrel is about to sail, with Bordas and Lovaton. The Government can handle the situation if the Department will give it the means. 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 260, Doc. 261, and Doc. 262]

Same to same (telegram) Mar. 5 Same subject. Suggests loan against the alcohol and tobacco taxes as a means of relieving the financial stress. 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). do Same subject. Replies to his Mar. 2 and Mar. 4; instruction to inform President Bordas of certain views (given in detail) which the Department wishes him to point out to Arias. Department is advising with bankers in regard to financial terms to produce $1,600,000 to be expended under supervision of the commercial attache. 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

Mr. Sullivan to Air. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 7 Same subject. Unless immediate financial relief is given, the hold of the United States on the situation will be lost. 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). Mar. 9 Same subject. Reply to his Mar. 7. Department will try to arrange immediate advance if he is sure $500,000 on back salaries will enable the Government to continue and enact the reforms suggested. 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 10 Same subject. The $500,000 would certainly enable the Government to live and to enact the reforms suggested by the Department. Requests early appointment of the commercial attaché. 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). Mar. 14 Same subject. Reply to his Mar. 5 and Mar. 10. Department is ready to endeavor to arrange advance of $500,000 if Dominican Government will pledge and turn over the collection of alcohol and tobacco taxes to the Receivership; inquires meaning of “tobacco tax.” Commercial attache still being looked for 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 15 Same subject. Reply to Department’s Mar. 14. Minister of Finance, while ready to pledge alcohol and tobacco taxes, is unwilling to surrender the collection to the Receivership at present and urges that Department abide by original plan for control by receivership on failure to make payments. Explanation of tobacco tax. 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 269, Doc. 270, and Doc. 271]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. He is informed that Bordas’s mission results in peaceable understanding with Arias, which means that the constitutional convention will proceed to enact Department’s reforms, including new election law and election of president to succeed Bordas on June 30. Revolution probably averted. 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 269, Doc. 270, and Doc. 271]

Same to same (telegram). Mar. 19 Same subject. Election set for Apr. 1 and 2, the President considering no later date to be constitutional; the question of the interval in the presidential term is still undetermined. Inquires whether the Department will send observers of the election or leave it to the Legation 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 269, Doc. 270, and Doc. 271]

Same to same (telegram). Mar. 20 Same subject. Owing to General Receiver’s protest that heavy losses in customs are resulting from extensive smuggling in the north, Dominican Cabinet to-day voted to submit no longer to domination by Arias in that region and several governors have been removed. If advances to pay salaries can not be had at once there will be serious trouble. Recommends support of the Government in order to hasten three fundamental reforms: collection of all revenues by the receivership, entire control of public works,” and establishment of a financial expert urges instant action. 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 271, Doc. 272, and Doc. 273]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). do Same subject. Requests information as to attitude of Congress on the loan. The payment of back salaries might be made by temporary advance of $500,000 from public works fund on deposit in New York if Congress would authorize pledging alcohol and tobacco taxes to repay it. If this is not possible, request Minister of Finance to prepare a plan for efficacious repayment. 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 271, Doc. 272, and Doc. 273]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Mar. 22 Same subject. All opposition groups are now assailing the Bordas party and the American Government, which is accused of failing in its promises Arias published my request in pursuance of Department’s instruction of Mar. 1, with defiant refusal. Legislation is insisting on prime necessity of a fair election. 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 273, Doc. 274, and Doc. 275]

Same to same (telegram). Mar. 23 Same subject. Reply to Department’s Mar. 20. There is no hope of Congress approving financial relief of any kind, its hope being to starve on Bordas. Government’s rigorous proceeding against Arias may develop outbreak in the north Failure to furnish financial assistance will probably permit reform in financial controllership to slip from our hands. Relief is absolutely essential to orderly election. 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 273, Doc. 274, and Doc. 275]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). do Same subject. Keply to his Mar. 22. states Department’s attitude as to advance; this, if made should be expended only through a temporary controller who shall be replaced by a permanent one under certain restrictions. Inquires whether folzot banks have enough cash to be transferred to Government on telegraphic order if, through negotiation of bonds, the equivalent should be available in New York. 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 276]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 26 Same subject. Reply to Department’s Mar. 23 If Bordas is given money prior to the election ii would probably mean his reelection; his failure would rehabilitate Arias. The Government agrees to temporary controller, to be followed by a permanent controller as suggested by Department. Information as to available cash in local banks. Requests speedy instructions as to election answers. 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 277]

Same to same (telegram). Mar. 30 Same subject. Revolution breaking out at La Vega and Santiago; outbreak can be suppressed by furnishing funds to Bordas; important to prevent Arias from getting a start. 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280]

Same to same (telegram). Mar. 31 Same subject. Filibusters in Congress thwarting Government’s election plans, to prevent election before Apr. 30, with intent to declare presidency vacant after that date. Serious fighting at La Vega and Santiago. 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). Apr. 2 Same subject. Reply to his Mar. 31. Requests his opinion as to probable dates of elections and time of adjournment of Congress; instruction as to caution in speaking of elections and candidates; this Government has no interest except to aid in the election of candidate desired by the people at free and fair elections.

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Transmits President Bordas’s appeal for financial assistance. Bordas is about to ask Congress for suspension of constitutional guaranties. Bordas about to take field in person against Arias. 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, and Doc. 283]

Same to same (telegram). Apr. 3 Same subject. Quotes his public statement to the effect that the President of the United States desires that the Dominican people shall have the officers they desire, and is not concerned as to the personnel of government 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, and Doc. 283]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). Apr. 4 Same subject. Approves statement mentioned in his Apr. 3. States attitude of the United States as to elections and methods of changing laws and personnel of government. Inquires daily cost of Government’s military operations and estimate of forces necessary to subdue rebellion. The situation will be laid before the President at once. 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, and Doc. 283]

The Dominican Legation to the Department of State. do Same subject. Requests financial support of the United States in order to suppress the revolution. 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 283, Doc. 284, and Doc. 285]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Apr. 11 Same subject. Transmits request of Minister for Foreign Affairs that the daily advance be increased to $5,000, without which the campaign against Arias can not be kept up. 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 283, Doc. 284, and Doc. 285]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). Apr. 14 Same subject. Reply to his Apr. 11. The receivership has been instructed to advance $3,500 daily for 15 days, a longer campaign not being anticipated. Unless Congress approves proposition for loan within 15 days all available funds will be exhausted. 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, and Doc. 287]

84 Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan. 1914. Apr. 17 Same subject. A long report on the political and financial situation. 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, and Doc. 287]

Same to same (telegram). Apr. 21 Same subject. Arias was being reduced to insignificance when Puerto Plata revolted yesterday. The whole revolutionary activity is intended to prevent the election which the Government expected to hold May 20. The Wheeling should remain at Santo Domingo and another gunboat should be at Puerto Plata. 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 288, Doc. 289, and Doc. 290]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). Apr. 26 Same subject. Reply to his Apr. 21. The Wheeling will go to Puerto Plata. The Petrel will be ordered to Santo Domingo in case of absolute necessity. 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 288, Doc. 289, and Doc. 290]

Mr. Henry to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Apr. 28 Same subject. The American steamer Algonquin failed to enter the port of Puerto Plata: de facto blockade existing and town being shelled. Requests warship. 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 288, Doc. 289, and Doc. 290]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bryan. Do Protection of British interests. Expresses thanks for protection given to British subjects. 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Henry (telegram). Apr. 29 Political and financial affairs. Reply to his Apr. 28. The Petrel will proceed to Puerto Plata; the Wheeling will remain at Santo Domingo. 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294]

Mr. Henry to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Do. Same subject. Military news. Gunboat essential. 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Apr. 30 Same subject. Revolutionists have caused closing of Puerto Plata customhouse and interference with rights of the United States which, under the convention, may protest. Urges consideration. 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). May 5 Same subject. Reply to his Apr. 30. The Navy Department on May 2 instructed commander of Petrel to request opening of customhouse Puerto Plata and to see that all American and other foreign interests are protected. 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Do Same subject. Consul Henry, Puerto Plata, reports Bordas probably weakening; the Nautilus has ordered cessation of artillery on both sides. 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, and Doc. 297]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Reports seem to show that Vidal will rise against the Government when sure the United States will not interfere. 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, and Doc. 297]

Same to same (telegram). .May 13 Protection of British interests. The British Charge d’Affaires requests protection of British railroad property at Sanchez. 262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373]

39 Mr. Cernuda to Mr. Bryan May 14 Political and financial affairs. Notice of closure and blockade of ports of Puerto Plata and Monte Cristi. 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, and Doc. 297]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Cernuda May 16 Same subject. Reply to his May 14. As the blockade of Puerto Plata is reported to be maintained effectively, this Government recognizes the blockade of that port, but can not recognize the blockade of Monte Cristi as it is not advised of its effective maintenance. 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 298, Doc. 299, and Doc. 300]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). Do Protection of British interests. The U. S S. Washingtonwill proceed to Sanchez to report on conditions and protect foreign interests. 262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373]

41 Mr. Cernuda to Mr. Bryan. May 19 Political and financial affairs. Refers to his note of May 14 and Department’s May 16 and states that his Government will confine the blockade to Puerto Plata. Expresses thanks for the attitude of this Government. 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 298, Doc. 299, and Doc. 300]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). May 20 Same subject. Reports election dates decreed to be June 7 and 8 for members of electoral college, which will meet June 15 to elect President, Vice President, Deputies, and Senators; new Congress will meet June 25; inauguration of President on July 1, which is the date of expiration of Caceres’s term. If complied with, this decree will preserve constitutional government unbroken. Asks whether interrupted plans for observation of elections shall proceed. 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 298, Doc. 299, and Doc. 300]

99 Same to same. May 21 Same subject. Incloses note from the Foreign Office, which is the final word of the Government in regard to a financial controller. 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302]

Same to same (telegram). May 25 Same subject. The Dominican Government has requested him to ask his Government’s cooperation in protecting the treaty of 1907; gives substance of statement made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs as to the reasons for the request and for suggestions from this Government. 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302]

46 Mr. Cernuda to Mr. Bryan. May 26 Same subject. Refers to a note of Mar. 20 from the Foreign Office to the American Minister in regard to a financial expert, for which another note has been substituted after discussion with the American Minister. Quotes the substitute note. 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bran. 1914. May 27 Protection of British interests. Requests protection of British subjects at Samana Bay. 262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram). May 28 Political and financial affairs. Instructs him to transmit by radio to the commander of the Washington at Santo domingo the text of the representations following, to the effect that this Government will be obliged to take the most effective steps toward the restoration of order unless the contending leaders will of their own motion put an end to the present strife. As a means to that end the United States suggests that every announced or prospective candidate for the presidency withdraw his name in favor of some upright citizen unconnected with politics. The United States will do everything possible in aid of fair elections. The foregoing representations are to be made by the commander verbally to President Bordas, and if he accedes to them they are to be presented verbally to the leaders of all factions. 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

109 Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 1 Same subject. The revolution is practically quelled outside of Puerto Plata. Military news. The Government will entertain suggestions regarding liberty of elections, but not any that would be of advantage to the revolutionists as such. 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]

109 Mr. Bryan t o Mr. Cernuda. do Same subject. Reply to his note of May 26. The President has accepted with pleasure the suggestion that he appoint a financial expert to go to Santo Domingo to aid in the settlement of Dominican debts, to devise an adequate system of public accounting, and to execute the original agreement regarding the revenues, all with a view to the Republic’s financial stability. The President has therefore appointed Mr. Charles M. Johnston as Financial Expert, who will exercise all the powers of Comptroller. The Department recommends him as worthy of all confidence. 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Johnston. Do Same subject. Informs him of his designation as Financial Expert and specifies his duties and status. 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Spring Rice. June 2 Protection of British interests. Reply to his May 27. The protection desired will be rendered. 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, and Doc. 376]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan. June 3 Protection of Porto Rican citizens of the United States drafted into the Dominican Army. Requests instructions. 264 [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 6 Political and financial affairs. Reports having prepared for observation of elections, which are to occur June 7 and 8. 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309]

50 Mr. Cernuda to Mr. Bryan. June 9 Same subject. Reply to Department’s June 1; the power granted to the Financial Expert to devise and put into operation additional measures for increasing the revenues is acknowledged, but such measures can not be executed without sanction of the Dominican authorities in cases where the sanction is required by the Constitution and laws. 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309]

Mr. Smith to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 12 Same subject. Transmits report from Consul Livingston that Arias is about to try a new ruse to cover preparations for revolt; and that Customs Inspector N orris is expecting trouble on the border; both’ disturbances to be operated through Haiti. 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 310, Doc. 311, and Doc. 312]

Same to same (telegram). June 16 Same subject. It is clear that the Haitian Government is supplying arms and ammunition to agents of Vidal and is passing them across the border. Two agents of Arias have arrived on a mission to the Haitian government, purpose not ascertained. 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 310, Doc. 311, and Doc. 312]

Mr. Barclay to Mr. Bryan. June 17 Protection of British interests. Thanks him for his June 2. 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, and Doc. 376]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Smith (telegram). June 18 Political and financial interests. In view of his June 12 and 16 and advices from Santo Domingo, he is instructed to state at once to the Minister for Foreign Affairs that the Government of the United States is convinced of the complicity of Haitian authorities in the Dominican revolutionary activities, which is both unfriendly toward the Dominican Republic and exceedingly offensive to the United States Government, which is greatly surprised at it and will be forced to consider what steps are needful to end the violations of customs regulations that are involved, unless the Haitian authorities immediately cease shipping munitions of war across the frontier for the use of Dominican revolutionists. 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 310, Doc. 311, and Doc. 312]

Mr. Daniels to Mr. Bryan 1914. June 19 Same subject. Incloses telegrams from Capt. Russell reporting notification to Dominican authorities that the United States will not permit bombardment of Puerto Plata; no acknowledgment received. 239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports installation of Charles M. Johnston as Financial Expert on June 17. 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 314, Doc. 315, and Doc. 316]

Same to same (telegram) June 20 Same subject. Transmits request of Dominican Government that the Department take some action to prevent smuggling of arms with the aid o Haitian Government; war will be declared on Haiti if its authorities are not brought to a realization of their obligations. 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 314, Doc. 315, and Doc. 316]

Same to same (telegram) do Same subject. Dominican Government asks immediate explanation of the threat which Bordas claims the Commander of the South Atlantic Squadron has made to fire on Government troops if artillery is used at Puerto Plata; he has requested time to hear from the Department. 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 314, Doc. 315, and Doc. 316]

69 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan June 22 Protection of Porto Rican citizens. Refers to his No. 103 of June 3 and instructs him in regard thereto 264 [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378]

Same to same (telegram). June 24 Political and financial affairs. Reply to his firs June 20. Instructs him to inform the Government that Department has made representations to Haiti. 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, and Doc. 321]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Reply to his second June 20. De partment will reply formally to Dominican Government as soon as formal protest is received from Dominican Chargé. 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, and Doc. 321]

Same to same (telegram). June 29 Same subject. Explains why bombardment of Puerto Plata is not permissible. Instructs him to inform the Government that when blockade is raised, this Government will notify insurgents that collection of customs must not be interfered with. Department is considering what other action to take toward restoration of order. 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, and Doc. 321]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Instructs him to explain to the Government that the action taken by the Machias was not hostile to the Bordas Government, much less of favor to the revolutionists, but considered necessary for protection of noncombatants at Puerto Plata. 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, and Doc. 321]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Election news. Opposition claims Bordas Government will lose mandate on July 1, but there is no immediate probability of its losing de facto power. Foreign representatives are asking what attitude this Government will take. Instructions desired. 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, and Doc. 321]

Same to same (telegram). July 1 Same subject. Dominican Government does not agree to raise blockade; gives reasons; asks that this Government consider the evil results that will be produced by its present attitude. If it intends to prevent Bordas from blockading, besieging, or bombarding rebels in Puerto Plata,the Dominican Government despairs of dealing with the situation and this Government must openly take the responsibility. 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, and Doc. 324]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Reply to Department’s second June 29; its purport has been explained to the Government, which replies that firing upon the constitutional Government is violation of international law and can be satisfied only when the order to the commander of the Machias has been countermanded, the order having the effect of relieving the revolutionists from effect of Government successes, which now promise speedy termination of insurrection; it is convinced that the action of the United States is due to propaganda by American sympathizers with the revolution who have created the rebellion. 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, and Doc. 324]

115 Mr. White to Mr. Bryan. July 3 Same subject. Transmits communication from the Foreign Office setting forth the exact status of the Bordas Government under the present Constitution of the Republic. 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, and Doc. 324]

55 Mr. Soler to Mr. Bryan July 8 Same subject. Formal protest of the Dominican Minister against the action of the United States at Puerto Plata, with history of the case. Request for substitution of other warships. 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 325]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Barclay July 13 Protection of British interests. The U. S. S. Marietta has orders to protect foreign lives and property at Sanchez and vicinity. 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, and Doc. 376]

Mr. White to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914July 14 Political and financial affairs. The Dominican Government desires t o restrict line of defense in Santo Domingo in case of approach of revolutionists; he informed it that the U. S. S. Castine would not permit firing by either side within the city and he would not submit the matter to the Diplomatic Corps without instructions, and if the Government could not hold off the revolutionists it had better ask for the good offices of the United States. It replied that this request was impossible but assistance from Washington and establishment of a neutral zone would be acceptable. Another war vessel and marines would be appreciated. 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327]

same to same (telegram). July 16 Same subject. The situation looks better, but he considers it highly important that this Government should be a party to the solution so as to secure necessary reforms; reports negotiations with revolutionists which he has obtained. 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327]

Mr. Phillips to Mr. White (telegram). July 17 Same subject. Approves his July 16. 246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, and Doc. 330]

81 Mr. Bryan to Mr. White July 23 Same subject. Approves his July 16. 246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, and Doc. 330]

Same to same (telegram). July 29 Same subject. Instruction to state to the Government and the opposition that the President will soon propose a plan for the restoration of peace and meantime asks that hostilities be suspended. 246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, and Doc. 330]

Mr. Henry to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Aug. 6 Same subject. General armistice just signed, to take effect to-night. 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Gonzales (telegram). Aug. 13 Same subject. Instructions to the commission appointed by the President to proceed to Santo Domingo. 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333]

Same subject. Text of the plan of the President, handed to Commissioners Fort and Smith for their guidance. 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. White (telegram). Aug. 15 Same subject. Notifies him of the appointment of a commission, composed of ex-Governor Fort of New Jersey, Mr. Charles Smith, attorney-at-law, of New Hampshire, and the American Minister, Mr. Sullivan, chairman, who have left for Santo Domingo. Instructs him to arrange for their reception. 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Mr. Fort to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Aug. 21 Same subject. Reports favorable negotiations with leaders, with expectations of selection of Provisional President to-morrow. 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338]

Same t o same (telegram). Aug. 25 Same subject. Reports full acceptance of the President’s plan; proclamation of resignation of Bordas is in preparation; selection of Provisional President due to-morrow. 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338]

Mr. White to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Aug. 28 Same subject. Reports inauguration of Dr. Ramón Báez as Provisional President on Aug. 27, after being agreed on by all parties. He asks for recognition by the United States. 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. White (telegram). do Same subject. Instructs him to call upon the new Provisional President and enter into diplomatic relations with him as Chief Executive of the Dominican Republic. 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

Mr. Bryan to the Commission (telegram) Aug. 31 Same subject. Instruction to demand the submission of Arias. 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

Mr. Fort to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Sept. 3 Same subject. Conditions permit the provisional President to handle the negotiations with Arias himself. 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

Sept. 8 Same subject. Text of the agreement between the U. S. Commission and the Provisional President of the Dominican Republic relating to the election of a regular President and of members of Congress. 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

Mr. Smith to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Sept. 12 Same subject. Reports approval by the commission of President’s plans as to Arias and others for the pacification of the Cibao; he was urged to hasten to an early settlement. 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, and Doc. 343]

10 Mr. Lansing to Mr. Blanchard. Sept. 19 Same subject. Instruction to inform the Haitian Government that the United States Government desires it to take effective steps for the termination of the smuggling of arms between Haiti and the Dominican Republic. 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, and Doc. 343]

Mr. Smith to Mr. Bryan Sept. 29 Same subject. Incloses translation of election decree and electoral law just completed. 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]

71 Mr. Soler to Mr. Bryan. Oct. 1 Same subject. Incloses autograph letter of President Baez to President Wilson, announcing his inauguration. 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, and Doc. 347]

Mr. Smith to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Presidential candidates will be Jimenez, Vasquez, Velasquez, and Vidal. General pacification advancing. 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, and Doc. 347]

Mr. Smith to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Oct. 5 Same subject. Commission joins Dominican President and presidential candidates in requesting Department’s consent to one week’s postponement of elections to allow printing to be done; also desire consent to work on roads. 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, and Doc. 347]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. White (telegram). Oct. 8 Same subject. Approves postponement of elections. 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349]

92 Same to same Oct. 24 Same subject. Incloses letter addressed by the President to President Baez acknowledging his letter of Aug. 27, to be delivered to His Excellency. 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349]

Mr. White to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 11 Same subject. Horacista party reported not voting at Santiago; unless the court annuls election, Jiménez majority assured; Jiménez party anxious for United States to recognize validity of election at once and declare openly that it will not tolerate revolutionary activity. Such a declaration should be preceded by formal promise of Jiménez and Velázquez to support financial control. 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 350, Doc. 351, and Doc. 352]

Same to same (telegram). Nov. 14 Same subject. Requests assent to President Baez’s increase of floating debt; details of financial situation. 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 350, Doc. 351, and Doc. 352]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. White (telegram). do Same subject. Reply to his Nov. n. instructs to report election figures; attitude of Provisional Government toward election and toward the Financial Agent; and to say that this Government will support the President elected by the people when satisfied of people’s choice, and that it will not tolerate further insurrections. 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 350, Doc. 351, and Doc. 352]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. White (telegram). Nov. 18 Same subject. Reply to his Nov. 14. Receivership can not advance more than $5,000 daily. Department expects Jimenez and Velazquez to pledge themselves in writing to recognize Comptroller and to turn over to receivership collection of internal revenues. Essential that Johnston’s new 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 352, Doc. 353, Doc. 354, and Doc. 355]

Mr. White to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reply to Department’s Nov. 14. Gives election figures Provisional President satisfied. Jimenez and Velazquez have pledged themselves to financial control. 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 352, Doc. 353, Doc. 354, and Doc. 355]

Same to same (telegram). Nov. 24 Same subject. Jimenez has secured 337 electoral votes; 317 necessary; he is regarded as the next President. 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 352, Doc. 353, Doc. 354, and Doc. 355]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. white (telegram). Nov. 25 Same subject. Instruction to assure President Báez of this Government’s intention of keeping its promise to furnish such assistance as may be necessary to maintain an orderly government, now that the will of the people has been freely and clearly expressed. 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358]

Mr. White to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Dec. 1 Same subject. President Baez unwilling to issue decree declaring majority of Assembly a quorum, on grounds of unconstitutionality, etc. He prefers solution to come from Washington. Mr. White suggests that Department name date on which it will recognize Jimenez as President and turn over funds to him, as delay will be conducive of disorders. 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. White (telegram). Dec. 4 Same subject. Reply to his Dec. l. instructions to confer with Baez and Jimenez and, if they approve, to fix a day for recognition of the new President, with certain provisos; and to warn the opposition against obstructive moves. Financial instructions. 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358]

Mr. White to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Dec. 5 Same subject. Jimenez proclaimed President to-day by National Assembly. 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, and Doc. 360]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Do Same subject. President Jimenez was sworn in to-day. 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, and Doc. 360]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan (telegram) do Same subject. Congratulatory message 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364]

President Wilson to ex-President Baez, (telegram) Dec. 8 Same subject. Message of appreciation and good wishes. 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364]

President Wilson to President Jiménez (telegram). do Same subject. Congratulations 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364]

President Jimenéz to President Wilson (telegram) Dec. 9 Same subject. Message of thanks 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364]

Ex-President Baez to President Wilson (telegram) Dec. 10 Same subject. Message of thanks. 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, and Doc. 368]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Dec. 12 Same subject. Receivership still needs $5,000 daily. 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, and Doc. 368]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sullivan Dec. 14 (telegram). 1914 Dec. 14 Same subject. Instructions have been sent to continue $5,000 daily until further notice; this amount must on no account be exceeded. 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, and Doc. 368]

Same to same (telegram).do Do Same subject. Instruction to inform President Jimenez that he is respectfully urged to issue decrees putting into effect the following reforms: Placing revenue collection under receivership; official recognition of Comptroller Johnston and his prescribed duties; amendment of Collet contract as stipulated; reduction of army, as to which this Government will give any assistance desired 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, and Doc. 368]

Mr. Sullivan to Mr. Bryan Dec. 17 (telegram). Dec 17 Same subject. Reports urging on the Government 261 all the reforms suggested and that they are now under consideration; recommends patience. 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370]

ecuador.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Miller 1913 Nov. 28 Guayaquil & Quito Ry. Co. Instruction to the American arbitrator, Judge Miller, regarding the nature of the arbitral tribunal and its award. 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]

Mr. Hartman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1911. Jan. 5 Same subject. Reports arrival of Judge Miller. 275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409]

Mr. Hartman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Jan. 24 Political affairs. Revolutionists still control Esmeraldas. Attack on the Government forces on Jan. 28 anticipated. American Consular Agent not heard from for several weeks. 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 379, Doc. 380, and Doc. 381]

Same to same (telegram). Feb 1 Guayaquil & Quito Ry. Co. Reports failure of arbitrators to agree and departure of Judge Miller. 275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hartman (telegram). Feb. 7 Same subject. Inquires whether the board of arbitration was organized, what steps were taken to reach an agreement, and the points of difference on which the final disagreement was reached. 275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409]

Mr. Hartman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Feb. 8 Same subject Reply to Department’s Feb. 7 275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409]

Mr. Hedian to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Feb 10 Political affairs. Consuls have been notified that Government forces will bombard Esmeraldas to-day: presence of a warship desirable. 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 379, Doc. 380, and Doc. 381]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Goding (telegram). Feb. 12 Same subject. Transmits instructions for Consular Agent at Esmeraldas to report effects of bombardment if such has occurred and to use good offices to secure neutral zone for safety of noncombatants. No warship available at present. 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 382, Doc. 383, and Doc. 384]

Mr. Goding to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Cable offices at Esmeraldas were destroyed by fire yesterday. Will report when communications are established. 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 382, Doc. 383, and Doc. 384]

Same subject. Gives particulars of the revolution, which has continued for two or more months, and states his opinion that should the revolutionary forces appear in Guayaquil the people would deliver the city to them. 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 382, Doc. 383, and Doc. 384]

17 Same to same do

same to same (telegram) Feb 13 same subject An official report dated Feb. 10 says that consular officers are unable to secure a zone for the protection of noncombatants. Consulates and neutral property will be respected as asylum by the combatants 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, and Doc. 387]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Do Guayaquil & Quito Ry Co. Same purport as Mr. Hartman’s Feb. 8. 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]

Mr. Moore to Mr. Goding (telegram). Feb. 14 Political affairs. Instructs him in regard to sending reports concerning revolution and asks if he confirms press reports of defeat of 2,000 Government troops in Manabi. 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, and Doc. 387]

Mr. Hartman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports bombardment and burning of Esmeraldas on Feb. 11. American Minister at Lima expresses anxiety for cable operatives. Is of opinion that cruiser should be sent to Esmeraldas 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, and Doc. 387]

Mr. Moore to Mr. Hartman (telegram). do Same subject. Instructs him to report the revolutionary situation and strength of Plaza’s Government. Press reports revolutionary troops occupy Tulcan. 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391]

Mr. Hartman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Feb. 16 Same subject. Tulcan not occupied by the revolutionists. Reports statement by Minister for Foreign Affairs as to troops and plans of the Government. Situation now favorable to the Government. 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hartman (telegram). 1914. Feb. 16 Same subject. Reply to his Feb. 14. Instructs him to report what American interests are in danger which would receive protection from presence of warship in Ecuadorian waters. Gives reasons why Department does not desire to send a ship unless absolutely necessary. 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391]

Mr. Hedian to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Feb. 17 Same subject. Bombardment of Esmeraldas has ceased. Position of troops. Many inhabitants of neutral zone returning. 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391]

Mr. Hartman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Feb. 19 Same subject. Refers to Department’s Feb. 14 and responsibility to obtain a statement of American interests at Esmeraldas in danger from revolution which a war vessel would protect. Recommendation for a war vessel was based upon a telegram from the American Minister at Lima. 271 [Pg. 271 includes portions of Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, and Doc. 395]

Same to same (telegram). Feb. 26 Same subject. Reports departure of President Riaza ostensibly to take command of army at Esmeraldas. President of Chamber of Deputies Pallares is acting as President. 271 [Pg. 271 includes portions of Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, and Doc. 395]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Reports uprising of prisoners at the penitentiary who are now in control; unless the Government forces succeed in the coming battle with the prisoners a general plundering of the city will take place. Refuge at the Legation has been granted to the three sons of Mrs. Plaza with their nurses. 271 [Pg. 271 includes portions of Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, and Doc. 395]

Same to same (telegram). Do Same subject. Government forces have regained control of the penitentiary. 271 [Pg. 271 includes portions of Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, and Doc. 395]

Same to same (telegram). Feb. 28 Same subject. Dr. Moreno, President of the Senate has assumed the duties of the Presidency during the absence of President Plaza. The family of President Plaza has returned home. 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 395, Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399]

Mr. Yoder et al. to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 3 Imprisonment of Robert B. Jones, an American citizen. Requests protection for Mr. Jones who has been imprisoned since Dec. 17. 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Goding (telegram). Mar. 4 Same subject. Instructs him to investigate, report by telegraph, and extend all possible and proper protection to Mr. Jones. 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419]

Mr. Goding to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 5 Same subject. Reports having informed the Legation concerning the case and states the facts in connection with the arrest of Mr. Jones. 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hartman (telegram. do Same subject. Instructs him to report fully by telegraph what action he has taken in the matter. 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, and Doc. 422]

Mr. Hedian to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Government forces, after ineffectual attacks on Esmeraldas, have retired 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 395, Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Goding (telegram). Mar. 6 Imprisonment of Robert B. Jones, informs him of instructions to Legation and instructs him to continue to report directly to the Department as well as to the Legation. 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, and Doc. 422]

22 Mr. Goding to Mr. Bryan Mar. 7 Same subject. Transmits an extended report of the case. 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, and Doc. 422]

Mr. Hartman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Informs department of representations made to the Foreign Office with a view to securing a prompt, fair, and just trial for Mr. Jones. 283 [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Goding (telegram). Mar. 9 Same subject. Instructs him to forward to the Legation and Department a certified copy of the evidence and brief of law in the case. 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, and Doc. 425]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hartman (telegram). Do Same subject. Instructs him to forward to the Department a brief synopsis of the testimony in the case and if facts and law warrant to request the immediate release of Jones. 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, and Doc. 425]

Mr. Goding to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 11 Same subject. Reports forwarding to Department uncertified copies of evidence and brief in the case. Certified copies in the Legation. Jones released under bond leaves immediately for Washington. 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, and Doc. 429]

24 Same to same Mar. 13 Same subject. Reports discharge of Jones Mar. 11 1914. at noon 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, and Doc. 429]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Goding (telegram). Mar. 16 Same subject. Instructs him to forward certified copies of the evidence in the case. 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, and Doc. 429]

Mr. Hartman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 17 Political affairs. Port of Esmeraldas is again open to commerce, Government forces having captured the city. President Plaza is expected to arrive in Quito Mar. 19. 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 395, Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399]

Same to same (telegram). Mar. 18 Imprisonment of Robert B. Jones. Reply to Department’s Mar. 9; as Jones was discharged, synopsis of testimony will not be telegraphed. 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, and Doc. 429]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Goding Mar. 23 Political affairs. Acknowledges his No. 17. Department has been fully informed regarding the 1 revolution. 1 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 395, Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hartman 1914 Apr. 3 Guayaquil & Quito Ry. Co. Incloses letter from the Vice President of the railway company regarding protest against infringement on the securities given the company, by the operation of the J. G. White contract with Ecuador. 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 411]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan Apr. 11 Same subject. Reports his inability to agree with the Ecuadorian arbitrator on the terms of arbitration. 278 [Pg. 278 includes portions of Doc. 411, Doc. 412, and Doc. 413]

Mr. Hartman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Apr. 16 Political affairs. Revolutionists have captured Ibarra. He has been requested to grant refuge to three sons of President Plaza if revolutionists march against Quito. 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403]

Same to same (telegram). June 2 Same subject. Consular Agent at Esmeraldas reports that city besieged by revolutionists. 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403]

46 Mr. Goding to Mr. Bryan. June 27 Imprisonment of Robert B. Jones. Reply to Department’s Mar. 16. Incloses copy of decree discharging bondsmen of Jones, which closes the case. 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432]

Mr. Hartman to Mr. Bryan July 10 Guayaquil & Quito Ry. Co. Refers to Department’s Apr. 3 and to his note in pursuance thereof to the Foreign Office, and incloses the reply of the Foreign Office. 278 [Pg. 278 includes portions of Doc. 411, Doc. 412, and Doc. 413]

74 Same to Same Aug. 12 Message of the President. Extracts from the copy transmitted by the Minister. 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 379]

Same to same (telegram). Aug. 14 Political affairs. Extraordinary powers have been granted to the President by Congress. 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403]

Same to same (telegram). Aug. 22 Same subject. Requests authority to undertake negotiations looking toward the ending of the revolution. 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403]

Same to same (telegram). do. Financial affairs. Ecuador solicits the assistance of this Government in obtaining a loan of $8,000,000. Details. 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hartman (telegram). Aug. 25 Same subject. Reply to his Aug. 22. On account of the grave disturbance of the money markets of the world and the almost total suspension of credit, the Department feels that the present is not a propitious time to assist Ecuador in obtaining a loan. 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419]

Same to same (telegram). do Political affairs. Informs him that Department does not consider it advisable or prudent for the Government of the United States to mix in any way in the internal political affairs of Ecuador. 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]

44 Aug. 26 Guayaquil & Quito Ry. Co. Refers to his July 10, and informs him that the Department considers it unnecessary to reply at present to the note from the Foreign Office. 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]

Mr. Hartman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 4 Exclusion of Goo Kwai, an American citizen of Chinese birth. Reports difficulty in obtaining permission for the entry of Goo Kwai into Ecuador and action of Ecuadorian Government in referring the matter to Washington for consideration. 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432]

80 Same to same. Nov. 5 Same subject. Refers to his Nov. 4 and reports particulars. 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432]

82 Nov. 8 Same subject. Reports informal representations made to Foreign Office. Government evidently regards this case as a very important one. 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

11 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Cordova. Dec. 7 Same subject. Asks if he has received any instructions from his Government to take this matter up with the Department. 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

50 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hartman Dec. 8 Same subject. Reply to his No. 80 of Nov. 5 and No. 82 of Nov. 8. Incloses copy of Department’s note to the Ecuadorian Legation and instructs him to continue good offices for the assistance of Mr. Kwai. 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

Mr. Cordova to Mr. Bryan. Dec. 11 Same subject. Informs Department of instructions received from his Government to discuss the matter with the Department. 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437]

Same to Same Dec. 17 Same subject. He has informed his Government of agreement with the Department that Goo Kwai should be permitted to stay in Ecuador until the last day of this month on a visit. Requests that American Minister to Ecuador be informed. 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hartman (telegram). Dec. 28 Same subject. Informs him of result of a conference with the Ecuadorian Minister and agreement that Goo Kwai be allowed to remain in Ecuador until 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 437, Doc. 438, and Doc. 439]

14 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Cordova Dec. 31 Same subject. Acknowledges his note of Dec. 17 and states that American Minister at Quito was informed on Dec. 28 of the agreement reached. 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 437, Doc. 438, and Doc. 439]

france.

No. From and to whom. Date Subject. Page.

Mr. Chadbourne to Mr. Bryan. 1913 Dec. 18 Liability to French military service of naturalized American citizens of French origin and of American-born children of French parentage. Inquiry as to the law involved in the case of a naturalized citizen upon return to France. 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 440]

Mr. Moore to Mr. Chadbourne. Dec. 24 Same subject. Reply to the foregoing 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 441]

Mr. Moore to Mr. Herrick (telegram). Dec. 27 Same subject. Nouguier case; request release. 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 442 and Doc. 443]

494 Mr. Herrick to Mr. Bryan. 1914 Jan. 2 Same subject. Reply to the foregoing. In view of the French Government’s ruling in previous cases, it would not be advisable to present the Nouguier case. 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 442 and Doc. 443]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Herrick (telegram). Jan. 16 Same subject. Reply to the foregoing. Instruction to present the Nouguier case. 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, and Doc. 447]

509 Mr. Herrick to Mr. Bryan. Jan. 19 Same subject. Reply to the foregoing. He has requested the release of Nouguier. 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, and Doc. 447]

Same to same (telegram). Mar. 25 Same subject. Refers to the foregoing. The French Government refuses to release Nouguier. 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, and Doc. 447]

255 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Herrick. Apr. 4 Same subject. Chrystie case. Incloses letter from J. A. C. Fargo and the Department’s reply, for his information. 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, and Doc. 447]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Young Sept. 22 Same subject. Pellissier case. Informs him as to the French law relating to American citizens formerly citizens of France who contemplate returning to that country. 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, and Doc. 449]

317 Mr. Lansing to Mr. Herrick Sept. 24 Same subject. Pellissier case. Incloses letter from Mr. Young, and instructs Mm to present the case and request release of Pellissier. 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, and Doc. 449]

207 Same to same (telegram). Oct. 27 Same subject. Chandeysson case. Information requested. 298 [Pg. 298 includes portions of Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453]

231 Mr. Herrick to Mr. Bryan(telegram) Oct. 28 Same subject. Reply to the foregoing 298 [Pg. 298 includes portions of Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453]

233 Mr. Lansing to Mr. Herrick (telegram). Nov. 4 Same subject. Refers to the foregoing. If Chandeysson did not voluntarily enlist, request his release on the ground of American citizenship. 298 [Pg. 298 includes portions of Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453]

261 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Herrick (telegram). Nov. 12 Same subject. Candevan case. Ask for release. 298 [Pg. 298 includes portions of Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453]

753 Mr. Herrick to Mr. Bryan. Nov. 12 Same subject. Refers to Department’s No. 317 of Sept. 24, and incloses note from the Foreign Office, refusing to release Pellissier. As its position m this case is the same as in previous cases, it is suggested that cases of the same nature in the future will doubtless meet with the same decision. 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 454]

767 Nov. 17 Same subject. Refers to Department’s No. 233 of Nov. 4, Chandeysson case. In view of the decision in the Pellissier case, authority is requested to withhold representations in this and all similar cases. 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455]

311 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Herrick (telegram). Nov. 25 Same subject. Peralme case. Request release. 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, and Doc. 458]

390 Mr. Sharp to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Dec. 18 Same subject. Reply to the foregoing; as no reply has been received to Embassy’s No. 767 of Nov. 17, asks further instructions as to Peralme case. 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, and Doc. 458]

442 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Sharp Dec. 31 Same subject. Reply to the foregoing. Instruction to request release of Peralme; Art. 17 of French Nationality Law should not apply to naturalized Americans who emigrated before reaching military age, and this Government can not concede the principle if the law is applied to such persons. 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, and Doc. 458]

great britain.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

152 Mr. Page to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Feb. 21 Colonization of Gold Coast, West Africa, by American Negroes. A negro named Sam is spreading propaganda in the United States and selling shares in an “African Trading Company” with a view to inducing negroes to emigrate to the Gold Coast. Sir Edward Grey requests that the Department do all it can to prevent such emigration, being certain that the scheme is fraudulent. 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 468, Doc. 469, and Doc. 470]

251 Same to same do Same to same and purport 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

Same to same (telegram) Feb. 23 Same subject. Additional evidence of fraudulency 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 471, Doc. 472, and Doc. 473]

252 Same to same Do Same subject and purport 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 471, Doc. 472, and Doc. 473]

The President to Congress. 1914. Mar. 5 Panama Canal tolls; repeal of the provision of the Panama Canal Act exempting vessels in the coastwise trade of the United States from the payment of tolls. Address of the President to Congress requesting repeal of the tolls provision. 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 463]

168 Mr. Page to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 6 Same subject. Reports the appreciative comment in London on the President’s address to Congress. 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465]

186 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Page Mar. 9 Colonization of Gold Coast, West Africa, by American negroes. The Department has transmitted copies of his Nos. 251 and 252 of Feb. 21 and 23 to the competent authorities. 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and Doc. 475]

75 Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bryan. Mar. 12 Same subject. It is intended by the British Government to pass an ordinance compelling every immigrant into the Gold Coast to deposit security for his repatriation if locally required. 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and Doc. 475]

81 Mar. 17 Same subject. The ordinance referred to in his No. 75 of Mar. 12 is being passed and the British authorities at Portland, Me., have been instructed not to issue British papers to the negro Sam’s steamer Curityba. 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476]

92 Mar. 23 Jurisdiction of the United States over foreign ships and persons on board them in United States waters; jurisdiction in foreign waters over crew of private ship under United States flag. Requests a full statement of the law and practice of the United States. 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461]

196 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Page. Apr. 1 Presentation of a statue of Washington to Great Britain by the State of Virginia. Incloses a letter from the Governor of Virginia transmitting a joint resolution of the General Assembly of Virginia providing for presentation to the British Government of a replica of Houdon’s statue of Washington, and requesting that the resolution be communicated to the British Government. Instruction formally to communicate this offer. 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Stuart Apr. 2 Same subject. Acknowledges receipt of his letter and the inclosed resolution, which have been transmitted to the Ambassador at London with instructions to communicate the offer therein made. 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466]

Apr. 10 Arbitration agreement between the United States and Great Britain extending the duration of the Convention of Apr. 4, 1908. Proclamation, compliance with Department’s instruction of No. 196. 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 459]

303 Mr. Page to Mr. Bryan Apr. 29 Presentation of a statue of Washington. Incloses the reply of the British Government accepting Virginia’s gift. 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 466 and Doc. 467]

Mr. Bryan to Mr Stuart May 15 Same subject. Incloses copy of Mr. Page’s No. 303 of Apr. 29 and its inclosure. 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 468, Doc. 469, and Doc. 470]

Mr. Bryan to Mr Stuart do Same subject. Informs him of having communicated to the Governor of Virginia copies of his No. 303 of Apr. 29 and its inclosure. 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 468, Doc. 469, and Doc. 470]

355 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Spring Rice. May 19 Jurisdiction of the United States over foreign ships, etc. Reply to his No. 92 of March 23. 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462]

June 15 Panama Canal tolls. Text of the Act repealing the tolls provision of the Canal Act. 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465]

Nov. 11 Treaty between the United States and Great Britain for the Advancement of Peace. Proclamation. 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]

greece.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

6257 Mr. Vouros to Mr. Bryan 1913. Dec. 17 Inviolability of correspondence of consular officers, interpretation of the Consular Convention between the United States and Greece. Requests that steps be taken to procure the dissolving of a decree whereby the Consul of Greece at Philadelphia is enjoined to hold certain papers from the Foreign Office of Greece subject to further orders of the court. 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 477]

182 Mr. Moore to Mr. Vouros 1914. Jan. 3 Same subject. Acknowledges his Dec. 17, 1913, and states that it is the duty of the consul to present to the court the means of defense that may be available to him under the Consular Convention, for until this is done it can not be assumed by the Department that the court will disregard the applicable provisions of the convention; furthermore, it is not competent for an executive branch of this Government to attempt to control or influence the judicial branch. 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

6620 Mr. Vouros to Mr. Bryan 1914. Mar. 7 Same subject. Replies to the Department’s No. 182 of Jan. 3, renews his request, and requests a statement of the opinion of the Department as to the regularity of the judicial proceedings,in order that his Government may accordingly shape its attitude toward United States consuls in Greece. 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Johnson. Mar. 16 Same subject. Incloses correspondence submitted by the Greek Legation tending to show violations of the Consular Convention by the authorities of California and request him to take such action as may appear proper. 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Gregory. Mar. 28 Same subject. Informs him of the substance of Mr. Vouros’ notes and requests him to take such steps as he may find appropriate in the matter. 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481]

198 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Vouros do Same subject. Acknowledges his Mar. 7 and informs him of having submitted the matter to the Attorney General. 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

Mr. Gregory to Mr. Bryan. Apr. 1 Same subject. As requested, he has instructed the United States Attorney at Philadelphia to call the attention of the court to the provisions of the Consular Convention of 1902, guaranteeing the inviolability of consular offices, and to suggest the apparent advisability of dissolving the injunction complained of. 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, and Doc. 484]

202 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Vouros Apr. 7 Same subject. Informs him of the correspondence between the Department and the Attorney General. 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, and Doc. 484]

guatemala.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

1914. Oct. 13 Treaty for the advancement of general peace. Proclamation. 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 485]

27 Mr. Leavell to Mr. Bryan. Mar 11 Message of the President to the Congress. Transmits a copy, with translation, of President Estrada Cabrera’s Message of Mar. 1, 1914. 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486]

haiti.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

Mr. Smith to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Jan. 2 Political and financial affairs. Reports revolutionary activities, with Dominican aid. 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 487, Doc. 488, and Doc. 489]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Smith (telegram). Jan. 21 Same subject. The Nashville has been ordered to Cape Haitien. 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 487, Doc. 488, and Doc. 489]

Mr. Smith to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Jan. 22 5 Same subject. The Government requests that the Nashville carry orders to Minister of the Interior,who is cut of at Fort liberty. 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 487, Doc. 488, and Doc. 489]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Smith (telegram). do Same subject. The request as to the Nashville has been complied with; the Department is disposed to do anything proper to support constituted government. The Montana ordered to Port au Prince. 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, and Doc. 493]

Mr. Livingston to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Jan. 23 Same subject. A “Committee of Public Safety,” named by the revolutionists at Cape Haitien, has removed customs officials and appointed a commission. Haitian National Bank protests to Consulate. 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, and Doc. 493]

Mr. Smith to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. National Bank of Haiti, as creditor of the Government, protests to the Legation against seizure of customhouse at Cape Haitien and requests the “exercise of such influence as is possible to protect said creditors.” 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, and Doc. 493]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Livingston (telegram). Jan. 25 Same subject. Instructs him to use all possible persuasion to cause de facto administrators of customs to respect Haiti’s obligations to National Bank. 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, and Doc. 493]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Smith (telegram). do . Same subject. Informs him of instructions to Mr. Livingston. Instructs him to impress upon revolutionary leaders the President’s policy as set forth in his statement of Mar. 12, 1913, to insist upon constitutional methods for reform of any abuses, and to demand full protection of life and property for all Americans and other foreigners. 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497]

Mr. Smith to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Jan. 27 Same subject. The President abdicated Jan. 27 and went aboard German warship. This ship and U. S. S. Montana preparing to land troops. Revolutionists reported approaching. 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497]

Mr. Smith to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Jan. 30 Same subject. Reports number of United State and German troops ashore; their presence promise peaceful election of new President. 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Smith (telegram). do Same subject. Instruction to impress upon de facto authorities the necessity of complying with national obligations as to assignment of customs funds for payment of definite debts; there must be no diversion of public moneys required for present obligations. 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497]

Mr. Smith to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Feb. 2 Same subject. Reports compliance with Department’s instructions as to customs. States political situation. 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, and Doc. 501]

Same to same (telegram). Feb. 3 Same subject. The Zamor brothers appear to control revolutionary situation, having defeated Davilmar Theodore in battle. Oreste Zamor has sent for permission to enter Port au Prince; he expects to establish provisional government and await action of Assembly. 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, and Doc. 501]

Same to same (telegram). Feb. 7 Same subject. Reports entry of Oreste Zamor into Port au Prince. 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, and Doc. 501]

Same to same (telegram). Feb. 8 Same subject. Reports election of Zamor to the presidency by the Assembly. Requests instruction as to recognition; foreign representatives awaiting decision of this Government. Zamor’s presidency obtained by revolutionary means, but his entry peaceable and order has since been maintained 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, and Doc. 501]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Smith (telegram). Feb. 9 Same subject. The President prefers to delay recognition until situation is more settled. Instructs to ascertain what guaranties the new Government can give as to its permanence and ability to protect lives and property of foreigners, and how many Provinces have accepted the new government also what is the attitude and strength of Davilmar Theodore. 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 501, Doc. 502, and Doc. 503]

Mr. Smith to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Feb. 10 Same subject. Transmits statement made in writing by the new Minister for Foreign Affairs, Charles Zamor, in response to the Department’s inquiries of Feb. 9. Diplomatic Corps think Theodore unable to cause serious disturbance. Zamor Government, strong. 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 501, Doc. 502, and Doc. 503]

Same to same (telegram). Feb. 12 Ineffective blockade of Cape Haitien. Diplomatic Corps notified thereof, but will await action of this Government. 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, and Doc. 588]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Smith (telegram). Feb. 13 Same subject. Instructs him to recognize blockade if it is effective. 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, and Doc. 588]

Mr. Livingston to Mr Bryan (telegram). Feb. 16 Protection of Haitian officials and their families by American diplomatic and consular officers. President of Haiti requests protection of family of Minister of Interior Charles Zamor. 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Livingston (telegram). do Same subject. Department can not give definite instructions until it has received more detailed information. Refers to Department’s regulations and points out that no government has been recognized in Haiti. 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596]

Mr. Livingston to Mr Bryan (telegram). Feb. 17 Same subject. The wife and four children of Charles Zamor wish to come to the Consulate in case of necessity 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Livingston (telegram). do Same subject. Instructs him that he may afford shelter to the women and children mentioned if necessary to shield them from violence. 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596]

Mr. Smith to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Ineffective blockade of Cape Haitien. Because of doubt as to effectiveness of blockade and whether recognition thereof would affect the question of recognizing the de facto Government and the belligerency of Theodore, the entire matter is held in abeyance. 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590]

57 Same to same Feb. 20 Same subject. Elaboration of the telegram of Feb. 17 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590]

Mr. Livingston to Mr Bryan (telegram). Feb. 21 Political and financial affairs. Theodore’s army has evacuated Cape Haitien, which is patrolled by U. S. Marines. Zamor forces have entered the city. 339 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 610, Doc. 611, and Doc. 612]

Mr. Smith to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Occupation of Cape Haitien by Zamor forces fully confirmed. 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Smith (telegram). Feb. 26 Same subject. States conditions precedent to recognition, with instructions to convey them to the new Government and report whatever reply is made. 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506]

Mr. Smith to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Feb. 28 Same subject. Reply to instructions of Feb. 26. The Foreign Office declines to give definite replies to inquiries as to customs, gives assurances as to lighthouses and Mole St. Nicholas, and clearly states that all matters in which the United States might be interested would have due consideration after recognition of the new Government by the United States. 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 506 and Doc. 507]

60 Same to same do Ineffective blockade of Cape Haitien. Refers to his No. 57 of Feb. 20 and reports that the blockade has been lifted. 384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Smith (telegram). Mar. 1 Political and financial affairs, instruction to recognize the new Government. 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511]

Same to same (telegram). Mar. 2 Same subject. Refers to last statement in his Feb. 28 and instructs him to say that this Government desires prompt signing of the protocol of arbitration, and issuance of instructions to vise passports of American citizens of Syrian origin naturalized prior to anti-Syrian law of 1903. 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511]

Mr. Smith to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 3 Same subject. Reply to Department’s Mar. 1. He was received formally by President Zamor this day. 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511]

23 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Smith. Mar. 12 Ineffective blockade of Cape Haitien. Refers to Legation’s No. 57 of Feb. 20. His action approved. 384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592]

Same to same (telegram). Mar. 19 Political and financial affairs. Consul Livingston reports renewal of revolutionary activities by Theodore. He has been requested by both Theodore and the Zamor Government to attempt an arrangement, and asks permission to cooperate with Commander of the Nashville to that end. Mr. Smith adds his recommendation to that, effect. 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511]

Same to same (telegram). Mar. 20 Same subject. If it is desired by the Government that Livingston interview the revolutionists instructions will be sent therefor to the Commander of the Nashville. 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 512, Doc. 513, Doc. 514, and Doc. 515]

Mr. Smith to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 22 Same subject. The Government can not formally make the request of the United States referred to in Department’s Mar. 20, but has informally done so. 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 512, Doc. 513, Doc. 514, and Doc. 515]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Smith (telegram). Mar. 31 Same subject. Refers to Department’s Mar. 2 and again calls attention of the Government of Haiti to its previous representations. Instructs him so to state in a memorandum and to urge an immediate reply. 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 512, Doc. 513, Doc. 514, and Doc. 515]

Mr. Smith to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Apr. 8 Same subject. The department’s instruction of Mar. 31 has been complied with and the Foreign Office has replied to his memorandum, but the reply is not entirely satisfactory as the Minister is avoiding all foreign affairs as far as possible owing to domestic situation.

Mr. Terres to Mr. Bryan (telegram). May 10 Same subject. Refers to Legation’s Mar. 22. Consul Livingston has been authorized to cooperate with the Bishop of Cape Haitien in an effort to conciliate the revolutionists. 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Terres (telegram). May 18 Same subject. Instruction to inform Livingston to proceed with the Bishop and employ his good offices with a view to making peace between the Government and the revolutionists. 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518]

231 Mr. Livingston to Mr. Bryan. May 26 Same subject. Report on his interview with the revolutionists and that of the Bishop; both were unsuccessful. The revolutionists are openly aided by the Dominicans. 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518]

88 Mr. Smith to Mr. Bryan June 9 Same subject. Reports an internal loan equal to about. $312,500. Owing to the serious lack of funds it is not unlikely that Haiti will soon appeal to the United States for relief. 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519]

Mr. Livingston to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 19 Same subject. Reports active operations oi the revolutionists; warship necessary. 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520]

Mr. Smith to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Jun e 20 Same subject. President Zamor will go to the front to-morrow; in his absence the Government will be in the hands of a commission acting in conjunction with the Cabinet. 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 521, Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525]

Same to same (telegram). June 22 Same subject. Reports movement of troops and 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 521, Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Smith (telegram). June 25 Same subject. A United States vessel will arrive at Cape Haitien about the 29th. 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 521, Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Livingston. June 26 Same subject. His No. 231 of May 26 approved. 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 521, Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Blanchard. 1914 July 2 Same subject. Incloses copy of a draft convention between the United States and Haiti, with instructions to ascertain the views of the Government thereon. 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 521, Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Terres (telegram). July 9 Same subject. Informs him of movements of vessels. 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 526, Doc. 527, and Doc. 528]

Mr. Blanchard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). July 20 Same subject. Reports fighting at Port au Prince and Cape Haitien. 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 526, Doc. 527, and Doc. 528]

Mr.Hazeltme to Mr. Bryan. July 30 Same subject. Report on the political and financial situation. 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 526, Doc. 527, and Doc. 528]

Mr. Blanchard to Mr. Bryan. Sept. 5 Same subject. Reports military successes and critical financial situation of the Government. 352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 528 and Doc. 529]

Same to same (telegram). Oct. 1 Same subject. Reports protest of National Bank of Haiti against bill for issue of paper money to 12,000,000 gourdes, as a violation of Government contract with Bank; the Government makes countercharges. 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 529, Doc. 530, and Doc. 531]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Blanchard (telegram). Oct. 7 Same subject. The Department regrets the differences between the Government and the Bank, makes certain suggestions in regard to the disposition of funds, and instructs him to bring them to the attention of the Government and ask for its views thereon. 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 529, Doc. 530, and Doc. 531]

Mr. Blanchard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Oct. 19 Same subject. Political situation makes presence of a war vessel desirable. 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 531, Doc. 532, Doc. 533, and Doc. 534]

Mr. Czaykowski to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports the Zamor Government fallen in the north. 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 531, Doc. 532, Doc. 533, and Doc. 534]

Mr. Blanchard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Oct. 29 Same subject. Reports flight of President Zamor and the capital in complete possession of the revolutionists. Presence of war vessels urgent. 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 531, Doc. 532, Doc. 533, and Doc. 534]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Blanchard (telegram). do Same subject. Informs him of the sending of certain war vessels. The Department is contemplating a convention with Haiti along the lines of its instruction of July 2. Instruction to protect Charles Zamor and his restoration to his official functions 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 534, Doc. 535, and Doc. 536]

Same to same (telegram). Oct. 30 Same subject. Refers to his Oct. 29 and Department’s Oct. 29. Instruction concerning protection of American life and property and to impress on the Government the purpose of this Government to take such stance as may be necessary to this end. 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 534, Doc. 535, and Doc. 536]

Mr. Blanchard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports compliance with the instruction of Oct. 29. President Zamor has resigned. 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 536, Doc. 537, and Doc. 538]

Mr. Lansing Mr. Blanchard (telegram). Do Same subject. Refers to his Oct. 29. instruction that when the de facto government is fully established the Department contemplates conversations looking toward a customs convention and a free election under supervision of United States commissioners. 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 536, Doc. 537, and Doc. 538]

Mr. Blanchard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. President Zamor and family have sailed. Charles Zamor and other ministers are refugees at French Legation. Military news. 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540]

Same to same (telegram). Nov. 3 Protection of Haitian officials and their families by American diplomatic and consular officers. The French Minister requests removal of Charles Zamor and former Acting Minister of the Interior Delancourt, refugees at the French Legation, to the Hancock. This is not possible under our regulations; but, Commander Willard approving, arrangements have been made for calling for assistance from American Legation in case of attack on refugees. 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, and Doc. 599]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Blanchard (telegram). Nov. 4 Same subject. His Nov. 3 approved. He is authorized to take all measures necessary for the protection of Charles Zamor and Cabinet. 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, and Doc. 599]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject and purport 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, and Doc. 599]

17 Same to same do Political and financial affairs. Incloses, for his information, a memorandum outlining a plan of provisional government for Haiti which this Government would be willing to recognize and support, and warning those concerned that present hostilities must cease and some such procedure adopted as the one outlined, in order to restore constitutional government. 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540]

Mr. Blanchard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 6 Same subject. Refers to Department’s Oct. 30. Reports arrival of victorious revolutionist chief, Theodore, welcomed with presidential honors. 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 540 and Doc. 541]

Mr. Blanchard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Nov. 7 Same subject. Reports election of Theodore to the Presidency. 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545]

Same to same (telegram). Nov. 10 Same subject. President Theodore inaugurated this morning. 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Blanchard (telegram). Nov. 12 Same subject. Refers to his Nov. 7 and previous correspondence; instructs him of the terms upon which recognition of Theodore as Provisional President. 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545]

Mr. Blanchard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 13 Same subject. Refers to his Nov. 7 and Department’s Nov. 12. Theodore was regularly elected. Asks if this is sufficient warrant for executing instructions of Nov. 12. 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Blanchard (telegram). Nov. 16 Same subject. Refers to his Nov. 13. Department desires him to carry out the instructions of Nov. 12, adding thereto a sixth condition precedent to recognition of Theodore. 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 545, Doc. 546, Doc. 547, and Doc. 548]

Mr. Blanchard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 18 Same subject. Reports compliance with Department’s instructions of Nov. 12 and Nov. 16. Theodore insists on recognition not as Provisional President but as President. Recommends such recognition. 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 545, Doc. 546, Doc. 547, and Doc. 548]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Blanchard (telegram). Nov. 21 Same subject. Refers to his Nov. 18. This Government will not recognize Theodore as President until after arrival in Washington of the commission stipulated in Department’s Nov. 12 and Nov. 16, with satisfactory credentials. 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 545, Doc. 546, Doc. 547, and Doc. 548]

Mr. Blanchard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 24 Same subject. Reports introduction of bill for issue of 16,000,000 gourdes of paper money. 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Blanchard (telegram). do Same subject. In order that there may be no misconstruction of Department’s Nov. 21, instructs him that this Government will recognize Theodore as President as soon as the Haitian commission has signed satisfactory protocol covering all matters. 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551]

Mr. Blanchard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 25 Same subject. Before receipt of Department’s Nov. 24, he had complied with the instructions of Nov. 21 and had received satisfactory assurances. In view thereof, he requests further instructions in regard to the later telegram. 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Blanchard (telegram). Nov. 27 Same subject. Refers to his Nov. 24 and instructs him to endeavor to discourage the proposed issue of paper money, which is a matter that should be taken up by the commission to be appointed. The Bank of Haiti will refuse to receive the proposed issue. 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, and Doc. 554]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Blanchard (telegram). Nov. 28 Same subject. Refers to his Nov. 25. Instructs him to inform Theodore that he is ready to use his good offices with the Bank to facilitate the expenses of the commission and those of the Government during the sessions of the commission. Department’s Nov. 24 was drafted to prevent any possible bad faith on the part of Theodore. 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, and Doc. 554]

Mr. Blanchard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Dec. 1 Same subject. Refers to Department’s Nov. 28 and Nov. 24. Requests to be instructed whether to proceed according to Department’s Nov. 21 or Nov. 24 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, and Doc. 554]

Same to same (telegram). Dec. 2 Same subject. Refers to Department’s Nov. 27. The Minister of Foreign Affairs alleges the need for the paper money issue because the Government is without funds and is unable to place a loan. 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 555, Doc. 556, and Doc. 557]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Refers to Department’s Nov. 28 and Dec. 1. The Haitian Government finds it impossible to empower its commission to negotiate the customs matter as Department desires and has prepared a counterproject in regard to financial control. Suggests reception of the commission without, the Department’s stipulations but with strict understanding as to time of recognition. 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 555, Doc. 556, and Doc. 557]

Same to same (telegram). Dec. 4 Same subject. Reports violent scene in the Congress upon interpellation of the Minister for Foreign Affairs. 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 555, Doc. 556, and Doc. 557]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Blanchard (telegram). do Same subject Refers to his Dec. 2. instructs to inform Theodore that an issue of paper money at this time might compel the Department to cancel its offer as to good offices with the Bank, contained in Department’s Nov. 28. 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, and Doc. 560]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Blanchard (telegram). 1914. Dec. 4 Same subject. Refers to his Dec. 1 and Dec. 2, and instructs him to proceed in conformity with Department’s Nov. 24 and inform Theodore that this Government will extend provisional recognition upon appointment of a commission in accordance with Department’s Nov. 12 and Nov. 16; that the Department is ready at the same time to use its good offices with the Bank in accordance with its Nov. 28; that formal recognition of Theodore as President will be extended only after the commission has signed satisfactory protocols at Washington in accordance with Department’s Nov. 24. Instructs him to report whether or not additional naval forces are desired. 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, and Doc. 560]

Mr. Blanchard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Dec. 7 Same subject. Has just received Department’s first Dec. 4. Requests instruction as to his Dec. 1 and Dec. 2. 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, and Doc. 560]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Blanchard (telegram). do Same subject. Refers to his Dec. 2. Instructs him that this Government will not regard as legal any issue of paper money such as he proposes. His French and German colleagues may be so informed 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 560, Doc. 561, and Doc. 562]

Mr. Wehrhane to Mr. Bryan. Dec. 8 Same subject. Incloses telegram with request that it be sent to the office of the National Bank of Haiti, ordering preparation of $110,000 gold for shipment on U.S. warship. 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 560, Doc. 561, and Doc. 562]

Same to same (telegram). Dec. 10 Same subject. Transmits substitute for the telegram inclosed in letter of Dec. 8. 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, and Doc. 566]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Blanchard (telegram). do Same subject. Transmits Mr. Wehrhane’s telegram with instruction to deliver it to the National Bank of Haiti. 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, and Doc. 566]

Mr. Wehrhane to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Dec. 11 Same subject. Transmits telegram for forwarding to the Bank authorizing it to deliver the gold to the captain of the U. S. S. Machias. 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, and Doc. 566]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Blanchard (telegram). Dec. 12 Same subject. Instruction to transmit to the Bank the telegram transmitted by Mr. Wehrhane in his Dec. 11. 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, and Doc. 566]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Instructs him in full in regard to this Government’s attitude toward Haiti’s financial matters and the question of recognition of Theodore as President; it will be necessary for this Government to have full information as to the fiscal standing and general plans of Theodore’s government. 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568]

Mr. Blanchard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. The cause of the interpellation of the Minister for Foreign Affairs reported in Ins Dec. 4 was the reading in Congress of the draft of our convention for customs control and of the counterproject. Reports more fully on the matters treated in recent telegrams and summarizes the Haitian counterproject. Reports further progress of the bill for the issue of 16.000.000 paper money. 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568]

Same to same (telegram). Dec. 14 Same subject. Transmits message for Wehrhane from the Bank, saying transportation of the gold from the vaults to the wharf is dangerous on account of public excitement. 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, and Doc. 571]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Blanchard (telegram). Dec. 15 Same subject. Reply to the foregoing. Instruction to request commanding officer of the Hancock to land as many marines as necessary to escort the gold from the Bank to the Machias. 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, and Doc. 571]

Mr. Blanchard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. The new Minister for Foreign Affairs states that he had no knowledge of the counter-project of his predecessor; summary of the Minister’s reply to the various points of Department’s Nov. 12. Instructions requested. 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, and Doc. 571]

Same to same (telegram). Dec. 18 Same subject. Reports embarkation of the gold by unarmed marines. Machias has sailed. 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 571, Doc. 572, and Doc. 573]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Blanchard (telegram). Dec. 19 Same subject. Reply to his Dec. 12 and Dec. 15. Full statement of the position of the United States as to the terms necessary to recognition of Theodore as President. More explicit information as to the intentions of the Government must be submitted. 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 571, Doc. 572, and Doc. 573]

Mr. Blanchard to Mr. Dec. 21 Same subject. Department’s Dec. 12 complied with. 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 573, Doc. 574, and Doc. 575]

Bryan (telegram). Mr. Menos to Mr. Bryan. Dec. 22 Same subject. Protest of the Haitian Government against the action of the United States in extending its aid to the Bank of Haiti in the shipment of gold to New York. 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 573, Doc. 574, and Doc. 575]

Mr. Blanchard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Dec. 22 Same subject. Transmits text of Foreign Office protest against gold shipment; requests instruction. 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 575 and Doc. 576]

23 Same to same Dec. 24 Same subject. Refers to his Dec. 2 and 12; reports compliance with instruction of Dec. 7; incloses Foreign Office reply. 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 576 and Doc. 577]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. A bill for the issue of 8,000,000 gourdes, paper money, has been promulgated. 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578]

24 Same to same Dec. 28 Same subject. Incloses copy of his personal and unofficial note to the Foreign Minister in pursuance of the instruction of Dec. 12; incloses also the Minister’s reply in official form. 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 579]

Mr. Ménos to Mr. Bryan Dec. Same subject. Further statement in regard to the relations between the Bank and the Government. 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 579 and Doc. 580]

25 Mr. Blanchard to Mr. Bryan. 29 Dec. 30 Same subject. Incloses a further statement by the Foreign Office as to the gold removed from the bank. 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 580 and Doc. 581]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Blanchard (telegram). do Same subject. Transmits telegram from Vice President Wehrhane of the National Bank of Haiti to the President of Haiti; instructions to impart its contents verbally to the Haitian Minister of Finance. 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582]

2 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Menos Dec. 31 Same subject. Reply to his Dec. 22 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 582 and Doc. 583]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Wehrhane (telegram). do Same subject. Transmits telegram from Bank of Haiti to its Vice President in New York, Wehrhane, stating that Haitian authorities took from the bank’s vaults $65,000. 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 583 and Doc. 584]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Transmits paraphrase of a telegram to him from the Bank of Haiti, reporting sealing of safes by the Government; suspension compulsory; desires to know whether the Bank shall be closed. 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, and Doc. 588]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Blanchard (telegram). do Same subject. Instructs him to protest against any interference with the Bank by the Government, it being owned and operated by American and other foreigners; this Government is deeply concerned over reports as to Haiti’s arbitrary dealing with foreign interests. 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, and Doc. 588]

honduras.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

3 Mr. E wing to Mr. Bryan 1914 Jan. 24 Message of the President to the Congress. Transmits copies of the message of President Bertrand read Jan. 1, 1914. 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 600]

italy.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

173 Mr. Root to Mr. White 1907. Feb. 11 Status of native or naturalized American citizens of Italian parentage. Instruction to open negotiations for a naturalization convention; argument for such a convention. 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602]

82 Mr. Griscom to Mr. Root June 5 Same subject. Reply to the foregoing, inclosing his note of May 25 to the Foreign Office; its favorable reception. 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 603]

47 Mr. Adee to Mr. Griscom June 29 Same subject. Acknowledges the foregoing; instruction to express to the Foreign Office this Government’s gratification with the reception of its proposal. 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 603, Doc. 604, and Doc. 605]

389 Mr. Griscom to Mr. Root 1908. June 19 Same subject. Refers to Department’s Feb. 11, 1907, No. 173; incloses reply of Foreign Office to his note of May 25, 1907; summary thereof; the Italian Government intends to settle the matter by amending the Italian law rather than by entering into a convention. 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 603, Doc. 604, and Doc. 605]

185 Mr. Adee to Mr. Garrett Aug. 1 Same subject. Reply to the foregoing; it is hoped the proposed legislation will clear up the present confusion. 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 605, Doc. 606, and Doc. 607]

185 Mr. Knox to Mr. Leishman. 1911. Apr. 6 Same subject. Refers to the 1907–8 correspondence and inquires whether or not the proposed legislation has been enacted; instructs him in his discretion again to urge the conclusion of a treaty, using the arguments set forth in the instruction of Feb. 11, 1907. 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 605, Doc. 606, and Doc. 607]

446 Mr. Leishman to Mr. Knox. Sept. 15 Same subject. Reply to the foregoing; incloses correspondence with the Foreign Office, which confirms its former position; but the legislation has not yet been enacted. 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 608]

139 Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Brien. 1913. May 26 Same subject. Incloses copy of its circular of 1901 entitled “Notice to Americans formerly subjects of Italy who contemplate returning to that country,” and a letter to the Department stating that the Italian military law has recently been changed as to age limit; instruction to ascertain the true age limit. 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 608, Doc. 609, and Doc. 610]

254 Mr. O’Brien to Mr. Bryan. June 11 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 608, Doc. 609, and Doc. 610]

143 Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Brien. July 15 Same subject. Reply to the foregoing; makes further inquiries as to age limit. 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 610, Doc. 611, and Doc. 612]

17 Nov. 4 Same subject. Reply to the foregoing; incloses Embassy’s memorandum to the Foreign Office on the subject, and the latter’s commentaries thereon, showing the age limits to be 16 and 32. 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 610, Doc. 611, and Doc. 612]

18 Dec. 19 Same subject. Reply to the foregoing; incloses proposed amendment to the 1901 circular; inquires whether it appears to be correct and fairly comprehensive. 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613]

52 1914. Jan. 5 Same subject. Reply to the foregoing; the proposed amendment appears to be comprehensive and correct. Inquiries whether he shall sound the Foreign Office in regard to the possibility of concluding a naturalization convention with Italy similar to the Convention of 1870 with Austria-Hungary. 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 613, Doc. 614, and Doc. 615]

Apr. 15 Arbitration agreement between the United States and Italy extending the duration of the Convention of March 28. 1908. Proclamation. 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 601]

65 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Page June 19 Status of native or naturalized American citizens of Italian parentage. Refers to the inquiry in his No. 52 of Jan. 5 regarding a naturalization convention, in which connection Department incloses copy of a letter in reply to an inquiry on that subject from the Hon. Charles B. Smith regarding a proposed resolution by Congress asking the Department to negotiate for such a convention. Preliminary to negotiations the Department desires information as to changes, if any, that have been made in Italian law since the correspondence of 1911 which would apparently make such a treaty more feasible than before 402 \

10 Mr. Shank to Mr. Bryan Sept. 2 Same subject. The emigration authorities say that children born abroad of Italian parents are Italians unless the parents had become naturalized prior to the birth of the child; otherwise they are liable to military duty. The principle of dual nationality is here involved. Case of Macaluso. Another case, in which the father became naturalized while the son was a minor. Nearly all naturalized Italian-Americans are detained for military duty, even when they have been previously excused. He has protested against detention of native-born citizens. 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 615 and Doc. 616]

142 Mr. Page to Mr. Bryan Sept. 9 Same subject. Reply to Department’s No. 65 of June 19, in pursuance of which he addressed a note, on July 3, to the Foreign Office, which replies, July 30, that the new law was approved June 13, 1912, and regulations for its application were promulgated Aug. 2, 1912; the law abrogates all previous citizenship laws and provides that “loss of nationality does not exempt from military service except as provided by special laws.” By this exception Italy reserves the right to negotiate treaties of naturalization with other countries in which the fact of the foreign naturalization of an Italian subject operates so as to exempt him from military service. It would therefore appear opportune to introduce legislation with a view to opening negotiations for a naturalization treaty with Italy. 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617]

247 Same to same Sept. 15 Same subject. Reports the cases of three naturalized American citizens, all clergymen, Carra, Danchise, and Cassetta; and the case of Spediacci, American-born, whose father was naturalized before the son’s birth—all indiscriminately held for military service. Other cases are constantly being presented; the Embassy has replied that it is powerless to help them; a naturalization convention should apparently be negotiated at the first opportunity. 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 617 and Doc. 618]

30 Mr. Lansing to Mr. Pag (telegram). 1914. Sept. 21 Same subject. Instruction to ask the Italian Government that arrangements be made for the release with permission to return to the United States of the numerous naturalized American citizens o Italian birth who are domiciled in the United States and are now visiting Italy; to cite the expatriation act of 1907 and the naturalization act of 1906; to mention the case of Ciappone. 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621]

14 Mr. Page to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Sept. 22 Same subject. Reply to the foregoing. He ha pressed the matter repeatedly without receiving other reply than verbal promise to investigate. Refers to his No. 247 of Sept. 15. 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621]

79 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Page Sept 23 Same subject. Instruction to make a special appeal in behalf of the Reydominic Cassetta. 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621]

34 Mr. Page to Mr. Bryar (telegram). Oct. 2 Same subject. Further reply to Department’s telegram No. 30 of Sept. 21; he has repeatedly written to the Foreign Office and made personal visits without reply or other result than promise to consider in one case only. Requests instructions. 408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 621, Doc. 622, and Doc. 623]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Smith. Oct. 5 Same subject. Reply to his proposal to introduce in Congress a resolution looking to the negotiator of a naturalization treaty with Italy; quotes Mr Page’s 142 of Sept. 9. 408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 621, Doc. 622, and Doc. 623]

51 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Page (telegram). Oct. 6 Same subject. Reply to his telegram 34 of Oct. 2 all that he can do, in the absence of a naturalization treaty, is to express earnestly this Government’s interest in persons concerned and its desire for their release. 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627]

81 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Page Oct. 7 Same subject. Reply to his No. 247 of Sept. 15; the Department does not regard the present as a favorable time to approach the Italian Government on the subject of a naturalization treaty. 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627]

38 Mr. Page to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Oct. 8 Same subject. Reply to Department’s telegram 3C of Sept. 21; the War Office requests certain information concerning Ciappone. The Government finds it very difficult officially to permit subjects with naturalization in America, to escape military service without granting similar privileges to certain other countries. 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627]

9 Mr. Lansing to Mr Shank. Oct. 14 Same subject Reply to his No.10 of Sept. 2; his action as therein reported is approved, and similar action should be taken wherever it is clear that the persons concerned are domiciled in the United States and have made practical election of American rather than Italian nationality. However, in the absence of a naturalization treaty, this Government is not in a position to press the matter where the Italian Government is unwilling to recognize the persons as American citizens. 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627]

60 Mr. Lansing to Mr. Page. Oct. 14 Same subject. Reply to his telegram 38 of Oct. 8; the Department is endeavoring to obtain the desired information. 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629]

162 Mr. Page to Mr. Bryan Oct. 14 Same subject. Reply to Department’s No. 79 of Sept. 23; reports his repeated efforts in behalf of naturalized American citizens of Italian birth; the Government shows some willingness to respond in certain cases, but must have specific information in each case. Again urges negotiations for a naturalization treaty. 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629]

177 Nov. 3 Same subject. Reply to Department’s 81 of Oct. 7; submits facts that may show the present a favorable time negotiating a treaty 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 629 and Doc. 630]

93 Mr. Lansing to Mr. Page Nov. 20 Same subject. Reply to his No. 162 of Oct. 14; instructs him to forward copies of all correspondence with the Italian Government relating to naturalized American citizens of Italian origin who are held as subject to Italian military regulations. The Department’s views coincide with Mr. Page’s as to the desirability of a naturalization treaty; in this connection his attention is called to Department’s instruction No. 65 of June 19, 1914. 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 630, Doc. 631, and Doc. 632]

221 Mr. Page to Mr. Bryan Dec. 14 Same subject. Reply to the foregoing; incloses copies of all correspondence requested, and also that relating to certain native-born citizens. Reports interviews at the Foreign Office from which he concludes that, in view of new conditions, the present may not be a favorable time for urging treaty negotiations. 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 630, Doc. 631, and Doc. 632]

japan.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

29 Mr. Blanchard to Mr. Bryan. 1913. Apr. 25 Abolition of foreign settlements in Chosen. Transmits original of final protocol. 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637]

21 Mr. Moore to Mr. Blanchard July 11 Same subject. The protocol is acceptable. Commendation of the Consul General at Seoul. 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638]

56 Mr. Guthrie to Mr. Bryan. 1914. Mar. 26 Same subject. Incloses notes approving protocol 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639]

57 Same to same. Mar. 27 Same subject. Incloses Foreign Office note saying the ordinances will be put into effect Apr. 1. 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Apr. 1 Same subject. The foreign settlements were abolished on Apr. 1. 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 640 and Doc. 641]

Department of State to Japanese Embassy. May 9 Arbitration agreement. Memorandum regarding the termination of the convention of 1908 and the retroactivity of the agreement of 1913. 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 633]

May 26 Same subject. Proclamation of the agreement 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 633]

Mr. Chinda to Mr. Bryan. June 10 Protest of Japan against certain land laws of the State of California. Telegram from the Japanese Foreign Office to the Japanese Ambassador, dated June 9, 1914, and delivered to the Secretary of State by the Ambassador, June 10. Japan is not Inclined to continue negotiations for a conventional settlement; prefers to recur to the correspondence interrupted by these negotiations, and therefore now looks for an answer to its note of Aug. 26, 1913. In view of the failure of the negotiations for a convention, the Japanese Government desires to make public the correspondence on the subject. 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Chinda. June 23 Same subject. Reply to the foregoing. This Government defers to the wish of the Japanese Government to end the negotiations for a conventional settlement; the Japanese Government should now submit a detailed answer to this Government’s note and aide memoire of July 16, 1913, which it considers substantially unanswered by the communication of Aug. 26, 1913. As the legislation complained of rests upon an economic basis, this Government regrets that Japan lays so much emphasis on racial discrimination. 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635]

Mr. Chinda to Mr. Bryan. Nov. 25 Same subject. Reply to the Department’s June 23, 1914, and note and aide memoire of July 16, 1913. Reasserts that the California statute is racially discriminatory; denies that it is based on economic considerations; asserts that if so based it would still be discriminatory; regrets that this Government has not yet fundamentally answered the main complaint of Japan that said statute is contrary to the letter and spirit of the existing treaty; reasserts that the diplomatic channel is the only proper one, and that previous to a renewal of negotiations for a treaty the present situation in California should be ameliorated. 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 635 and Doc. 636]

liberia.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

178 Mr. Lansing to Mr. Page (telegram). Sept. 22 Financial affairs. Instructs to forward telegram to the American Minister at Monrovia, asking for report on effect of European war on conditions in Liberia. 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 642, Doc. 643, and Doc. 644]

Mr. Buckner to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Sept. 24 Same subject. Reports financial condition in Liberia serious; effect of European war. 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 642, Doc. 643, and Doc. 644]

Mr. Lansing to Messrs. Kuhn, Loeb & Co. Sept. 25 Same subject. Transmits Minister Buckner’s telegram with reference to serious financial conditions in Liberia. Requests suggestions for relief. 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 642, Doc. 643, and Doc. 644]

Messrs. Kuhn. Loeb & Co. to Mr. Lansing. Sept. 29 Same subject. Under existing conditions, impossible to arrange a loan to Liberia. 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, and Doc. 648]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Buckner (telegram). Sept. 30 Same subject. Cable definite information regarding condition American missionaries; also needs of Liberians. 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, and Doc. 648]

Mr. Buckner to Mr. Bryan (telegram) Oct. 3 Same subject. Reports on condition of missionaries and immigrants. 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, and Doc. 648]

Same to same (telegram). Nov. 28 Same subject. New York bankers refuse loan. Can anything be done to prevent default in November interest? 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, and Doc. 648]

Mr. Lansing to Kuhn, Loeb & Co. (telegram). Nov. 30 Same subject. Transmits the foregoing and requests assistance for Liberia. 442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650]

Kuhn, Loeb & Co. to Mr. Lansing (telegram). Dec. 2 Same subject. Under present conditions not possible to arrange any loan to Liberia. 442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650]

mexico.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

Mr Simpich to Mr. Bryan. 1913. Apr. 5 Taxation of American citizens. Reports Constitutionalists collecting taxes; possibility of second collection by Federals; Americans helpless. 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191]

230 Mr. Bowman to Mr. Bryan. Apr. 12 Same subject. Reports confusion as to proper authority for collection of mining tax; requests instruction. 731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 1191 and Doc. 1192]

Mr. Moore to Mr. Simpich (telegram). Apr. 126 Same subject. Taxes mentioned in his Apr. 5 should be paid under protest; file protest where possible and secure receipt. 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 1192 and Doc. 1193]

201 Mr. Moore to Mr. Wilson (telegram) do Same subject. Quotes the foregoing; instruction to bring the matter before the Foreign Office. 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, and Doc. 1195]

1935 5 Mr. Wilson to Mr. Bryan. Apr. 29 Same subject. Reports compliance with above instruction. 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, and Doc. 1195]

Mr. Carr to Mr. Bowman Apr. 30 Same subject. Reply to his 230. 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, and Doc. 1195]

103 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hanna May 12 Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Instruction to protest to Constitutionalist authorities against compulsory contribution of $2,500 by San Luis Mining Co. of San Dimas. 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 1260, Doc. 1261, Doc. 1262, and Doc. 1263]

Mr. Schmutz to Mr. Bryan. June 12 Same subject. List of forced loans levied at Zacatecas by Gen Natera. 759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 1263, Doc. 1264, and Doc. 1265]

1375 Mr. Moore to Mr. O’Shaughnessy. July 21 Same subject. Forwards report by Consul Bonney of forced loans levied at San Luis Potosi by rebels, with instruction to request adequate protection. 759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 1263, Doc. 1264, and Doc. 1265]

Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Aug. 17 Same subject. Informs him of threatened forced 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 1266, Doc. 1267, Doc. 1268, and Doc. 1269]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher. Aug. 20 loans at Parral. Same subject. Instructions in regard to the fore 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 1266, Doc. 1267, Doc. 1268, and Doc. 1269]

Mr. Blocker to Mr. Bryan (telegram) Aug. 22 Same subject. A $50,000 forced loan demanded by Jesus Carranza of Agujita Mining Co. at Ciudad Porfirio Diaz. 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 1266, Doc. 1267, Doc. 1268, and Doc. 1269]

Mr. E. C. Bryan to Mr. W. J. Bryan (telegram). Aug. 23 Same subject. Offers his services in delivering messages to consul and others at Parral. 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 1266, Doc. 1267, Doc. 1268, and Doc. 1269]

Mr. W. J. Bryan to Mr. E. C. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Thanks for his Aug. 21; requests him to say to Parral military authority that this Government will hold him personally responsible for all injuries to American and other foreigners, and to forward reply and other data. 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, Doc. 1272, and Doc. 1273]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bryan. Aug. 31 Protection of British interests. Asks that American officials in Mexico inform all foreigners alike when intimation of events likely to affect their safety is received. 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 1463, Doc. 1464, and Doc. 1465]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Sept. 18 Forced loans. Reports indications of an impending general demand on foreigners for forced loans in the form of purchase of government bonds. 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, Doc. 1272, and Doc. 1273]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Miller (telegram). Sept. 24 Same subject. Instruction to protest against demand outlined in the foregoing. 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, Doc. 1272, and Doc. 1273]

Mr. Osborne to Mr. Spring Rice. Sept. 29 Protection of British interests. Instructions in the sense indicated by his note of August 31 have been given to American consuls in Mexico. The transport Buford will furnish transportation to any foreigner desiring to leave Mexico. 839 [Pg. 839 includes portions of Doc. 1465, Doc. 1466, and Doc. 1467]

523 Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Oct. 1 Forced loans. A movement is on foot to raise a loan from the petroleum interests under threat of expropriation. 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, Doc. 1272, and Doc. 1273]

Mr. Alger to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Oct. 6 Same subject. Gen. Buelna demands $8,000 from Rosario Mining Co. at Mazatlan. 763 [Pg. 763 includes portions of Doc. 1274, Doc. 1275, Doc. 1276, Doc. 1277, and Doc. 1278]

Mr. Moore to Mr. Alger (telegram). Oct. 8 Same subject. Instruction to protest informally as to the foregoing. 763 [Pg. 763 includes portions of Doc. 1274, Doc. 1275, Doc. 1276, Doc. 1277, and Doc. 1278]

564 Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan. Oct. 18 Protection of British interests. The German Minister asks good offices for release of forty Germans held at Torreon. Other foreigners refused release are seven Englishmen, forty Frenchmen, and a great number of Spaniards and Italians. 839 [Pg. 839 includes portions of Doc. 1465, Doc. 1466, and Doc. 1467]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman. Oct. 19 Same subject. Asks that steps be taken for release of all foreigners held at Torreon. 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 1468, Doc. 1469, and Doc. 1470]

Mr. Hanna to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Forced loans. Forced loan expected at Monterey; he and the British Consul will recommend to foreigners not to acquiesce. 763 [Pg. 763 includes portions of Doc. 1274, Doc. 1275, Doc. 1276, Doc. 1277, and Doc. 1278]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Simpich. Oct. 23 Protection of British interests. Say to Carranza it is hoped that orders will be issued for the liberation and protection of all foreigners at Torreon. 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 1468, Doc. 1469, and Doc. 1470]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hanna (telegram). Oct. 24 Forced loans. Instruction to send Department details before making recommendation. 763 [Pg. 763 includes portions of Doc. 1274, Doc. 1275, Doc. 1276, Doc. 1277, and Doc. 1278]

Mr. Hanna to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1913. Nov. 17 Same subject. An American manager of an American company has been ordered to send at once $10,000 to military headquarters. States reasons for opposing such demands: requests instructions. 763 [Pg. 763 includes portions of Doc. 1274, Doc. 1275, Doc. 1276, Doc. 1277, and Doc. 1278]

Same to same (telegram). Nov. 18 Same subject. Reports other demands. He will protest, on the basis of general consular instructions. 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 1278, Doc. 1279, Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, and Doc. 1282]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 19 Same subject. Huasteca Oil Co. assessed $100,000 by Gen. Aguilar, Tampico. 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 1278, Doc. 1279, Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, and Doc. 1282]

The British Embassy to the Department of State. do Protection of British interests. Asks to be informed of any steps which this government might contemplate taking which might result in danger to British subjects and other foreigners. 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 1470 and Doc. 1471]

Same to same (telegram). Nov. 20 Forced loans. Gen. Aguilar is sending reply to Mr. Miller’s protest against forced loan demanded of Huasteca Co., which has been allowed to resume operations pending conclusion of negotiations. He has advised various companies not to pay. Requests instructions. 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 1278, Doc. 1279, Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, and Doc. 1282]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hanna (telegram). Nov. 21 Same subject. Reply to his Nov. 17 and 18; instruction to make protest, but see Department’s Oct. 24. 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 1278, Doc. 1279, Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, and Doc. 1282]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Simpich (telegram). Nov. 22 Same subject. Mexican Petroleum Co. and Huasteca Petroleum Co. have had $100,000 demanded of them by Gen. Aguilar. Bring this to Carranza’s attention and informally request issuance of order to withdraw demand and cease molesting these companies. 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 1283, Doc. 1284, and Doc. 1285]

558 Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). Nov. 24 Political affairs. Outlines purposes of this Government in Mexico. 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 651]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Miller (telegram). Nov. 25 Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Reply to his Nov. 20. Continue to protest. Advise persons compelled to comply with demands to obtain receipts. 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 1283, Doc. 1284, and Doc. 1285]

Mr. Simpich to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Refers to Department’s Nov. 22; forwards reply of Carranza’s Foreign Office to his protest. 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 1283, Doc. 1284, and Doc. 1285]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bryan. Dec. 3 Protection of British interests. Property of Richard Keays, British subject, and that of other foreigners in district of Juarez, Chihuahua, in danger. Asks protection. 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 1470 and Doc. 1471]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Simpich (telegram). Dec. 6 Same subject. Directed to ask protection of property of Richard Keays and other foreigners in Juarez. 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 1470 and Doc. 1471]

638 Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Forced loans. The Governor of Smaloa has assessed illegal taxes with penalty of confiscation for nonpayment; details. 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 1286 and Doc. 1287]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). Dec. 8 Same subject. Instruction to bring to attention of authorities any illegal procedure in Sinaloa as to taxes. 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 1286 and Doc. 1287]

580 Same to same (telegram) Dec. 12 Same subject. The Consul at Mazatian reports reduction of tax mentioned in the foregoing. 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 1288, Doc. 1289, Doc. 1290, and Doc. 1291]

Mr. Taylor to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Same subject. Exorbitant tax levied at Guaymas. Requests instructions as to application of the Treaty of 1831. 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 1288, Doc. 1289, Doc. 1290, and Doc. 1291]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Taylor (telegram). Dec. 13 Same subject The Treaty of 1831 not in force; instruction to report discrimination against foreigners. 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 1288, Doc. 1289, Doc. 1290, and Doc. 1291]

691 Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram) Dec. 15 Same subject. Refers to his 638 of Dec. 6 and reports action taken, reduction of taxes and satisfaction of diplomatic corps. 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 1288, Doc. 1289, Doc. 1290, and Doc. 1291]

289 Mr. Guyant to Mr. Bryan Dec. 29 Protection of Chinese. Chinese merchants in fear of forced loans make formal request for protection of consulate. 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 1603, Doc. 1604, and Doc. 1605]

Mr. Moore to Mr. Simpich (telegram). 1914. Jan. 3 Protection of British interests. Directed to request return of cattle of Richard Keays seized by Villa, and ask that he be permitted to pass them out of Mexico. 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 1470 and Doc. 1471]

Mr. Willard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of Spanish interests. Quotes telegram received by Prime Minister regarding expulsion of Spaniards and requesting protection. Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs renews request for protection. 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 1334, Doc. 1335, and Doc. 1336]

Mr Moore to Mr. Willard (telegram). do Same subject. Instructs him to inform the foreign Office of steps taken to protect Spanish subjects in Mexico. 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 1336, Doc. 1337, Doc. 1338, and Doc. 1339]

Mr. Moore to Mr. Hostetter (telegram). do Same subject. Instructs him to extend protection to Spanish subjects in his district, to make representations to authorities, and to report result of representations. (Mutatis mutandis to Am. Consul at Chihuahua.) 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 1336, Doc. 1337, Doc. 1338, and Doc. 1339]

986 Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan 1914. Jan. 5 Protection of Chinese. Quotes note from Chinese Legation in Mexico City expressing thanks for protection afforded Chinese during bombardment of Tamnico. 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 1603, Doc. 1604, and Doc. 1605]

Same to same (telegram). Jan. 6 Same subject. Investigation is being made of reported maltreatment by Federals at American ranch at Colonia of American named Fisher and others. Believed that Chinese cook will be executed. 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 1603, Doc. 1604, and Doc. 1605]

Mr. Willard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of Spanish interests. Reports conversation with King of Spain concerning killing of two Spanish subjects and other outrages by revolutionists as well as killing of two Japanese. Energetic measures by Am. Government requested. 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 1336, Doc. 1337, Doc. 1338, and Doc. 1339]

Mr. Riaño to Mr. Moore Jan. 7 Same subject. Requests intervention of Department to prevent confiscation of the mine “El De sengano,” the property of two Spaniards, two Mexicans, and one American, at Guanaceyi Durango. 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 1339, Doc. 1340, and Doc. 1341]

Mr. Moore to Mr. Hamm (telegram). do Same subject. Instructs him to use good offices to secure protection of the mine “El Desengaño.” (Same to Vice Consul a Nogales.) 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 1339, Doc. 1340, and Doc. 1341]

Mr. Moore to Mr. Letcher (telegram). Jan. 8 Same subject. Instructs him to investigate and re port concerning killing of two Spanish subjects near Chihuahua and action, if any, taken by authorities. 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 1342, Doc. 1343, Doc. 1344, and Doc. 1345]

Mr. Moore to Mr. Willard (telegram). do Same subject. Instructs him to inform the King of contents of Department’s telegram of Jan. 5. Constitutionalist leaders are investigating complaint of mistreatment of Spaniards at Parral. 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 1292, Doc. 1293, Doc. 1294, and Doc. 1295]

Mr. Guyant to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Asks whether he shall advise American and Chinese merchants to refuse payment in expected attempt to collect forced loans. 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 1292, Doc. 1293, Doc. 1294, and Doc. 1295]

Mr. Moore to Mr. Guyant (telegram). Jan. 9 Same subject. Directs urgent protest against any attempt to exact forced loans from foreigners. If exacted, foreigners should pay under protest, making protest matter of record, and secure receipts. 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 1292, Doc. 1293, Doc. 1294, and Doc. 1295]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Federal authorities collect $70,00C (Mex.) from business men and foreign companies at Tuxpam. 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 1292, Doc. 1293, Doc. 1294, and Doc. 1295]

Mr. Alger to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of Spanish interests. Requests interpretation as to meaning of all proper protection to property of foreigners. 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 1342, Doc. 1343, Doc. 1344, and Doc. 1345]

720 Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of German interests. Says German Minister has called concerning protection of foreigners at Tepic where trouble is anticipated. Suggests war vessel at San Blas. 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 1568, Doc. 1569, and Doc. 1570]

Mr. Moore to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). Jan. 10 Same subject. Says Navy Department has issued appropriate instructions regarding situation at Tepic 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 1568, Doc. 1569, and Doc. 1570]

Mr. Moore to Mr. Carothers (telegram) do Protection of Spanish interests. Informs him of threatened confiscation of the mine El Desengano and instructs him to represent to Villa the increasing number of complaints coming to Department from foreign governments with requests for protection. 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 1342, Doc. 1343, Doc. 1344, and Doc. 1345]

Mr. Edwards to Mr. Bryan. (telegram). Jan. 12 Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Forced loans made at Acapulco. 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 1292, Doc. 1293, Doc. 1294, and Doc. 1295]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Johnson (telegram) do Protection of Chinese. Directs protest against execution of Chinese cook. 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 1606, Doc. 1607, and Doc. 1608]

Mr. Davis to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Jan. 14 Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Legislature of Michoacan has decreed forced loan. Americans ask if they have to comnly. 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 1296, Doc. 1297, Doc. 1298, and Doc. 1299]

610 Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). do Same subject. Directs appropriate representations regarding American interests in Acapulco. 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 1296, Doc. 1297, Doc. 1298, and Doc. 1299]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Alger (telegram). Do Protection oi Spanish interests. Refers to his telegram of Jan. 9 and instructs him to extend same protection to other foreigners as to Americans. 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 1345, Doc. 1346, Doc. 1347, and Doc. 1348]

Mr. Willard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Minister for Foreign Affairs requests cooperation of American Consuls in Mexico with Spanish Secretary of Legation, who is to investigate condition of Spaniards at various places. 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 1345, Doc. 1346, Doc. 1347, and Doc. 1348]

same to same telegram do same subject. States Minister for Foreign Affairs is sending Secretary of Legation Cardenas at Habana to El Paso to investigate and render assistance to Spaniards at Chihuahua. Minister for Foreign Affairs desires that Cardenas communicate direct and communicate with American Consuls there. 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 1345, Doc. 1346, Doc. 1347, and Doc. 1348]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). 1914. Jan. 15 Same subject. Informs him of Secretary of Legation Cardenas’s mission to El Paso and points in Mexico. Directs extension of courtesies and asks information for purpose of directing American consular officers to facilitate mission. 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 1345, Doc. 1346, Doc. 1347, and Doc. 1348]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Davis (telegram). do Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Directs formal protest if attempt to impose forced loan is made. If attempt persisted in, payment should be made under protest, protest being made of record, and receipt taken for amounts paid. 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 1296, Doc. 1297, Doc. 1298, and Doc. 1299]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Willard (telegram). Jan. 16 Protection of Spanish interests. Informs him that appropriate Consuls have been suitably instructed 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 1348, Doc. 1349, Doc. 1350, and Doc. 1351]

Mr. Stadden to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Jan. 19 Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Governor of Colima calls meeting for purpose of demanding money. 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 1296, Doc. 1297, Doc. 1298, and Doc. 1299]

Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Jan. 20 Same subject. Consul at Progreso reports forced 770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 1300, Doc. 1301, Doc. 1302, and Doc. 1303]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Stadden (telegram). Jan. 21 loan on Mexicans and foreigners. Same subject. Outlines course to be followed if attempt to force loan is persisted in. 770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 1300, Doc. 1301, Doc. 1302, and Doc. 1303]

618 Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). do Same subject. Outlines course to be followed by Consul at Progreso if authorities persist in attempt to force loan. 770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 1300, Doc. 1301, Doc. 1302, and Doc. 1303]

Mr. Willard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Protection of Spanish interests. Minister for Foreign Affairs extends thanks for assistance rendered by consular officers, and asks that certain Spanish families in El Paso be assisted to return to their homes. 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 1348, Doc. 1349, Doc. 1350, and Doc. 1351]

Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan (telegram) do Same subject. Reports concerning murder of Gonzales brothers at Chihuahua. 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 1348, Doc. 1349, Doc. 1350, and Doc. 1351]

735 Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Jan. 22 Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Many complaints regarding forced loans received. Asks authority to enter formal protest with Mexican de facto government 770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 1300, Doc. 1301, Doc. 1302, and Doc. 1303]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Willard (telegram). Jan. 23 Protection of Spanish interests. Full instructions have been given American Consuls in Chihuahua. 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 1351, Doc. 1352, Doc. 1353, and Doc. 1354]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher (telegram). do Same subject. Requests reports on promised investigation of murder of Spanish subjects. Directs informal urging of investigation, if it has not been 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 1351, Doc. 1352, Doc. 1353, and Doc. 1354]

622 Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). Jan. 24 Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Directs that he present formal protest to central administration against imposition of forced loans upon American citizens. 771 [Pg. 771 includes portions of Doc. 1303, Doc. 1304, and Doc. 1305]

159 Mr. Gracey to Mr. Bryan do same subject. Makes report on political and financial conditions at Progreso. 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 1615, Doc. 1616, Doc. 1617, and Doc. 1618]

Mr. Garrett to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Jan. 26 Kidnapping of Samuel Cantu, a Mexican, on American territory by Mexican officers. Reports that Cantu was enticed to middle of international bridge, seized on American side, dragged across border, and thrown into prison. Reported that he will be shot. Protest made 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 1615, Doc. 1616, Doc. 1617, and Doc. 1618]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Garrett (telegram). Jan. 27 Same subject. If Cantu not already killed inform appropriate authorities this Government demands his immediate return to American side of border. 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 1615, Doc. 1616, Doc. 1617, and Doc. 1618]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). do Same subject. Informs him of kidnapping of Cantu and directs that appropriate authorities be informed of demand of this Government that he be returned to American side of border. 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 1615, Doc. 1616, Doc. 1617, and Doc. 1618]

Mr. Garrett to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Demand for release of Cantu made. General Quintana replies matter has been referred to his superior from whom orders for release must come suggests demand through Embassy 901 [Pg. 901 includes portions of Doc. 1618, Doc. 1619, Doc. 1620, and Doc. 1621]

629 Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). Jan 28 Same subject. Informs him of contents of telegram of Jan. 27 from Mr. Garrett, and directs that demand for release be made of appropriate authorities. 901 [Pg. 901 includes portions of Doc. 1618, Doc. 1619, Doc. 1620, and Doc. 1621]

141 Mr. W. H. Page to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Sir Edward Grey suggests idea that British and other European Governments might be willing to request Huerta to resign, and outlines conditions of resignation. Asks to be informed concerning the President’s feeling in regard to the proposal. 444 [Pg. 444 includes portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. W. H. Page (telegram). Jan. 29 Same subject. Directs that he remind the British Government of the several earnest efforts already made to bring about change of administration at Mexico City acceptable to Huerta, but rejected by him, and to say that any change would be merely substitution of authority and responsibility of the United States. Outlines President’s position and says restrictions on exportation of arms and ammunition to Mexico will be removed. 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 653]

Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Jan. 29 Protection of German interests. Says German Minister complains of depredations suffered by Germans at Tepic through operations of rebels. Asks that matter be brought to attention of Carranza. 885 [Pg. 885 includes portions of Doc. 1571, Doc. 1572, and Doc. 1573]

632 Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). do Kidnapping of Samuel Cantu. As General Quintana’s reply is now taken as a diplomatic refusal, and as it is believed true intention is to execute Cantu, directs that renewed demand for release be made saying that unless demand is complied with, this Government will find it necessary to consider drastic measures in the premises. 901 [Pg. 901 includes portions of Doc. 1618, Doc. 1619, Doc. 1620, and Doc. 1621]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Garrett (telegram). do Same subject. Directs renewed demand for release i of CanM. 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 1622, Doc. 1623, and Doc. 1624]

753 Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Jan. 30 Same subject. Reports delivery of demand for release of Cantu. Minister of War has telegraphed to Gen. Quintanantana. 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 1622, Doc. 1623, and Doc. 1624]

639 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Shanklin do Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Informs him of complaint of Los Institutos Central y Anglo-Mexicano, at Toluca, concerning forced loan and outlines action to be taken. 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 1306, Doc. 1307, and Doc. 1308]

Mr. Folk to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Jan. 31 Political affairs. In view of President Wilson’s declaration not to recognize as legal or binding anything done by Huerta it is necessary to fix date when he became dictator. According to record it is Oct. 10, 1913; but the matter is one for determination by the President. 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Folk do Same subject. The President regards Oct. 10, 1913, as the date when Huerta became dictator; reasons. 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656]

Mr. Bryan to all Diplomatic Missions (circular telegram). do Same subject. Outlines attitude of this Government toward Mexico. 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656]

756 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hostetter (telegram) do Protection of German interests. Quotes telegram of Jan. 29, from Mr. O’Shaughnessy, and directs that it be brought to the attention of the appropriate authorities with view to remedying situation. 885 [Pg. 885 includes portions of Doc. 1571, Doc. 1572, and Doc. 1573]

Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Kidnapping of Samuel Cantu. Quotes note from Minister for Foreign Affairs saying that orders for release of Cantu have been sent to General Quintana. 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 1622, Doc. 1623, and Doc. 1624]

Mr. Garrett to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Feb. 1 Same subject. Cantu released and brought to Laredo 903 [Pg. 903 includes portions of Doc. 1625 and Doc. 1626]

Mr. Hostetter to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of German interests. Reports that Carranza claims German Minister’s charges are absurd, as life and property of all foreigners is respected if they remain neutral. (Communicated to Mr. O’Shaughnessy Feb. 2, 1914.) 885 [Pg. 885 includes portions of Doc. 1571, Doc. 1572, and Doc. 1573]

235 Mr. Garrett to Mr. Bryan Feb. 2 Kidnapping of Samuel Cantu. Makes full report in the case. 903 [Pg. 903 includes portions of Doc. 1625 and Doc. 1626]

182 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Guyant Feb. 3 Protection of Chinese. Directs protection of lives and property of Chinese in his district. 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 1606, Doc. 1607, and Doc. 1608]

Proclamation by the President. do Political affairs. Revokes Proclamation of Mar. 14, 1912, prohibiting the exportation of arms or munitions of war to Mexico. 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 656 and Doc. 657]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hostetter (telegram). Feb. 6 Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Directs protest to Constitutionalists against forced loan on Almada Sugar Refineries Company. (Same to Nogales and Los Mochis.) 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 1306, Doc. 1307, and Doc. 1308]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Protection of Spanish interests. Instructed to see Villa concerning press report that Spaniards at Torreon will be shown no mercy if they do not leave at once, and to say this Government protests against cruelty to foreigners. 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 1351, Doc. 1352, Doc. 1353, and Doc. 1354]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher (telegram). Feb. 7 Same subject. In view deep interest manifested by Spanish Government, directs full report concerning murder Gonzalez brothers. 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 1354, Doc. 1355, Doc. 1356, and Doc. 1357]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Feb. 8 Same subject. Reports interview with Villa who renews assurances of protection to all foreigners, including Spaniards. Says Terrazas, jr., will not be released but will not be further molested. 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 1354, Doc. 1355, Doc. 1356, and Doc. 1357]

Mr. Hostetter to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Feb. 9 Same subject. Say Carranza denies press reports regarding treatment of Spaniards by Villa when he gets to Torreon. 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 1354, Doc. 1355, Doc. 1356, and Doc. 1357]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Same subject. Directs bringing up of case of Gonzalez brothers when conversing with Villa, and outlines points to be emphasized. 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 1357, Doc. 1358, and Doc. 1359]

Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Feb. 12 Same subject. States no investigation made in Gonzalez case, but Acting Governor states brothers executed by military order. 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 1357, Doc. 1358, and Doc. 1359]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy. 1914. Feb. 12 Kidnapping of Samuel Cantu. Encloses copy of dispatch of Feb. 2 from Mr. Garrett and directs that attention of the appropriate authorities be brought to abuses committed by military leaders in Nuevo Laredo with request that action be taken to put stop thereto. Also directs that removal of commander be suggested. 904 [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 1626 and Doc. 1627]

Mr. Moore to Mr. Carothers (telegram). Feb. 14 Protection of German interests. Says German Ambassador has inquired concerning treatment to be expected for German subjects at Torreon, and directs that Villa be asked for proper assurances. 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 1574, Doc. 1575, Doc. 1576, and Doc. 1577]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports interviewing Villa, and say German Ambassador may be assured protection will be given German subjects at Torreon. (Communicated to German Ambassador Feb. 16.) 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 1574, Doc. 1575, Doc. 1576, and Doc. 1577]

289 Mr. Simpich to Mr. Bryan. Feb. 19 Protection of Spanish interests. Quotes Carranza’s reply concerning protection of Desengano mine. 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 1360, Doc. 1361, and Doc. 1362]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Protection of British interests. At request of British Ambassador directs that inquiries be made in regard to William Benton said to have been thrown into jail after discussion with Villa. 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 1471, Doc. 1472, Doc. 1473, and Doc. 1474]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Villa says Benton not under arrest, but is suspected of being in plot to kill him. Confident Benton is not dead. 843 [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 1474, Doc. 1475, Doc. 1476, and Doc. 1477]

Mr. Edwards to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Villa says that Benton is dead. He accuses Benton of attempt to kill him. 843 [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 1474, Doc. 1475, Doc. 1476, and Doc. 1477]

204 Same to same .Feb. 20 Same subject. Reports interview with Villa concerning death of Benton. 843 [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 1474, Doc. 1475, Doc. 1476, and Doc. 1477]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Resolutions adopted at mass meeting demanding investigation of death of Benton. Says that Benton went to Juarez seeking trouble, although warned against making journey, and that after heated discussion and struggle with Villa was placed in guard house. Doubt exists as to after procedure and execution. 844 [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 1477 and Doc. 1478]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). Do Same subject. Directs that copy of Benton sentence be forwarded to Department and copy given to press. 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 1479, Doc. 1480, and Doc. 1481]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Edwards (telegram). Feb. 21 Same subject. Asks detailed information concerning facts in Benton matter. 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 1479, Doc. 1480, and Doc. 1481]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Gives brief outline of Benton sentence. 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 1479, Doc. 1480, and Doc. 1481]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Request to Villa that he deliver Benton’s body to his wife not answered. 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 1482, Doc. 1483, Doc. 1484, and Doc. 1485]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Simpich (telegram). do Same subject. Directs that endeavor be made to comply with request of Mrs. Benton that her husband’s body be recovered. 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 1482, Doc. 1483, Doc. 1484, and Doc. 1485]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan do Same subject. Encloses original copy of sentence under which Benton was executed. 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 1482, Doc. 1483, Doc. 1484, and Doc. 1485]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher (telegram). do Same subject. In view of many conflicting reports Department would appreciate signed statement from Villa covering the Benton matter. 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 1482, Doc. 1483, Doc. 1484, and Doc. 1485]

Mr. Stadden to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Taxation of American citizens in Mexico. Reports enactment of law by the Colima Legislature imposing a war tax. Requests instructions. 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 1196, Doc. 1197, Doc. 1198, and Doc. 1199]

The British Embassy to the Department of State. Feb. 22 Protection of British interests. Expresses thanks for good offices in the Benton matter, and hopes that a full and impartial inquiry will be made. 847 [Pg. 847 includes portions of Doc. 1486, Doc. 1487, and Doc. 1488]

Mr. Edwards to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Villa refuses to deliver Benton’s body, but promises to mark the grave. 847 [Pg. 847 includes portions of Doc. 1486, Doc. 1487, and Doc. 1488]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Same subject. Directed to urge upon Villa the necessity of delivering Benton’s body to relatives or friends requesting it, as failure to deliver is being made basis of speculation and bitter criticism. 847 [Pg. 847 includes portions of Doc. 1486, Doc. 1487, and Doc. 1488]

Mr. W. H. Page to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. British Government asks permission for British consul to investigate Benton’s death. 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 1489, Doc. 1490, and Doc. 1491]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher (telegram). Feb. 23 Same subject. Directed to request that Villa give immediate orders for delivery of body of Benton. 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 1489, Doc. 1490, and Doc. 1491]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Edwards (telegram). do Same subject. Directs that he, with witnesses, make endeavor to view body of Benton, but failing in this, to ascertain exact place of burial and statement concerning condition of body at time of burial. 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 1489, Doc. 1490, and Doc. 1491]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports that Villa sends message declining to deliver Benton’s body. 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 1491, Doc. 1492, Doc. 1493, and Doc. 1494]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher (telegram). do Same subject. Points out importance of disinterment and examination of body of Benton, and directs that this be impressed upon authorities. 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 1491, Doc. 1492, Doc. 1493, and Doc. 1494]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Simpich (telegram) Feb. 24 Same subject. Directs that unofficial representations be made to Carranza concerning exhumation and delivery of Benton’s body to relatives. 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 1491, Doc. 1492, Doc. 1493, and Doc. 1494]

Mr. Edwards to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Feb. 24 Same subject. New officials now at Juarez and unacquainted with Benton matter. They promise to communicate with Villa. 850 [Pg. 850 includes portions of Doc. 1494, Doc. 1495, Doc. 1496, and Doc. 1497]

Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Villa declines to deliver Benton’s body, but is willing that widow and others visit cemetery, where body will be exhumed and then reinterred. 850 [Pg. 850 includes portions of Doc. 1494, Doc. 1495, Doc. 1496, and Doc. 1497]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher (telegram). do Same subject. Expresses gratification on receipt of assurances that visit to cemetery and exhumation of Benton’s body will be permitted, and directs that Villa be asked to permit two Americans and two British subjects to accompany widow, to whom body should be delivered. 850 [Pg. 850 includes portions of Doc. 1494, Doc. 1495, Doc. 1496, and Doc. 1497]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bryan. do Same subject. British Government has directed British Consul at Galveston to make investigation concerning death of Benton and disappearance of two other Englishmen. Asks assistance of American consular officers. 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 1497 and Doc. 1498]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Stadden (telegram). do Taxation. Make formal protest against imposition of war tax on American citizens. 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 1196, Doc. 1197, Doc. 1198, and Doc. 1199]

Mr. Simpich to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of Chinese. Quotes telegram from Cananea concerning manifestations against foreigners, particularly Chinese. 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 1606, Doc. 1607, and Doc. 1608]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Simpich (telegram). do Same subject. Directs influence be exerted to prevent hostile action against Chinese or other foreigners, and that asylum be extended when lives in danger. Further directs that they be conducted to American side and cared for if necessary. 898 [Pg. 898 includes portions of Doc. 1608, Doc. 1609, Doc. 1610, and Doc. 1611]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher (telegram). Feb. 25 Protection of Spanish interests. Directs renewal of effects to have investigation of Gonzalez case. 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 1360, Doc. 1361, and Doc. 1362]

Same to same (telegram). do Protection of British interests. Quotes telegram sent to Mr. Carothers regarding representations to be made to Villa in the Benton matter. 852 [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 1498, Doc. 1499, and Doc. 1500]

Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Gives substance of a statement said to have been made by Villa concerning execution of Benton. 852 [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 1498, Doc. 1499, and Doc. 1500]

Mr. Simpich to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Feb. 26 Same subject. Carranza dissatisfied that communications concerning Benton are being addressed to Villa instead of to him. 853 [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 1500, Doc. 1501, and Doc. 1502]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Telegram from Villa states that he declines to deliver Benton’s body, but is disposed to permit a representative of this Government and one of the British Government together with the family of Benton to view body at Chihuahua. 853 [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 1500, Doc. 1501, and Doc. 1502]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. (telegram). do Same subject. Acknowledges receipt of copy of Benton Court Martial proceedings and comments thereon. Encloses clipping containing report of Sir Edward Grey’s statement in the House of Commons. 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 1503 and Doc. 1504]

Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports receipt of reply from Villa, who again declines to deliver body to widow or relatives. Villa offers special train to bring interested parties to Chihuanua from Juarez 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 1503 and Doc. 1504]

Mr. Stadden to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Taxation. Quotes correspondence with the Governor of Colima re war tax. 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 1196, Doc. 1197, Doc. 1198, and Doc. 1199]

Mr. Simpich to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of Chinese. Reports situation at Cananea temporarily relieved, but attitude local authorities toward Chinese does not warrant dependence on promises of protection should situation grow critical. 898 [Pg. 898 includes portions of Doc. 1608, Doc. 1609, Doc. 1610, and Doc. 1611]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Lewis (telegram). Feb. 27 Forced loan imposed on American citizens. Requests information concerning report that Carranza demanded forced loan from Americans at Mochis, naming deportation as alternative. 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 1306, Doc. 1307, and Doc. 1308]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher (telegram). do Protection of British interests. Directs that he arrange for special train offered by Villa, and to impress upon him importance of giving full protection to members of party going to view Benton’s body. 855 [Pg. 855 includes portions of Doc. 1504, Doc. 1505, and Doc. 1506]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Simpich (telegram). do Same subject. Directs that Carranza be informed concerning Department’s procedure in addressing Villa in Benton case prior to addressing him. Asks Carranza’s approval of plans to view Benton’s body 855 [Pg. 855 includes portions of Doc. 1504, Doc. 1505, and Doc. 1506]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bryan. do Same subject. Sir Edward Grey states that information so far received raises presumption of guilt of Villa in Benton case, and that should guilt be established steps will be taken to secure justice at earliest possible opportunity. 856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 1506, Doc. 1507, and Doc. 1508]

Mr. Simpich to Mr. Bryan. 1914. Feb. 28 Same subject. Reports receipt of communication from Carranza, who states that representations in Benton case should be addressed to him directly by a representative of the British Government, and that all foreign governments or their representatives should address communications on matters of international character to him. 856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 1506, Doc. 1507, and Doc. 1508]

Mr. Moore to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Protection of Spanish interests. Says Spanish Ambassador informs Department Descugano mine confiscated despite Villa’s assurances. 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 1360, Doc. 1361, and Doc. 1362]

Mr. Cobb to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 1 Protection of British interests. Says that commission to view body of Benton is assembled at El Paso, but permission to proceed is being withheld pending authorization from Carranza. 857 [Pg. 857 includes portions of Doc. 1508 and Doc. 1509]

Mr. Simpich to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 2 Same subject. Carranza directs Villa that further investigations in Benton case cease for the present, and that he refrain from further discussion of the matter. 858 [Pg. 858 includes portions of Doc. 1509, Doc. 1510, Doc. 1511, and Doc. 1512]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher (telegram). do Same subject. Directs that he await further instructions before doing anything further in regard to the examination of Benton’s body, and that he show this instruction to Edwards, Cobb, and Carothers. 858 [Pg. 858 includes portions of Doc. 1509, Doc. 1510, Doc. 1511, and Doc. 1512]

386 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Simpich do Protection of Spanish interests. Acknowledges dispatch 289, discusses question of presentation of claims, and expresses hope that American consular officers will continue to be permitted to use good offices in behalf of other foreigners in territory under control of Carranza.
(This instruction was communicated to the American Embassies at London and Mexico City, to American consuls at Ciudad-Juarez and Chihuahua, and to Mr. Carothers.) 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 1363]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Miller (telegram). do Forced loan imposed on American citizens. Directs protest against forced loan requested of Oil Fields of Mexico Company. 773 [Pg. 773 includes portions of Doc. 1309, Doc. 1310, Doc. 1311, and Doc. 1312]

The British Embassy to the Department of State. Mar. 3 Protection of British interests. Outlines Sir Edward Grey’s opinion of the situation in the Benton case. 858 [Pg. 858 includes portions of Doc. 1509, Doc. 1510, Doc. 1511, and Doc. 1512]

Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 4 Same subject. Reports arrival of committee appointed by Carranza to investigate Benton case and to determine whether disinterment of body is necessary. 859 [Pg. 859 includes portions of Doc. 1512, Doc. 1513, and Doc. 1514]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Forced loan imposed on American citizens. Governor of Tampico says Government does not wish to assess forced loan on foreigners. 773 [Pg. 773 includes portions of Doc. 1309, Doc. 1310, Doc. 1311, and Doc. 1312]

Mr. Lewis to Mr. Bryan(telegram). Mar. 5 Same subject. Unable to obtain confirmation of statement that Carranza demanded loan. 773 [Pg. 773 includes portions of Doc. 1309, Doc. 1310, Doc. 1311, and Doc. 1312]

Mr. Alger to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 9 Taxation. Constitutionalists are collecting taxes from American citizens which had already been paid to Fedeials. 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, and Doc. 1203]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Alger (telegram). Mar. 11 Same subject. Report names of Americans from whom Constitutionalists are again collecting taxes. 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, and Doc. 1203]

Mr. Simpich to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of British interests. Quotes long statement from Carranza setting forth his views as to the manner in which representations on behalf of Americans and other foreigners should be made. 859 [Pg. 859 includes portions of Doc. 1512, Doc. 1513, and Doc. 1514]

Mr. Alger to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 12 Taxation. Understands that all mining companies are called on to pay taxes again. 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, and Doc. 1203]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Alger (telegram). Mar. 13 Same subject. Do Americans desire to have protest made against double tax? 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, and Doc. 1203]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hostetter (telegram). Do Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Directed to protest against imposition of war levy on Almada Sugar Refineries Company. 773 [Pg. 773 includes portions of Doc. 1309, Doc. 1310, Doc. 1311, and Doc. 1312]

Mr. Hostetter to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 14 Same subject. Says Almada Sugar Refineries was sold on option to American Company which did not comply with conditions and was returned to Almada. 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 1312, Doc. 1313, Doc. 1314, and Doc. 1315]

Mr. Alger to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Do Taxation. All Americans desire representations against double tax. 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, Doc. 1206, and Doc. 1207]

Mr. Bryan to Certain Foreign Diplomatic Missions. Do Protection of British interests. Incloses copy of communication from Carranza as quoted in Mr. Simpich’s telegram of Mar. 11. (Sent to Embassies of Germany, France, Japan, Great Britain, Spain, and Austria-Hungary.) 860 [Pg. 860 includes portions of Doc. 1514, Doc. 1515, and Doc. 1516]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bryan. Mar. 16 Same subject. Acknowledges note of the 14th instant regarding representations to Carranza; comments thereon, and asks that he be given timely notice should this Government acquiesce in the new practice demanded by Carranza. Says failure to deliver Benton’s body or to secure inquiry as to cause of death affects security of foreigners in Mexico. 860 [Pg. 860 includes portions of Doc. 1514, Doc. 1515, and Doc. 1516]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hostetter (telegram). 1914. Mar. 16 Taxation. Informs him of report of double taxation at Mazatlan and instructs to protest to appropriate authorities. 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, Doc. 1206, and Doc. 1207]

Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of Spanish interests. Reports reply of Military Governor to note urging investigation of murder of Gonzalez brothers. 795 [Pg. 795 includes portions of Doc. 1363 and Doc. 1364]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher (telegram). Mar. 17 Same subject. Directs that matter of murder of Gonzalez brothers be taken up with Carranza on first suitable occasion. 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 1365, Doc. 1366, and Doc. 1367]

637 Mr. Hostetter to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Taxation. General Carranza has promised to investigate the matter of double taxation. 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, Doc. 1206, and Doc. 1207]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Spring Rice. Mar. 18 Protection of British interests. Acknowledges note of the 16th; informs him of sending of telegram of this date to Mr. Carothers; states that he will be informed of developments concerning question of making representations to Carranza, and expresses appreciation of good offices of British consular officers in behalf of Americans in various parts of the world. 861 [Pg. 861 includes portions of Doc. 1516 and Doc. 1517]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Same subject. Directs use of influence with Villa to prevent improper acts or failure to protect British subjects or other foreigners in Northern Mexico. 862 [Pg. 862 includes portions of Doc. 1517 and Doc. 1518]

Mr. Stadden to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 19 Taxation. Government persists in collecting taxes again. Americans request advice. 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, Doc. 1206, and Doc. 1207]

Mr. Hostetter to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Confirms statement that sugar refineries were returned to original owners, the Almadas. 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 1312, Doc. 1313, Doc. 1314, and Doc. 1315]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Stadden (telegram). Mar. 23 Taxation. Advise Americans to pay tax under protest. 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 1208 and Doc. 1209]

333 Mr. Hamm to Mr. Bryan. Mar. 24 Same subject. Reports that Constitutionalists are refusing to receive taxes due unless former quotas which were paid to the Federal Government are paid again. 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 1208 and Doc. 1209]

Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Apr. 2 Arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers. Reports arrest of Consular Agent Powers at Parral on charge passing counterfeit money. Says charge ridiculous and arrest outrage, and hopes Department will make it clear that arrest of officials on trivial charges will not be tolerated. 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025]

Mr. Riaño to Mr. Bryan. Apr. 3 Protection of Spanish interests. Says note of Feb. 19, was communicated to the Spanish Government, which expresses thanks and cherishes hope that a thorough investigation of facts be made by Constitutionalist authorities. 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 1365, Doc. 1366, and Doc. 1367]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). Apr. 6 Same subject. Directs representations be made to Carranza against reported order to Villa for deportation of 600 Spaniards from Torreon. 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 1365, Doc. 1366, and Doc. 1367]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram—extract). do Same subject. Reports concerning expulsion of Spaniards. 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 1367, Doc. 1368, and Doc. 1369]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Riaño Apr. 7 Same subject. Gives resume of telegram of Apr. 6 from Mr. Carothers. 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 1367, Doc. 1368, and Doc. 1369]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports interview with Carranza 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 1370 and Doc. 1371]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Same subject. Directs representations be made to Carranza with view to obtaining suspension of deportation order. 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 1370 and Doc. 1371]

Same to same (telegram) do Arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers. Directed to bring to attention of Carranza this Department’s views concerning arrest of Consular Agent at Parral and suggest advisability of submitting to this Government for investigation questions involving alleged infraction of laws by consular officers. Also asks Carranza be requested to describe flat money which is acceptable. 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Carranza promises immediate attention to matter regarding arrest of Consular Agent at Parral. 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of American interests. Waters-Pierce Refinery under fire of opposing forces and fearing losses asks protection. Warehouses of Agencia Commercial, German, burned. Situation as to foreign property serious. 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 1052, Doc. 1053, and Doc. 1054]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Riaño Apr. 8 Protection of Spanish interests. Gives resume of Mr. Carother’s telegram of Apr. 7. 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 1372, Doc. 1373, and Doc. 1374]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports arrival of 700 Spaniards at Juarez, and requests instructions concerning assistance to be rendered. 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 1372, Doc. 1373, and Doc. 1374]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers. do Same subject. Says Red Cross will doubtless be able to extend some assistance. 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 1372, Doc. 1373, and Doc. 1374]

Mr. Willard to Mr. Bryan, (telegram). do Same subject. Says Minister for Foreign Affairs sends personal note urging protection of Spaniards in part of Mexico controlled by Villa and Carranza. 800 [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 1375 and Doc. 1376]

Mr. Riaño to Mr. Lansing 1914. Apr. 9 Same subject. Acknowledges note of Apr. 8, and protests against accusation that Spaniards took part in internal politics of Mexico. 800 [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 1375 and Doc. 1376]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports concerning Carranza’s attitude, representations to be made regarding foreigners, other than Americans. 801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 1376, Doc. 1377, and Doc. 1378]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do same subject. Directed to ascertain authenticity of report that Carranza will not molest property of Spaniards expelled from Torreon. 801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 1376, Doc. 1377, and Doc. 1378]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Says Carranza undoubtedly gave statement to press. 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 1379, Doc. 1380, and Doc. 1381]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Miner (telegram). do. Protection of American interests. Aamiral in command of Gulf Fleet will be directed to confer with him with view to having leaders of contending forces conduct operations with least danger to foreign property. 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 1052, Doc. 1053, and Doc. 1054]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). do Same subject. Quotes telegram of this date to Mr. Miller and directs that it be presented to appropriate authorities. 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 1054, Doc. 1055, Doc. 1056, and Doc. 1057]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Same subject. Quotes telegram of this date to Mr. Miller and directs that it be unofficially presented to Carranza. 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 1054, Doc. 1055, Doc. 1056, and Doc. 1057]

296 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hostetter do Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Incloses letter from which it appears that Alamada Sugar Refineries are controlled by American interests, and directs renewed protest against imposition of loan. 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 1312, Doc. 1313, Doc. 1314, and Doc. 1315]

Admiral Mayo to General Zarogoza. do Political affairs. Protests against arrest of officer and men of Dolphin and demands written disavowal of and apology for that act, and that American flag be saluted. 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658]

Mr. Bryan to the President Apr. 10 Political affairs. Quotes dispatch from Admiral Mayo reporting arrest and subsequent release of officer and men of the Dolphin. Requests instructions. 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 658, Doc. 659, Doc. 660, and Doc. 661]

Admiral Fletcher to Mr. Daniels. do Same subject. He has informed the Embassy of Mayo’s message regarding arrest of boat’s crew. 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 658, Doc. 659, Doc. 660, and Doc. 661]

841 Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports receipt of a note from the Foreign Office giving Mexican view of the arrest and request for withdrawal of ultimatum. Outlines written statement received from Huerta. 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 658, Doc. 659, Doc. 660, and Doc. 661]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). do Same subject. The President directs that he present to Foreign Office the extreme seriousness of the situation. 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Daniels do Protection of American interests. Incloses copy of telegram of the 9th instant to Mr. Miller and requests that appropriate instructions be given the Admiral in command of the Gulf Fleet. 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 1054, Doc. 1055, Doc. 1056, and Doc. 1057]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Riaño do Protection of Spanish interests, informs me of receipt of telegram of Apr. 9, from Mr Carothers. 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 1379, Doc. 1380, and Doc. 1381]

Mr. Hamm to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports arrival at Torreon and says protection of all foreign property except that of Spaniards. 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 1379, Doc. 1380, and Doc. 1381]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Willard. do Same subject. Directs that he inform Spanish Government that everything within powers of this Government is being done for protection of Spanish property. 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 1382, Doc. 1383, and Doc. 1384]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). Apr. 11 Same subject. Directs that he ascertain who have been Carranza’s advisers regarding interests of foreigners. Expresses hope that its instructions of Mar. 2 outlining its position may be given serious study by Constitutionalists. 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 1382, Doc. 1383, and Doc. 1384]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher (telegram). do Same subject. Directs that he endeavor to obtain definite expression from Carranza concerning abandoned Spanish property. 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 1382, Doc. 1383, and Doc. 1384]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Says he has assurances that Carranza will accept representations in interest of foreigners not Americans upon statements that they are made at request of foreign government. 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 1385, Doc. 1386, and Doc. 1387]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Answers telegram of this date, and says that he will go to Chihuahua accompanied by Pesquiere. 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 1385, Doc. 1386, and Doc. 1387]

842 Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Asks whether written promise received from Huerta will be satisfactory. 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663]

Admiral Fletcher to Mr. Daniels (telegram). do Same subject. Quotes report from Admiral Mayo saying General Zaragoza has sent letter expressing regret for arrest of boat’s crew. 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 664]

do Same subject. Detailed report relating to the arrest. 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 664]

741 Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). 1914. Apr. 11 Same subject. Admiral Mayo’s ultimatum approved by the President. Huerta’s statement does not fully meet demand. 452 [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 664 and Doc. 665]

844 Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr Bryan (telegram). Apr. 12 Same subject. Reports delay in receipt of Department’s telegram of Apr. 11, caused by censor. Has suggested to the Sub-secretary of Foreign Affairs that he see the President and impress upon him necessity for quick action in acceding to demands of Admiral Mayo. 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). do Same subject. Telegram 141 of Apr. 11 reported stopped by censor and delivery refused. Investigate and demand message. 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668]

845 Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Cable censorship instituted last evening; delay in delivery of message due to ignorance of censor. 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668]

847 Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Reports interview with Sub-secretary for Foreign Affairs and quotes note refusing to accede to demands of the United States. 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Same subject. Reports arrest and subsequent re1ease of mail orderly from the Minnesota. Will investigate and report. 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670]

Admiral Fletcher to Mr. Daniels (telegram). Do. Same subject. Quotes report from Admiral Mayo saying that noncompliance with demands is expected; instructions desired. 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Quotes telegram from the Embassy saying that the Mexican Government refuses to accede to the demands of Admiral Mayo. 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674]

Mr. Daniels to Admiral Fletcher (telegram). Do Same subject. Action will not be decided until arrival of President. Direct Mayo not to press salute until ordered. 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674]

743 Mr. Bryan 16 Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram) do Same subject. Refers to his Apr. 12; answer will be sent after President arrives tomorrow. 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan Do Protection of Spanish interests. Refers to Department’s Mar. 2; reports concerning Carranza’s attitude with regard to representations on behalf of foreigners. 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 1385, Doc. 1386, and Doc. 1387]

849 Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr Bryan (telegram). Apr. 13 Protection of German interests. Says German Minister has informed him that German subject named Radke has been kidnapped by rebel forces near Guaymas, and asks that President be requested to impress upon rebel authorities that Germans be protected same as other foreigners. 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 1574, Doc. 1575, Doc. 1576, and Doc. 1577]

Admiral Blue to Admiral Fletcher (telegram). do Political affairs. Directs that Admiral Mayo report concerning statement of Huerta that martial law existed at Tampico and that marines landed without permission. Asks if ships understood conditions, and whether they had proper notification. 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674]

Admiral Fiske to Mr. Daniels. do Same subject. Comments at length on communication from Mexican Sub-secretary of State. 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675]

747 Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). do Same subject. Statements made in Huerta’s reply are being investigated; it is hoped he will reconsider position taken. 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 675, Doc. 676, and Doc. 677]

Admiral Fletcher to Mr. Daniels (telegram). Apr. 14 Same subject. Admiral Mayo says that there was no intimation of existence of martial law or of objection to boat taking supplies. 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 675, Doc. 676, and Doc. 677]

748 Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). do Same subject. Secretary of the Navy has advised Flag Officer at Hampton Roads to proceed to Tampico with all available ships, including ten which are named. 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 677, Doc. 678, and Doc. 679]

744 Same to same (telegram). Do Same subject. While appreciating the conciliatory attitude of General Huerta, it is thought that he does not realize serious character of present situation and the very serious consequences which it may involve. Reviews position of United States. The President regards this as a most serious matter, and directs that he inform Huerta that the President expects prompt acceptance of terms. 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 677, Doc. 678, and Doc. 679]

854 Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports in detail interview with Huerta. 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 679 and Doc. 680]

855 Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Huerta has placed Tampico incident before Senate in executive session and has asked for special authority to deal with question. 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 680, Doc. 681, and Doc. 682]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher (telegram). do Protection of German interests. Directs that Carranza be requested to release Radke, and that Constitutionalists give protection to German subjects. (Communicated to Mr. O’Shaughnessy Apr. 14, also to American Consul at Hermosillo.) 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 1574, Doc. 1575, Doc. 1576, and Doc. 1577]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of Spanish interests. Quotes telegram from Mr. Fabela accepting procedure for making representations on behalf of foreigners, not Americans. 806 [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. 1388, Doc. 1389, and Doc. 1390]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Apr. 14 Same subject. Villa has directed that no Spanish property be touched until he so orders. 806 [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. 1388, Doc. 1389, and Doc. 1390]

Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan(telegram) Apr. 15 Same subject. Reports concerning Carranza attitude in case of Spaniards. 806 [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. 1388, Doc. 1389, and Doc. 1390]

Same to same (telegram). do Protection of German interests. Reports that Constitutionalist authorities say they can not accept American mediation in Radke case, as there is German consular officer at Chihuahua through whom representations should be made. 887 [Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 1577, Doc. 1578, Doc. 1579, and Doc. 1580]

2208 Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr Bryan. do Political affairs. Incloses note from Minister for Foreign Affairs referred to in his 841 of Apr. 10. 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 680, Doc. 681, and Doc. 682]

2207 do Same subject. Incloses note from Foreign Office referred to in his 842 of Apr. 11. It expresses the hope that the Tampico incident may be considered closed. 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683]

Mr. Bryan to Certain Diplomatic Officers (telegram). do Same subject. Quotes for information of Government to which accredited, telegram No. 744 of Apr. 14, 10 p.m., to Charge O’Shaughnessy. 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 683, Doc. 684, and Doc. 685]

856 Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports interview with Huerta, who now suggests simultaneous salutes. If this not agreeable, Huerta thinks matter should go to The Hague. 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 683, Doc. 684, and Doc. 685]

Admiral Fletcher to Mr Daniels (telegram). do Same subject. Admiral Mayo says that boats daily used regular landing during attack on Tampico, and that no notice that hostilities existed or that landings were forbidden 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686]

752 Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). Apr. 16 Same subject. The President is gratified that Huerta is disposed to bring incident to close by complying with Mayo’s demand, which shows salute will be returned. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689]

Admiral Fletcher to Mr Daniels (telegram). do Same subject. Reports concerning detention and release of mail orderly from the Minnesota; the incident is without significance. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689]

858 Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports further discussion with Minister for Foreign Affairs concerning simultaneous salutes. Outlines procedure proposed. Requests instructions. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689]

754 Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaugh nessy (telegram). Apr. 17 Same subject. Simultaneous salute proposed by Huerta can not be accepted. Salute, however, will be returned in accordance with international practice. 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690]

Mr. Bryan to Certain American Diplomatic Mission (telegram). do Same subject. Quotes for information of Government to which accredited, telegram No. 754 of Apr. 17, to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 690, Doc. 691, and Doc. 692]

860 Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports presentation to Minister for Foreign Affairs of Department’s telegram No. 754 of Apr. 17, which he will bring up in Cabinet. Quotes statement given him later by the Minister indicating Huerta’s refusal to accede to demands. Requests instructions. 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 690, Doc. 691, and Doc. 692]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Bernstorff. do Protection of German interests. Gives paraphrase of telegram of Apr. 15 from Mr. Letcher and calls attention to note of this date to him concerning representations to Carranza in behalf of all foreigners. 887 [Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 1577, Doc. 1578, Doc. 1579, and Doc. 1580]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Bernstorff do Protection of Spanish interests. Informs him concerning representations to Carranza by foreign governments. (Same to French, British, and Spanish Embassies.) 807 [Pg. 807 includes portions of Doc. 1390, Doc. 1391, and Doc. 1392]

862 Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Apr. 18 Political affairs. Minister for Foreign Affairs speaks of appealing to Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo as solution of Tampico incident. 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 692, Doc. 693, and Doc. 694]

757 Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). do Same subject. Expresses President’s disappointment at Huerta’s attitude regarding simultaneous salute, and announces his intention to lay matter before Congress unless Huerta complies with Mayo’s demand before 6 p.m. Apr. 19. Instruction to notify representatives of foreign governments and American consuls. 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 692, Doc. 693, and Doc. 694]

Mr. Bryan to certain American Diplomatic Missions (telegram-circular). do Same subject. Quotes statement issued at the White House to the effect that as Huerta insists on doing something less than demanded, the President has determined, if Huerta has not yielded by the 19th, to take matter to Congress on 20th. 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 695, Doc. 696, and Doc. 697]

865 Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Department’s telegram No. 757 of Apr. 18, presented to Minister for Foreign Affairs, who asks Mr. O’Shaughnessy if he would sign protocol stating that salute would be returned. Agreed to sign and asks if approved. 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 695, Doc. 696, and Doc. 697]

867 same to same (telegram) do same subject. Quotes protocol submitted by Minister for Foreign Affairs and requests instructions. 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 695, Doc. 696, and Doc. 697]

760 Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). 1914. Apr. 19 Same subject. President out of town and can not be reached until to-morrow. Points out objections to signing protocol. 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698]

76S Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. President approves Departments No. 760 concerning protocol; no concession of any kind is to be made; Huerta’s acceptance should be unconditional; details can be arranged directly with Mayo. No further negotiations necessary. The President expects Huerta to accept at once. 471 [Pg. 471 includes portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, and Doc. 700]

868 The Mexican Embassy to the Department of State. do Same subject. Huerta will not insist on simultaneous salute, but would be satisfied with a reciprocal salute. 471 [Pg. 471 includes portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, and Doc. 700]

Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. General Huerta continues to refuse unconditional salute. 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 700 and Doc. 701]

869 Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. A foreign office note verbale states that Mexican Government is not disposed to accede to unconditional demand of this Government but is disposed to act according to the terms of the protocol already submitted. He has informed the Minister that so far as the Embassy is concerned the matter is closed. 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 702 and Doc. 703]

870 Same to same (telegram) do Same subject. Department’s telegram No. 757 o Apr. 18 communicated verbally to foreign representatives. Suggests that Department communicate with consuls. Quotes note verbale mentioned in his telegram 569 of this date. 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 702 and Doc. 703]

347 Mr. Hamm to Mr. Bryan do Protection of Spanish interests. Reports interview with Gen. Villa showing his uncompromising attitude toward Spanish interests. 807 [Pg. 807 includes portions of Doc. 1390, Doc. 1391, and Doc. 1392]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan. (telegram). do Arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers. Incloses note from Mr. Fabela concerning arrest of Consular Agent at Parral and two other Americans on charge of counterfeiting. Expresses views. 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027]

Mr. Bryan, to all American consulates in Mexico (telegram). Apr. 20 Protection of American interests. As Huerta has refused to salute American flag as demanded the President will lay matter before Congress. Americans and other foreigners should be notified of contemplated action, and the former reminded of the President’s advice to withdraw from Mexico until order is restored. 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, Doc. 1059, and Doc. 1060]

Mr. Lespinasse to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Americans are being advised to leave. Asks whether destitute Americans should be provided with passage. 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, Doc. 1059, and Doc. 1060]

Mr. Bryan to certain American diplomatic missions (telegram). do Political affairs. In view of Huerta’s refusal to comply with demand of Admiral Mayo, the President will lay matter before Congress. 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705]

The President to Congress. Do Same subject. Discusses Tampico incident; requests approval of such use of armed forces as to obtain the fullest recognition of the rights of the United States 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705]

766 Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). do Same subject. The House has passed resolution supporting the President’s position. Precautions for safety of Americans and other foreigners should be taken. 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Hamburg-American steamer Ypiranga to arrive to-morrow with munitions of war. Trains ready to transport it. General in command will leave to-morrow with soldiers and all rolling stock, and will tear up tracks. 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canada (telegram). Apr. 21 Same subject. Direction to confer with Admiral Fletcher who has been instructed to take custom house and prevent delivery of arms and ammunition. 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Shanklin (telegram). do Same subject. Directs that Americans in need be furnished aid,and that all be urged to leave Mexico. 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709]

767 Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). do Same subject. Instruction to impress upon Foreign Minister necessity of keeping road to Vera Cruz open for protection of foreigners desiring to leave. 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 710, Doc. 711, and Doc. 712]

768 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canada (telegram). do Same subject. Direction to join Admiral Fletcher in vigorous protest should attempt be made to tear up tracks. 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 710, Doc. 711, and Doc. 712]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). do Same subject. Instruction to inform Huerta of the hope of this Government that information that his forces contemplate destruction of railroad to Vera Cruz is not true. This Government might feel it its duty to take means to prevent interruption of railroad communication to coast. 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 710, Doc. 711, and Doc. 712]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do same subject. Marines and blue jackets have taken possession of Vera Cruz; four killed, twenty wounded. Steamer Ypiranga stopped by Admiral Fletcher. Train from Mexico City did not arrive. 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 712, Doc. 713, and Doc. 714]

134 Mr. Terreros to Mr. Bryan. 1914. Apr. 21 Same subject. Quotes telegram from Huerta saying, We are fighting at Vera Cruz against the unlawful landing of American marines” 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 712, Doc. 713, and Doc. 714]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Captain of Ypiranga has placed himself subject to orders of Admiral Fletcher. American forces firing only when fired at. Admiral Badger with heavy force due. All business suspended. 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Same subject. Directs that position of the President be made clear to Carranza: Resolution of Congress sought not for purpose of making war but as declaration justifying use of armed forces. President makes distinction between Huerta and his followers and the rest of the Mexican people. Taking of customhouse made necessary by attitude of Huerta. 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717]

Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Apr. 22 Severance of diplomatic relations between the United States and Mexico. He has been handed his passports and is leaving for Vera Cruz. Has intrusted the American Embassy to the British Legation. Is notifying consular officers to withdraw from Mexico. 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 984, Doc. 985, Doc. 986, and Doc. 987]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Requests instructions as to consular 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 984, Doc. 985, Doc. 986, and Doc. 987]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Our ships now shelling Vera Cruz. Additional forces landed from battleships. Admiral Fletcher issues proclamation requesting cooperation local authorities to reestablish order 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Quotes Admiral Fletcher’s proclamation, copy of which has been given the Alcalde. 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 717, Doc. 718, and Doc. 719]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. American forces, under guns of war vessels, advance to take entire city. 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 717, Doc. 718, and Doc. 719]

Mr. Bryan to diplomatic representatives of certain foreign countries. do Same subject. Incloses copy of President’s address to Congress made on Apr. 20. 482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 720, Doc. 721, and Doc. 722]

Same to same (telegram) do Same subject and tenor 482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 720, Doc. 721, and Doc. 722]

Mr. Bryan to certain American diplomatic missions (telegram). do Same subject. Quotes Senate resolution, which has, been accepted by the House. 482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 720, Doc. 721, and Doc. 722]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Quotes Carranza’s reply to Department’s telegram of Apr. 21. 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 722 and Doc. 723]

Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Carranza asks that the President be approached with a view to avoiding armed conflict. 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725]

Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do same subject. Has been given passports and leaves by special train on 24th accompanied by Huerta’s son, who goes as a guaranty of safety. Consuls are being notified to withdraw. 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725]

Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan (telegram) do Same subject. Carranza asks if President will consider receiving from him a High Commissioner duly authorized to treat upon state of affairs, or if not convenient to receive Commissioner personally, each to appoint a High Commissioner for the purpose named. 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 725, Doc. 726, and Doc. 727]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Lespinasse (telegram). do Protection of American interests. Directed to provide needy Americans with passage. 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, Doc. 1059, and Doc. 1060]

Mr. Bryan to all American Consuls in Mexico (telegram). do Same subject. Instruction to urge all Americans to leave Mexico as soon as possible. 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 1061, Doc. 1062, and Doc. 1063]

Mr. Garrett to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Asks whether Department can reach isolated Americans in certain districts. 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 1061, Doc. 1062, and Doc. 1063]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Johnson (telegram). Apr. 23 Same subject and purport 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 1061, Doc. 1062, and Doc. 1063]

Mr. Ulmer to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Requests instructions concerning eighty-five Americans at Torreon, Velardena, and 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 1064, Doc. 1065, and Doc. 1066]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canada (telegram). do Same subject. Directed to endeavor to communicate with certain Americans at Frontera and other places for purpose of having them leave Mexico. 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 1064, Doc. 1065, and Doc. 1066]

Mr. Hamm to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Federal authorities refuse code messages. No messages received. One hundred twenty Americans in his District; sixty at Torreon; thirty at Durango, and thirty scattered. About one-half will leave. 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 1064, Doc. 1065, and Doc. 1066]

268 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher. do Taxation. Incloses No. 333 from Consul Hamm and instructs to ask General Carranza to issue orders against the collection of double taxes. 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 1209, Doc. 1210, and Doc. 1211]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Reports interview with Villa, during which Carranza’s attitude was discussed at length. 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 725, Doc. 726, and Doc. 727]

772 Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). do Severance of diplomatic relations. The Department is arranging to turn over the Embassy to the representative of another nation. Instruct consular officers to leave when necessary for safety. 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 984, Doc. 985, Doc. 986, and Doc. 987]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. O’Shaughnessy (telegram). 1914. Apr. 23 Same subject. Refers to his telegram of Apr. 22 and explains that before its receipt arrangements had been made to turn over to the Brazilian Legation the archives, etc:, of the American Embassy. Instructs him to act accordingly. Informs him of arrangements to turn over certain consulates to the Brazilian, British, and French consuls respectively. 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 987, Doc. 988, and Doc. 989]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Da Gama. Apr. 24 Same subject. Quotes substance of telegram of Apr. 23 to Mr. O’Shaughnessy. Informs him that the British Ambassador has made the necessary explanations to the British Minister in Mexico as to transfer of American interests to the Brazilian Legation. Incloses instructions for the Brazilian Minister. Thanks him for his and his Government’s courtesy. 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 987, Doc. 988, and Doc. 989]

Mr. Bryan to certain consular officers (telegram). do Same subject. Instructions in regard to leaving their posts and transfer of American interests to i French consular officers. 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 989 and Doc. 990]

Same to same. do Same subject and tenor 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 989 and Doc. 990]

Same to same (telegram) do Same subject and tenor 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 989 and Doc. 990]

Same to same (telegram) do Same subject and tenor 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 990]

Same to same (telegram) do Same subject. Instructions in regard to leaving their posts. 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 990]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher (telegram). do Political affairs. Directed to express to Carranza appreciation by the President of friendly spirit exhibited in suggestion concerning High Commissioners, but the President can not act in view of Carranza’s recent statement. Suggests another statement to effect that no assistance will be given Huerta. 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 727, Doc. 728, and Doc. 729]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Same subject. Villa may be informed that action by the United States on that part of the border which is controlled on the Mexican side by Constitutionalists will be governed by the attitude of Carranza and Villa and their associates. This Government desires most friendly relationships, and hopes to be assured that Carranza does not mean real hostility. 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 727, Doc. 728, and Doc. 729]

Mr. Fletcher to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. The Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs has instructed the Chilean Minister at Washington to act with Brazilian and Argentine colleagues in extending good offices. 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 729, Doc. 730, and Doc. 731]

Mr. Hamm to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of Chinese. Chinese desire to leave. Asks if temporary asylum in United States will be granted, and whether Chinese Legation will reimburse for transportation expenses. 898 [Pg. 898 includes portions of Doc. 1608, Doc. 1609, Doc. 1610, and Doc. 1611]

Mr. Manna to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers. Reports tearing down of flags; search of consulate; his own arrest and imprisonment by Federalist forces, and subsequent release by Constitutionalists. 659 [Pg. 659 includes portions of Doc. 1027 and Doc. 1028]

do Protection of American interests. Act of Congress appropriating $500,000 for transportation of Americans in Mexico to their homes in the United States. 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 1066, Doc. 1067, Doc. 1068, and Doc. 1069]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Ulmer (telegram). do Same subject. Directed to confer with Mr. Carothers and to take such steps as may be necessary to get Americans out of Mexico. 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 1066, Doc. 1067, Doc. 1068, and Doc. 1069]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hamm (telegram). do Same subject. Advise all Americans to leave at once. 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 1066, Doc. 1067, Doc. 1068, and Doc. 1069]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Do Same subject. Informed that several Americans taken from train near Tierra Blanca and taken to Cordoba or Orizaba where it is believed they were shot. Other Americans and a British subject taken to same place and may be executed. Admirals Fletcher and Badger informed. 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 1066, Doc. 1067, Doc. 1068, and Doc. 1069]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Spring Rice. do Same subject. Paraphrases telegram of this date from Consul Canada, as list of persons held includes a British subject. Suggests that in speaking for his Government he will impress on General Huerta importance of protecting all noncombatants. 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 1069, Doc. 1070, Doc. 1071, and Doc. 1072]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canada (telegram). do Same subject. British Ambassador offers to instruct British Minister in Mexico to make representations in behalf of all foreigners. Information should be furnished British Admiral at Vera Cruz who will seek solution each case. 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 1069, Doc. 1070, Doc. 1071, and Doc. 1072]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Not feasible to send war ship to Frontera and other places owing possibility incitement Mexicans against Americans. Suggest steamer be chartered to care for refugees. 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 1069, Doc. 1070, Doc. 1071, and Doc. 1072]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canada (telegram). 1914. Apr. 24 Same subject. Directed to secure suitable vessel and send immediately to Frontera, Carmen, Campeohe, and Proeresso. 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 1072, Doc. 1073, and Doc. 1074]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports details concerning conditions at Mexico City. 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 1072, Doc. 1073, and Doc. 1074]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canada (telegram). do Same subject. Directs that his telegram of this date be repeated to Brazilian Minister for purpose of having report investigated and if found true to make vigorous protest to Huerta requesting protection of all noncombatants. 676 [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, Doc. 1076, and Doc. 1077]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do same subject. Wires to Mexico City cut and instruction of this date can not be carried out. Says information now indicates that additional number Americans held at, Cordoba. 676 [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, Doc. 1076, and Doc. 1077]

Mr. Simpich to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Americans arrive from Nacozari. Cananea Copper Company closes mine. Train held to bring out remaining Americans 676 [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, Doc. 1076, and Doc. 1077]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr Bryan. do Same subject. Acknowledges note of this date and says that matter has been brought to the knowledge of the British authorities in Mexico. 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 1077, Doc. 1078, Doc. 1079, and Doc. 1080]

Mr. Reinsch to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Apr. 25 Protection of Chinese. Chinese Government seeks information concerning protection of Chinese subjects in Mexico. 899 [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. 1612, Doc. 1613, and Doc. 1614]

Mr. Johnson to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Col. Ricey, of Carranza’s staff, delivers note from Carranza saying that in event of war his troops would not fight Americans but would evacuate city; offers escort to Mr. Johnson should he desire to leave; Carranza’s troops will not join Huerta. 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 729, Doc. 730, and Doc. 731]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Transmits, for the information of the President, statement by Villa concerning relations between the United States and Mexico. 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733]

Messrs. da Gama, Naon, and Mujica to Mr. Bryan. do Same subject. The plenipotentiaries of Brazil, Argentina, and Chile tender their good offices as mediators for the peaceful and friendly settlement of the conflict between the United States and Mexico. 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733]

Mr. Bryan to Messrs. da Gama, Nadn, and Mujica do Same subject. Accepts their tender of good offices as mediators. 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 733 and Doc. 734]

Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports arrival at Vera Cruz, and quotes note from Foreign Office breaking off relations with his reply thereto. 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 735]

Mr. Bryan to certain consular officers (telegram). do Severance of diplomatic relations. Instructions in regard to leaving their posts and transfer of American interests to British consular officers. 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 990]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Same subject. Quotes fourth telegram of Apr. 24 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, and Doc. 993]

Mr. Da Gama to Mr. Bryan do Same subject. Acknowledges with thanks his note of Apr. 24. 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, and Doc. 993]

Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Apr. 26 Same subject. Transmits notes to and from the British Minister in regard to transfer of American interests to the British Legation. 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, and Doc. 993]

Mr. Bryan to certain consular officers (telegram V do Same subject. Instructions in regard to returning to their posts. 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 993, Doc. 994, Doc. 995, and Doc. 996]

Mr. Bryan to American diplomatic missions (telegram). do Political affairs. Quotes note of mediators and reply thereto, for communication to Foreign Office. 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, and Doc. 738]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of American interests. Practically all Americans out at Tampico. Oil interests abandoned. Other foreign property safe 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 1077, Doc. 1078, Doc. 1079, and Doc. 1080]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Apr. 27 Same subject. Brazilian Minister says Foreign Minister gives assurances no Americans killed or imprisoned except one at Aguascalientes. He gives assurances of full protection Americans and other foreigners. 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 1077, Doc. 1078, Doc. 1079, and Doc. 1080]

Mr. O’Shaughnessy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. British Minister effects transit of Americans from Mexico to Vera Cruz. British cruiser takes 1241 American refugees at Tampico. Minister has done utmost for Americans. 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 1080, Doc. 1081, Doc. 1082, and Doc. 1083]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hanna (telegram). do Arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers. Regrets arrest and indignities suffered. Question of redress will have due consideration. 660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, and Doc. 1030]

Mr. Lorillard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Argentina has been informed that Huerta will accept mediation. 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, and Doc. 738]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. American flag raised over port of Vera Cruz with impressive ceremony. 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, and Doc. 738]

same to same (telegram). Apr. 28 Same subject. Quotes communication from Admiral Craddock, British Navy, proposing, in consequence of possible difficulties of communicating with Brazilian Minister in Mexico, to do all in his power to assist. 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741]

Mr. W. H. Page to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Apr. 28 Same subject. Mexican Ambassador in London sent to British Foreign Office unofficial request for mediation. 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741]

Messrs. da Gama, Naón, and Mujica to Mr. Bryan. do Same subject. Huerta has accepted tender of good offices. Same tender made to Constitutionalist forces. Understood that it is proper to suspend hostilities and military movements of both sides 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Riaño do Same subject. Concerning suspension of hostilities the President says that war has not been declared; that Vera Cruz is occupied to enforce redress for specific indignity; further action of United States depends upon attitude and action of Huerta. Armistice not necessary. 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, and Doc. 743]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). do Severance of diplomatic relations. Instructions in regard to assuming charge of American interests. 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 993, Doc. 994, Doc. 995, and Doc. 996]

The British Embassy to the Department of State. do same subject. The British Foreign Office has instructed certain British consuls in Mexico to take charge of American interests in the absence of French consular officers. 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 993, Doc. 994, Doc. 995, and Doc. 996]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of American interests. Despite assurances of Minister for Foreign Affairs information has been received that Americans are detained at Cordoba and other places. Brazilian Minister again asked to make representations with view to securing permission for Americans to go to place of safety. 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 1080, Doc. 1081, Doc. 1082, and Doc. 1083]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Quotes note from General Maas saying foreigners will be permitted to leave Republic at will. 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 1080, Doc. 1081, Doc. 1082, and Doc. 1083]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Quotes note from British Minister saying Minister for Foreign Affairs with agreement of Minister of War has cabled orders for release of persons stated to be held at Cordoba. 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 1084, Doc. 1085, Doc. 1086, and Doc. 1087]

331 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Spring Rice. do Same subject. Has directed American Ambassador at London to inform British Government of this Government’s gratitude for and appreciation of conduct of British officers toward American refugees at Tampico and Puerto Mexico. 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 1084, Doc. 1085, Doc. 1086, and Doc. 1087]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Protection of American oil interests. Proposition for the neutralization of oil producing zone between Tampico and the Tuxpam River and west of Tampico. Asks to obtain agreement of the Constitutionalist authorities. 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1113, Doc. 1114, Doc. 1115, and Doc. 1116]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Herrick (telegram) Apr. 29 Same subject. Advises him of proposition to neutralize oil zones in Mexico. 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 1117 and Doc. 1118]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Spring Rice. do Same subject. Is gratified to learn that the British Government is making representations to the authorities at Mexico City. 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 1117 and Doc. 1118]

Mr. Hanna to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of Spanish interests. Reports entrance of Constitutionalist Army into Monterey and representations made to some of the generals in behalf of Spaniards. All foreigners are being well treated. It is reported that Vice Consul Silliman at Saitillo had been held a prisoner by Federals, and that several Americans had been arrested. Rumor that Consulate at San Luis Potosi was burned is without confirmation. 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 1392 and Doc. 1393]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canada (telegram). do Protection of American interests. Asks name of American mentioned in his telegram of the 27th, and directs that all possible be done to prevent summary action pending representations. 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 1084, Doc. 1085, Doc. 1086, and Doc. 1087]

Mr. Bryan to Messrs da Gama, Naón, and Mujica. do Political affairs. Notice of General Huerta’s acceptance of mediation is received with satisfaction. 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, and Doc. 743]

Mr. Bryan to certain American diplomatic missions (telegram). do Same subject. The Mediators inform Department that Huerta and Carranza accept principle of mediation, which enables mediators to deal with entire Mexican situation. 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 744, Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram) do Same subject. Carranza changes attitude and now is in accord with Villa on policy toward United States 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 744, Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Apr. 30 Same subject. The port of Vera Cruz formally turned over to army by navy to-day. 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 744, Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canada (telegram). do Same subject. Convey thanks to Admiral Craddock for message, and say any assistance of the kind indicated will be appreciated. 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 744, Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747]

Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of Chinese. Requests information concerning report that restrictions against Chinese and Japanese have been modified. 899 [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. 1612, Doc. 1613, and Doc. 1614]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bryan. do Protection of oil interests. Quotes instruction sent to the British Minister at Mexico City. 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 1118, Doc. 1119, and Doc. 1120]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Apr. 30 Protection of American interests. Information received that fifteen hundred Americans desire to leave Mexico City for Vera Cruz but are prevented by discontinuance of trains. Asks that matter be taken up. 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 1084, Doc. 1085, Doc. 1086, and Doc. 1087]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hanna (telegram). do Same subject. Directs steps be taken for protection of Americans in Saltillo. 680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 1087, Doc. 1088, Doc. 1089, and Doc. 1090]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bryan. do Severance of diplomatic relations. Reports correspondence with the British Foreign Office, the British Minister, and the Mexican Foreign Office in regard to transfer of America interests to the Brazilian Legation. 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 996 and Doc. 997]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). do Same subject. Expresses the Department’s pleasure in his assumption of charge of American interests. Instructions. 644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 998, Doc. 999, and Doc. 1000]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bryan. May 1 Same subject. Refers to his own letter of Apr. 30 and reports that the British Foreign Office has instructed the British Minister to turn over American interests to the Brazilian Minister. These instructions have been complied with. The British Minister will be glad to lend the Brazilian Minister any assistance in his power. 644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 998, Doc. 999, and Doc. 1000]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canada (telegram). do Protection of American interests. Directs communication with Brazilian Legation for purpose of urging immediate representations on behalf of A. B. Emery, American citizen, who it is said will be shot if $200,000 ransom is not paid. 680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 1087, Doc. 1088, Doc. 1089, and Doc. 1090]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher (telegram) do Same subject. Directs representations to Carranza in behalf of A. B. Emery. 680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 1087, Doc. 1088, Doc. 1089, and Doc. 1090]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Reinsch (telegram). do Protection of Chinese. Conditions improved and Chinese not believed in danger. Everything possible will be done for protection of Chinese and question of asylum in United States is being discussed with Chinese Legation. 899 [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. 1612, Doc. 1613, and Doc. 1614]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Miller (telegram). do Protection of oil interests. Consult with the American Naval officer in command at Vera Cruz and the British Consul at Tampico as to the most effective way to induce the local contending forces to accept the proposed neutralization of the oil zones. 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 1118, Doc. 1119, and Doc. 1120]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Spring Rice. do Same subject. The American representations did not include the clause “those in control of cities would be relied on not to molest oil operations or property.” This had better be done independently of the oil zones. 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 1120, Doc. 1121, and Doc. 1122]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bryan. do Same subject. Agrees to the suggestion to treat the question of the control of the cities independently to that of the oil wells. 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 1120, Doc. 1121, and Doc. 1122]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Quotes telegram from General Carranza stating that he has given orders to protect the oil zones and that the neutralization of the oil zones is not necessary. 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 1123, Doc. 1124, and Doc. 1125]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Daniels. May 2 Same subject. Incloses copy of telegram from Mr. Carothers of May 1, and requests that it be telegraphed to Admiral Fletcher 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 1123, Doc. 1124, and Doc. 1125]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Spring Rice. do Same subject, incloses copy of telegram from Mr. Carothers of May 1, 1914. 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 1123, Doc. 1124, and Doc. 1125]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bryan. do Same subject. The British Minister at Mexico City reports that he is doing all he can to persuade Huerta to give the necessary order to enable oil operators to return to the oil fields. 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 1125, Doc. 1126, and Doc. 1127]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). do Protection of American interests, asks that appropriate authorities be urged to provide facilities for 1,500 Americans at Mexico City to leave. 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 1091, Doc. 1092, and Doc. 1093]

Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Carranza has telegraphed orders for liberation of Emery. Constitutionalist authorities express doubt that he is held by their forces. 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 1091, Doc. 1092, and Doc. 1093]

Messrs. da Gama, Naón and Mujica to Mr. Bryan. do Political affairs. As tender of good offices has been accepted, negotiations should begin. After appointment of representatives, date for conference will be fixed 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 748, Doc. 749, and Doc. 750]

Mr. Bryan to American diplomatic officers (telegram). do Same subject. Informs of receipt of request from mediators, which is also being submitted to Huerta and Carranza, that representatives be appointed to confer with mediators. 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 748, Doc. 749, and Doc. 750]

General Funston to Mr. Garrison. do same subject, quotes order establishing military government at Vera Cruz. 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 748, Doc. 749, and Doc. 750]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bryan. May 3 Protection of oil interests. The British Minister at Mexico City reports that Huerta has promised to issue orders to permit the return of oil operators to the oil fields and to permit resumption of work. 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 1125, Doc. 1126, and Doc. 1127]

Mr. Riaño to Mr. Bryan 1914. May 3 Protection of Spanish interests. Requests good offices of Department to prevent confiscation of property of Joaquin Armendaiz. 809 [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 1394, Doc. 1395, and Doc. 1396]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher (telegram). May 4 Same subject. Instructs him to make representations to General Carranza to prevent the confiscation of property of Joaquin Armendaiz. 809 [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 1394, Doc. 1395, and Doc. 1396]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). do Arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers. Asks that information be obtained regarding reported arrest of Vice Consul Silliman at Saltillo, and that appropriate action for release be taken if report true. 660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, and Doc. 1030]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hanna (telegram). do Same subject. Directs efforts be made to communicate with Mr. Silliman reported imprisoned for eleven davs by General Maas. 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 1030, Doc. 1031, Doc. 1032, and Doc. 1033]

Mr. Hanna to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Asks that diplomatic representatives at Vera Cruz be requested to take action looking to release of Vice Consul Silliman at Saltillo and Consul Bonney at San Luis Potosi. 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 1030, Doc. 1031, Doc. 1032, and Doc. 1033]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canada (telegram). do Protection of American interests. Brazilian Minister says there are not 1,500 Americans wishing to leave. Few desiring to leave are being registered in order that train may be provided. 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 1091, Doc. 1092, and Doc. 1093]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher (telegram). do Same subject. Emery safe in Mexico City 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 1093, Doc. 1094, Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, and Doc. 1097]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). do Same subject. Expresses pleasure with efforts to secure train for Americans desiring to leave Mexico. 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 1093, Doc. 1094, Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, and Doc. 1097]

Mr. Capmany to President Wilson and Mr. Bryan. do Political affairs. Memorandum expressing attitude of the Constitutionalists toward the United States. 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 750 and Doc. 751]

Messrs. da Gama, Naón and Mujica to Mr. Bryan. May 5 Same subject. Niagara Falls has been designated as seat of conference; names of representatives appointed by Huerta. 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 751, Doc. 752, and Doc. 753]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher (telegram). do Protection of Chinese. Reports of modification of regulations regarding admission of Chinese without foundation, but m case of necessity temporary asylum may be afforded. 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 1615, Doc. 1616, Doc. 1617, and Doc. 1618]

Mr. Davis to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of American interests. Reports threatened confiscation property of Americans at Guadalajara. 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 1093, Doc. 1094, Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, and Doc. 1097]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). do Arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers. Asks that representations be made with view to immediate action concerning release of Mr. Silliman and other Americans. 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 1030, Doc. 1031, Doc. 1032, and Doc. 1033]

8 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports efforts being made for release of Mr. Silliman and other Americans imprisoned by order of General Maas. 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 1033, Doc. 1034, Doc. 1035, and Doc. 1036]

Mr. Hanna to Mr. Bryan (telegram). May 6 Same subject. Asks whether his telegram of May 4 was received, and expresses opinion that diplomats mentioned therein can obtain release of Messrs. Silliman and Bonney 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 1033, Doc. 1034, Doc. 1035, and Doc. 1036]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hanna (telegram). do Same subject. Appropriate instructions are being sent to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City. Requests all available information regarding imprisonment of Silliman. Bonney reported safe at 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 1033, Doc. 1034, Doc. 1035, and Doc. 1036]

The Department of State to the British Embassy. do Severance of diplomatic relations. Acknowledgment, with thanks for the letter of May 1. 644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 998, Doc. 999, and Doc. 1000]

996 Mr. Bryan to Mr. von Bernstorff. do Protection of American interests. American Ambassador at Berlin has been instructed to express to German Government thanks for assistance rendered American refugees from Tampico by German naval vessels. Mutatis mutandis to French and British Embassies. 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 1093, Doc. 1094, Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, and Doc. 1097]

Messrs. da Gama, Naón and Mujica to Mr. Bryan. do Political affairs. Huerta’s Minister for Foreign Affairs has informed them of landing of troops and munitions of war at Vera Cruz by United States and that such acts are contrary to agreement adopted. Asks investigation for purpose of informing Huerta. 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 751, Doc. 752, and Doc. 753]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Miller (telegram). do Protection of oil interests. Instructs to send to the Department as accurate information as he can obtain regarding the situation in general in his consular district. 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 1127, Doc. 1128, and Doc. 1129]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bryan. do Same subject. Telegram from the British Consul at Tampico to the British Admiral at Vera Cruz. British ships can enter Tampico to load petroleum except for the United States. All vessels, except American, can clear. It is reported that an ultimatum is being prepared demanding the withdrawal of American snips from Tampico within eight days or American oil properties will be destroyed. 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 1127, Doc. 1128, and Doc. 1129]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher (telegram). 1914. May 6 Same subject. Make representations to Carranza that Americans have been denied protection in the Huasteca oil district and have not been allowed to remain there. Ask him to give orders for the protection of all foreigners there, including Americans. 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, Doc. 1131, and Doc. 1132]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bryan. May 7 Same subject. Telegram from the British Admiral at Vera Cruz stating that it would be rash if Americans relied to© implicitly on Mexican assurances and returned now to the oil fields. 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, Doc. 1131, and Doc. 1132]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). May 8 Same subject. Asks authority to draw $5,000 to pay off employees of oil companies. Reports that the policy of the British naval officers is opposed to the return of American employees to the oil fields. 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, Doc. 1131, and Doc. 1132]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bryan. do Same subject. Has advised the British Minister at Mexico City that it would be impossible to draw any distinction of British or American nationality between either wells or employees. 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, and Doc. 1134]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Spring Rice. do Same subject. Acknowledges with gratification the Ambassador’s note of May 1, in regard to the neutralization of the oil fields. 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, and Doc. 1134]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Same subject. Request permission from General Carranza for the stationing of a United. States ship with wireless apparatus near Tampico and to permit small dispatch boats to pass between the fleet and Tampico. 700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 1135 and Doc. 1136]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Spring Rice. do Same subject. Requests that the British Minister at Mexico City be instructed to induce General Huerta to permit the establishment of communication between the American fleet and Tampico. 700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 1135 and Doc. 1136]

Mr. Bryan to certain American Consuls in Mexico (telegram). do Protection of American interests. Department desirous of learning names and addresses of all Americans who have not left Mexico, directs publication of notice requesting registration. 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 1097, Doc. 1098, and Doc. 1099]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). do Same subject. Informs him concerning the Department’s desire to obtain names and addresses of all Americans in Mexico and requests that he publish notice calling for registration. 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 1097, Doc. 1098, and Doc. 1099]

Mr. Bryan to certain foreign missions. do Same subject. Incloses copy of the foregoing and requests their assistance in the matter. 684 [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 1099 and Doc. 1100]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hanna (telegram). do Arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers. Consul Bonney and wife with number of refugees reported to have left Mexico City for Puerto Mexico. Brazilian Minister still endeavoring to obtain release of Silliman. 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 1037, Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, and Doc. 1040]

Mr. Bryan to Messrs. da Gama, Naón, and Mujica. do Political affairs. Troops and munitions were sent only to Vera Cruz, which had been occupied before offer of mediation was accepted. No aggressive measures have been taken since such acceptance 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 754, Doc. 755, and Doc. 756]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. von Bernstorff. May 9 Protection of American interests. Asks that German Consul at Guadalajara be instructed to investigate reported killing of certain Americans and other foreigners near Hostotipaquilla. 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 1100 and Doc. 1101]

Mr. Simpich to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject Suggests that Americans who return to Mexico against consul’s advice be informed that should they again be obliged to leave they should not expect Government’s aid in reaching their homes. 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 1102 and Doc. 1103]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Spring Rice. do Severance of diplomatic relations. Expresses thanks for the British Embassy’s note of Apr. 28. 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 1000, Doc. 1001, Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, and Doc. 1004]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bryan. do Protection of oil interests. The British Minister at 1 Mexico City has been instructed in the sense of Department’s note of the 8th instant. 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 1136, Doc. 1137, and Doc. 1138]

Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan’ (telegram). May 10 Arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers. Silliman still under arrest. Marchini has left for Vera Cruz. Archives, code, etc., removed from consulate by Mexican officials. Representations being made for release of Silliman and restoration of property. 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 1037, Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, and Doc. 1040]

Mr. Riaño to Mr. Bryan. do Protection of Spanish interests. Refers to previous correspondence. States that Constitutionalists at Monterey have forced the representative of the firm of Sr. Armendaiz to give them a draft of $12,000 on Sr. Armendaiz. Intervention requested. 809 [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 1394, Doc. 1395, and Doc. 1396]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). May 11 Same subject. Informs him of action taken to protect the property of Joaquin Armendaiz and instructs him to express to Gen. Carranza the Department sincere hope that Spanish subjects be generously dealt with. 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 1396, Doc. 1397, and Doc. 1398]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hanna (telegram). 1914. May 11 Same subject. Spanish Ambassador requests that Consul General take charge of property of Joaquir Armendaiz. Department has no objection to his taking charge unofficially upon certain stated conditions. 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 1396, Doc. 1397, and Doc. 1398]

Mr. Willard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). !do Same subject. Minister of State requests that immediate steps be taken for protection of Spaniards Telegram from Commander of Spanish war vessel to Minister of Marine quoted. 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 1398, Doc. 1399, and Doc. 1400]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. von Bernstorff. do Protection of American interests. Department would appreciate it if special messengers could be sent to make investigations concerning details of alleged killing and wounding of certain American at Hostotipaquilla. 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 1102 and Doc. 1103]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Simpich (telegram). do Same subject. Authorizes his acting on his suggestion of May 9. 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 1103, Doc. 1104, Doc. 1105, and Doc. 1106]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports that he and Vice Consul Bevan have gone aboard the Connecticut, and that about twenty Americans who refused to leave are being looked after by the German Consul. 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 1103, Doc. 1104, Doc. 1105, and Doc. 1106]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers. Marchani arrives Vera Cruz. All Americans released with exception of Silliman. Mentions taking of archives, etc., from consulate by Federals 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 1037, Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, and Doc. 1040]

19 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Orders for Silliman’s release and delivery to him have been given. Congratulates Department. 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 1037, Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, and Doc. 1040]

Mr. Bryan to all diplomatic missions, except Mexico (telegram-circular). do Political affairs. Mediation plans progressing satisfactorily; Huerta has appointed representatives names of representatives of United States. Hostilities between Huerta and United States suspended. Question of Carranza’s participation not determined. 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 754, Doc. 755, and Doc. 756]

Mr. Bryan to Messrs. da Gama, Naón, Mujica. May 12 Same subject. Acknowledges receipt of note of May 5. 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 754, Doc. 755, and Doc. 756]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Names Mexican peace delegates, who have left for Habana. 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 757 and Doc. 758]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Willard (telegram). do Protection of Spanish interests. Quotes telegram of Apr. 27 to Consul General at Monterey in order that he may have a general idea of Department’s efforts in behalf of Spaniards. Instructs him to inform Spanish Government that Department does not at this time consider intervention in Mexico wise or necessary. 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 1398, Doc. 1399, and Doc. 1400]

Mr. Riaño to Mr. Bryan do Same subject. Requests protection for Spanish subjects at Guaymas. 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 1400, Doc. 1401, and Doc. 1402]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Riaño May 13 Same subject. Informs him of action of Department to secure revocation of order for payment by Señor Armendaiz of draft of $12,000 to the Constitutionalists. 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 1400, Doc. 1401, and Doc. 1402]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hamm. (telegram). May 14 Same subject. Informs him of calls by the Spanish Ambassador and the Netherlands Minister and instructs him to make representations to Gen Carranza to secure liberal treatment of foreigners in the matter of taxation or contributions. 813 [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 1402, Doc. 1403, and Doc. 1404]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Same subject. Instructs him to make representations to Villa in the sense of telegram of May 14 to Consul Hamm. 813 [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 1402, Doc. 1403, and Doc. 1404]

467 Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan do Taxation. Reports that he is making representations to Gen. Carranza against the second collection of taxes. 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 1209, Doc. 1210, and Doc. 1211]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Miller (telegram.) Protection of oil interests. Department can not advance funds to private interests. Upon request for funds it will communicate with the home office of the companiesdo everything possible to secure justice American interests. 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 1136, Doc. 1137, and Doc. 1138]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Same subject. Make representations to Gen. Carranza to permit American employees of oil operators to return at once to Tampico, also to permit this Government to station a vessel with wireless at Tampico. 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 1139, Doc. 1140, and Doc. 1141]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Constitutionalist forces occupy Tampico. Guaranties to all foreigners to return to their business. 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 1139, Doc. 1140, and Doc. 1141]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Reports occupation of Tampico by Constitutionalists. 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 757 and Doc. 758]

Mr. Riaño to Mr. Bryan May 15 Same subject. The Mexican Minister tor Foreign Affairs has expressed thanks for attentions shown members of Mexican delegation. 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 759, Doc. 760, Doc. 761, and Doc. 762]

25 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr Bryan (telegram). 1914. May 15 Protection of American interests. A number of Americans at San Quintin are suffering hardships on account of lack of means and difficulty in reaching them to furnish assistance. Suggests sending of transport. 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 1342, Doc. 1343, Doc. 1344, and Doc. 1345]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Miller (telegram). do Protection of oil interests. Represent to local authorities that this Government expects that no action in forfeiture of leases will be taken where rentals have not been paid on account of prevailing conditions. (Same telegram to Durango.) 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 1139, Doc. 1140, and Doc. 1141]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Oil men are preparing to resume operations under guaranties of Constitutionalists. 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 1142, Doc. 1143, and Doc. 1144]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira. do Arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers. Inquiry concerning Silliman. 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 1040, Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, and Doc. 1043]

Mr. Bryan to Mr.Carother (telegram). May 16 Forced loans imposed on American cit zens. Directs that action of commanding general at Tampico in requesting contributions be brought to attention of Carranza, and outlines representations to be made. 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 1315, Doc. 1316, and Doc. 1317]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Miller (telegram). do Same subject. Quotes telegram of this date to Mr. Carothers and directs that substance be brought to the attention of the Constitutionalist commander at Tampico. 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 1315, Doc. 1316, and Doc. 1317]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Dodge. do Political affairs. Designates him as Secretary to the Special Commission near the mediators. 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 759, Doc. 760, Doc. 761, and Doc. 762]

Mr. Riaño to Mr. Bryan. May 17 Same subject. Conveys, on part of representatives of Huerta, thanks for courtesies and attentions extended since arrival on American territory. 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 759, Doc. 760, Doc. 761, and Doc. 762]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of oil interests. Officials of Tampico are powerless to prevent forfeiture of leases as they are private contracts. Americans and families should not return to Tampico at the present time. Federal forces are holding Panuco and it is believed that they will destroy wells if it is attempted to 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 1142, Doc. 1143, and Doc. 1144]

Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryar (telegram). do Protection of American interests. Constitutionalist authorities at Parral seek to have Americans return and open mines and other industries. Many now disposed to return. Asks instructions. 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 1106, Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, and Doc. 1109]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letchei (telegram). May 18 Same subject. While Department has advised Americans to leave Mexico, it does not attempt to compel them to leave or remain out of the country. Those remaining or returning do so at their own risk. 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 1106, Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, and Doc. 1109]

Mr. Bryan to Messrs. da Gama, Naon, and Mujica do Political affairs. Informs them of appointment of Special Commissioners Justice Lamar and Mr. Lehmann, and their Secretary, Mr. Dodge. 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 759, Doc. 760, Doc. 761, and Doc. 762]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hanm (telegram). May 19 Arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers. Department is considering advisability of requesting Huerta to release Silliman and Americans with him. Asks whether Constitutionalist commander would send guard under flag of truce to receive and conduct them to Monterey. 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 1040, Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, and Doc. 1043]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Daniels. do Protection of Spanish interests. Requests that orders be given to the Naval Commander in waters about Guaymas to extend protection to Spanish colony the north of Guaymas. 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 1405 and Doc. 1406]

263 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Riaño do Same subject. Informs him of request in Departments May 19 to Navy Department for protection of Spanish subjects at Guaymas. 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 1405 and Doc. 1406]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). May 20 Same subject. Instructs him to present to Carranza the matter of seizure of cotton, the property of Spanish subjects, in the Torreon district, with a view to its restoration to its owners. 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 1407, Doc. 1408, and Doc. 1409]

Mr Hanna to Mr. Bryan (telegram) do Arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers. Reply to his May 19. Proposed arrangements for escort of Silliman. 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 1040, Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, and Doc. 1043]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of oil interests. Gen. Carranza has no objection to the establishment of wireless communication between the fleet and Tampico, and he has given orders for full protection of foreigners. 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 1142, Doc. 1143, and Doc. 1144]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canada (telegram). do Same subject. This Government is conferring with the Governments of Great Britain and The Netherlands for an agreement to preserve the status quo concerning leases, royalties, and rentals of oil properties. Inform British and Netherlands consuls. 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 1144, Doc. 1145, Doc. 1146, and Doc. 1147]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Transmits telegram for the Netherlands consul at Tampico from the Netherlands Minister at Washington. 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 1144, Doc. 1145, Doc. 1146, and Doc. 1147]

Mr. Dodge to Mr. Bryan do Political affairs. American special representatives call on mediators, who explain mediation procedure. First session held in afternoon. 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 762, Doc. 763, and Doc. 764]

Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann to Mr. Bryan. 1914. May 20 Same subject. Report meeting with mediators, who propose plan for successor to Huerta; mention of Senior Lascurain. 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 762, Doc. 763, and Doc. 764]

Mr. Bryan to Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann. May 21 Same subject. The President was encouraged by character of proposal contained in their telegram of last evening. Further information needed before forming judgment as to Lascurain. Suggests alternative plan. Other names should be suggested. Asks as to scope and character of agrarian reforms 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765]

Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Mediators not opposed to alternative plan. Additional names given. As to reforms, the mediators express themselves as willing to go as far as may be thought proper. 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 765, Doc. 766, and Doc. 767]

Mr. Bryan to Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann (telegram). do Same subject, The resident suggests renewal of invitation to Constitutionalists to send Commissioners, without reference to scope of discussion or suspension of hostilities. 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 765, Doc. 766, and Doc. 767]

Mr. Daniels to Mr. Bryan. do Protection of Spanish interests, informs department that instructions will be issued for protection of Spanish subjects at Guaymas. 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 1407, Doc. 1408, and Doc. 1409]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of oil interests. Suggests that oil workers be warned not to return to Panuco until assured of employment. 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 1144, Doc. 1145, Doc. 1146, and Doc. 1147]

32 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). May 22 Arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers. Mr. Silliman now at Brazilian Legation and will leave for Vera Cruz to-morrow en route to the United States. 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, Doc. 1045, and Doc. 1046]

74 Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). do Same subject. Expresses sincere thanks and appreciation for efforts in behalf of Mr. Silliman. 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, Doc. 1045, and Doc. 1046]

Mr. Hanna to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Quotes telegram from British Vice Consul at Saltillo concerning release of Mr. Silliman and his departure for Mexico City. 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, Doc. 1045, and Doc. 1046]

Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann to Mr. Bryan (telegram) do Political affairs. The mediators give reasons for declining to renew invitation to Constitutionalists to participate. 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 767, Doc. 768, and Doc. 769]

Same to same (telegram). May 23 Same subject. Report result of two conferences held this day. Huerta willing to resign if so doing would contribute toward firm government. Mediation practically impossible while active hostilities continue in Mexico. Discusses armistice. 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 767, Doc. 768, and Doc. 769]

Mr. Agramonte to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Severance of diplomatic relations. The President of the American Colony in Mexico City reports a vote of thanks to the Brazilian Minister for his untiring splendid service rendered Americans and his watchful care in their behalf. 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 1000, Doc. 1001, Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, and Doc. 1004]

Mr. Willard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of Spanish interests. Reports inquiry by King of Spain regarding protection of Spanish interests in Mexico and requests advices of a reassuring nature to be communicated to the King. 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 1407, Doc. 1408, and Doc. 1409]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Willard (telegram). May 24 Same subject. Instructs him to inform Foreign Office of efforts of Department to protect Spanish interests; that mediation is in progress and satisfactory results are hoped for. 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 1409, Doc. 1410, and Doc. 1411]

Mr. Bryan to Messrs. Lamai and Lehmann (telegram) do Political affairs. By direction of the President makes clear position of this Government regarding elimination of Huerta, and directs presentation of seven considerations by which we should be guided. 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 769 and Doc. 770]

Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann to Mr. Bryan (telegram). May 25 Same subject. Telegram of 24th not given to mediators, but substance discussed with them. 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 770 and Doc. 771]

81 Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). do Severance of diplomatic relations. Transmits Mr. Agramonte’s telegram of May 23. 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 1000, Doc. 1001, Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, and Doc. 1004]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bryan. do Protection of oil interests. The British Government concurs in the principle of preserving the status quo concerning oil properties. 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 1148 and Doc. 1149]

Same to same May 26 Same subject. The British Government has authorized him to conclude an agreement with this Government in the form of an exchange of notes to preserve the status quo of oil properties 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 1148 and Doc. 1149]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers. Reports arrival of Mr. Silliman, who desires to go to Washington to report to the Department. Requests authority to draw funds for him. 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, Doc. 1049, and Doc. 1050]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canada (telegram). do Same subject. Authorizes Mr. Silliman to draw funds, and says Department would be glad to have him come to Washington. 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, Doc. 1049, and Doc. 1050]

Mr. Bryan to Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann (telegram). 1914 May 26 Political affairs. Comments on telegram of 25th; clears up certain points concerning transfer of government from Huerta. Directs change in minutes to read “Mexican representatives” instead of “representatives of Mexican Government,” so as to avoid any possible question of recognition. 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 771 and Doc. 772]

Messrs, Lamar and Lehmann to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Outlines proposition submitted by mediators as a basis of discussion. 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773]

Mr. Bryan to Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann (telegram). May 27 Same subject. Expresses disappointment with proposals outlined in dispatch of 26th; gives reasons and outlines conclusions. 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 773 and Doc. 774]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of Spanish interests. Reports arrangement made with De La Garza with certain cotton owners relative to export of their cotton and plan for investigation by a committee of the records of certain other Spaniards who are trying to effect an arrangement for possession of their property. Explanatory letter from De La Garza is being sent by mail. 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 1409, Doc. 1410, and Doc. 1411]

Mr. Lersner to Mr. Bryan. do Protection of German interests. Requests American naval vessels protect German interests on Mexican west coast during absence of H. M. S. Nürnberg which is going to Panama to exchange personnel. 887 [Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 1577, Doc. 1578, Doc. 1579, and Doc. 1580]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Chermon do Severance of diplomatic relations. Incloses copy of Mr. Agramonte’s telegram of May 23. 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 1000, Doc. 1001, Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, and Doc. 1004]

Mr. Chermon to Mr. Bryan May 28 Same subject. Acknowledges Department’s note of May 27, which he takes pleasure in forwarding to the Brazilian Government. 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 1004, Doc. 1005, Doc. 1006, and Doc. 1007]

488 Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan. do Protection of oil interests, incloses a note from the Constitutionalist authorities concerning protection of oil interests in the Huasteca and Los Esteros districts. 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 1150]

Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Outlines discussion with mediators: after receipt of telegram of 27th. Gives names of five persons as possible successor of Huerta and asks if any would be satisfactory. 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hamm (telegram). May 29 Protection of German interests. Directs, at request of German Embassy, he ask Carranza to release store and ranch belonging to Mrs. Helena Pfeiffer. 888 [Pg. 888 includes portions of Doc. 1580, Doc. 1581, Doc. 1582, and Doc. 1583]

492 Mr. Detcner to Mr.Bryan. do Taxation. Quotes telegram from General Carranza stating that orders have been issued to the tax authorities not to collect double taxes and where they have been collected to refund them 739 [Pg. 739 includes portions of Doc. 1211 and Doc. 1212]

Mr. Bryan to Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann (telegram) do Political affairs. It is assumed that representatives of Carranza will be admitted to the conference. Appointment to foreign minister by Huerta for purpose of succeeding to Presidency might prove embarrassing. Expresses preference as to establishment of provisional government. Insist to mediators that peaceful settlement is supreme object of our efforts and that formalities or technicalities should not be permitted to interfere. 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 775 and Doc. 776]

Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann to Mr. Bryan (telegram). May 30 Same subject. Mexican delegates have telegram urging signing of protocol because of danger from approaching Constitutionalists. Mediators insist that willingness of Carranza to enter conference is due to lack of ammunition and consequent inability to follow up advantage by marching on Mexico City. 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 776 and Doc. 777]

Mr. Bryan to Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann (telegram). do Same subject. Informs them of action to be taken if mediators insist on armistice. 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 777, Doc. 778, and Doc. 779]

Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann to Mr. Bryan. May 31 Same subject. Full report on question of admitting representatives of Carranza to conference. 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 777, Doc. 778, and Doc. 779]

Mr. Bryan to Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann (telegram). do Same subject. This Government is seriously disturbed by attitude of mediators regarding admittance of Constitutionalists. 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 779 and Doc. 780]

Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 1 Same subject. Discuss interview with mediators during which views expressed in Department’s telegram were pressed. 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 781]

Memorandum from German Embassy. do Protection of German interests. Requests protection for Germans at Guadalajara. 888 [Pg. 888 includes portions of Doc. 1580, Doc. 1581, Doc. 1582, and Doc. 1583]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Same subject. Directs representations to Carranza in regard to protection of German and other foreign interests at Guadalajara. 888 [Pg. 888 includes portions of Doc. 1580, Doc. 1581, Doc. 1582, and Doc. 1583]

1013 Mr. Bryan to Mr. von Bernstorff. June 2 Same subject. States that the Secretary of the Navy has given appropriate instructions concerning naval protection on west coast during absence of H. M. S. Nürnberg. 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 1583, Doc. 1584, Doc. 1585, and Doc. 1586]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Spring Rice. 1914. June 2 Protection of oil interests. Draft of note to be exchanged for the preservation of the status quo of the oil properties in Mexico. (Same note to the Netherlands Minister). 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 1151]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bryan. do Same subject. Accepts for his Government the agreement as described in Department’s note of the 2d inst. 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 1152, Doc. 1153, and Doc. 1154]

M. de Rappard to Mr. Bryan do Same subject and tenor 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 1152, Doc. 1153, and Doc. 1154]

Mr. Riaño to Mr. Bryan do Protection of Spanish interests. Requests good offices of Department to prevent the Constitutionalists from enforcing a loan of 500,000 pesos from Spaniards at Tampico. 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 1411, Doc. 1412, and Doc. 1413]

Same to same do Same subject. Requests good offices of Department in behalf of Senores Arocena, Turanzas, and Olano, Spanish cotton growers. 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 1411, Doc. 1412, and Doc. 1413]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Same subject. Informs him of purport of June 2d from Spanish Ambassador and hopes he will succeed in convincing Constitutionalists of the inadvisability and inexpediency of putting Spaniards in a class by themselves in connection with redemption of cotton 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 1414 and Doc. 1415]

Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Mediators have drafted reply to Zubaran concerning representation of Carranza at conference. 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 781, Doc. 782, and Doc. 783]

Mr. Bryan to Messrs. Lamai and Lehmann. June 6 Same subject. Sets forth fully whole matter under discussion at Niagara Falls in its full light as it appears to this Government. 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 781, Doc. 782, and Doc. 783]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Taxation. Official notices have been issued that all custom charges, oil production taxes, and similar charges must be paid in gold. 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 1212, Doc. 1213, Doc. 1214, Doc. 1215, and Doc. 1216]

same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Decree has been issued restoring oil production tax of 20 cents per ton instead of 75 cents as charged by Huerta Government. 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 1212, Doc. 1213, Doc. 1214, Doc. 1215, and Doc. 1216]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Decree reported in his June 3 applies to export charges, bar charges, and oil production tax. 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 1212, Doc. 1213, Doc. 1214, Doc. 1215, and Doc. 1216]

Mr. Riaño to Mr. Bryan June 4 Protection of Spanish interests. Informs Department of reported discrimination against Spaniards by the constitutionalists and requests good offices. 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 1414 and Doc. 1415]

494 Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of British interests. Villa orders sequestration of property of Benton’s widow. Incloses copy British Vice consul asks said. 863 [Pg. 863 includes portions of Doc. 1519 and Doc. 1520]

Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. In view of action of mediatois in consulting their respective Governments, asks whether it is considered that they are acting as individuals or as the representatives of their Governments and bound to follow their instructions. Different views expressed. 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 783 and Doc. 784]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject and tenor. 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 783 and Doc. 784]

Mr. Bryanto Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann. do Same subject. President does not understand that the Governments represented by mediators can or should direct mediators as to terms of settlement or course of procedure; hopes that mediators will see necessity of dealing with situation as it presents itself in Mexico, not as it may seem to their Governments. 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 5 Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Quotes note from Governor Caballero concerning loans. 776 [Pg. 776 includes portions of Doc. 1317, Doc. 1318, and Doc. 1319]

Same to same (telegram). Do Same subject. Reports concerning levy to be made by Constitutionalists at Tampico. 776 [Pg. 776 includes portions of Doc. 1317, Doc. 1318, and Doc. 1319]

113 Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). June 6 Arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers. Requests statement concerning charges made by Huerta against Mr. Silliman, and asks whether Mr. Silliman’s return to Saltillo would cause embarrassment. Also asks that copies of notes exchanged with Mexican Foreign Office be sent Department, if no objection thereto. 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, Doc. 1049, and Doc. 1050]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Riaño do Protection of Spanish interests. Informs him of tenor of instructions to Mr. Carothers to obtain the same treatment for Spaniards as is accorded other foreigners. 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 1416 and Doc. 1417]

39 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Willard. June 8 Same subject. Refers to his informs him of action taken by Department for protection of Spanish subjects in Mexico. 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 1416 and Doc. 1417]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Same subject, informs him of purport of note of June 4 from Spanish Ambassador and instructs him to urge Carranza that no discriminatory or confiscatory action be taken against property of Spaniards and that they be not arrested without good cause. (Same to Consul General at Monterey.) 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 1418, Doc. 1419, and Doc. 1420]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). 1914. June 8 Same subject. Instructs him to bring to the attention of Carranza the request of the Spanish Ambassador for good offices of Department to prevent the Constitutionalists from enforcing loan of 500,000 pesos from Spaniards at Tampico. (Same to American Consul at Tampico. 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 1418, Doc. 1419, and Doc. 1420]

52 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers. Considers it inadvisable for Mr. Silliman to return during present conditions. Charge of espionage, but concrete facts not mentioned. Case seems to have been dismissed. 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, Doc. 1049, and Doc. 1050]

13 Mr. dodge to Mr. Bryan. June 9 Political affairs. Incloses copy of reply of representatives of Huerta to the mediators, relative to plan originally proposed by mediators. 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786]

Memorandum to the German Embassy. June 10 Protection of German interests. Says Secretary of Navy has issued appropriate instructions concerning protection of foreigners during expected attack on Guadalajara by Constitutionalists. 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 1583, Doc. 1584, Doc. 1585, and Doc. 1586]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Miner (telegram). do Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Asks result of meeting of oil interests and action taken regarding loan byConstitutionalists. 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 1319, Doc. 1320, Doc. 1321, and Doc. 1322]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of Spanish interests. Quotes communication from Gen. Caballeros stating that the Government has not imposed upon Spaniards the payment of any loan and has not even exacted war 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 1418, Doc. 1419, and Doc. 1420]

Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 11 Political affairs. Quotes paragraph 1 of the plan under consideration for the transfer of the government. Unless objected to, Commissioners will agree to protocolization of this paragraph. 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 786 and Doc. 787]

14 Same to same June 12 Same subject. Incloses note setting out objections of Mexican delegates to plan proposed by American Commissioners. 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 787 and Doc. 788]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Forced loans. Reports failure of oil companies to act on $200,000 loan demanded by Gen. Aquilar. 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 1319, Doc. 1320, Doc. 1321, and Doc. 1322]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Reports further concerning loans which may be imposed by General Aguilar. 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 1319, Doc. 1320, Doc. 1321, and Doc. 1322]

Mr. Riaño to Mr. Bryan. do Protection of Spanish interests. Informs Department that the Constitutionalists at Tampico continue to impose enforced loans upon Spaniards. Juan Isasi and Ramon Junco have been arrested for refusing to contribute. Good offices requested. 821 [Pg. 821 includes portions of Doc. 1421, Doc. 1422, and Doc. 1423]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). June 13 Same subject. Informs him of purport of June 12 from Spanish Ambassador and instructs him to use good offices with Gen. Carranza (Same to American Consul at Tampico.) 821 [Pg. 821 includes portions of Doc. 1421, Doc. 1422, and Doc. 1423]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports having been requested by Spanish Vice Consul in the name of the Spanish Colony to request the Department to take no further action on the question of enforced loans. Payments made were voluntary. Governor General has called a meeting of Spanish Colony at Governor’s palace. 821 [Pg. 821 includes portions of Doc. 1421, Doc. 1422, and Doc. 1423]

16 Mr. Dodge to Mr. Bryan do Political affairs, incloses copy of letter of June 2 sent by mediators to Sr. Zubaran in reply to his letter of the 28th ultimo. 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789]

17 Mr. Lehmann to Mr. Bryan. do Same subject. Incloses copy of letter from Luis Elguero, a Huertista representative, relative to views of American representatives, and reply thereto. 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 789 and Doc. 790]

18 Mr Dodge to Mr. Bryan. June 15 Same subject. Incloses copy of part of correspondence between mediators and General Carranza handed by mediators to Commissioners. Carranza has appointed delegates to attend conference to settle “international conflict” between United States and Mexico, and requests reply. 533 [Pg. 533 includes portions of Doc. 790 and Doc. 791]

19 Same to same do Same subject Incloses copy of the reply of the mediators to Carranza. 534 [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 791 and Doc. 792]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Miller ((telegram). do Taxation. Advise Americans to pay oil production tax under protest. 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 1212, Doc. 1213, Doc. 1214, Doc. 1215, and Doc. 1216]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of oil interests. Anti-American demonstrations have taken place in the Panuco-Topila section. Requests that representations be made to General Carranza to send sufficient troops to that section to insure protection of foreign interests. 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 1152, Doc. 1153, and Doc. 1154]

Same to same (telegram). do Protection of Spanish interests. Refers to Department’s June 13th. Spanish Vice Consul states that arrested men have been released and again requests that no further action be taken in the matter. Spaniards have been notified that those wishing to remain in Tampico should register as Mexican citizens, otherwise they should leave. Vice Consul has resigned and preparing to leave. 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 1424, Doc. 1425, Doc. 1426, and Doc. 1427]

Mr. Lersner to Mr. Bryan. 1914. June 16 Protection of German interests. Requests this government bring its influence to bear on Constitutionalists for protection of German property; refers to taking over of property of German firm of Eversbusch at Tampico. 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 1583, Doc. 1584, Doc. 1585, and Doc. 1586]

20 Mr. Dodge to Mr. Bryan do Political affairs. Encloses copy of a letter from Mr. Lamar to Sr. Rabasa, Huerta commission, replying to objections to the plan submitted by the American Commissioners. 535 [Pg. 535 includes portions of Doc. 792 and Doc. 793]

Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports substance of talk with representatives of Constitutionalists at Buffalo; their position. 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 794 and Doc. 795]

Mr. Cobb to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports disagreement between Villa and Carranza over Zacatecas campaign. 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 794 and Doc. 795]

21 Mr dodge to Mr. Bryan. June 17 Same subject. Submits, in parallel columns, the plan of the mediators and the United States plan. 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 795 and Doc. 796]

Mr. Edwards to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Believes that differences between Villa and Carranza will not retard campaign against Huerta Government. Villa is advancing on Zacatecas. 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 796 and Doc. 797]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Taxation. Has tendered Constitutionalist bills in payment of bar taxes. Local officials have taken the matter up with General Carranza. 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1217, Doc. 1218, Doc. 1219, and Doc. 1220]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 18 Political affairs. It was impossible to prevent breach between Villa and Carranza, but it will not interfere with progress of revolution. Villa will receive orders from Carranza when they do not interfere with his military operations. 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 797, Doc. 798, and Doc. 799]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hanna (telegram). do Protection of oil interests. Instructs to request adequate protection for the Panuco-Topila section from General Carranza. 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, and Doc. 1157]

Mr. Barclay to Mr. Bryan. do Protection of British interests. Asks that American Consuls at Juarez and Chihuahua be instructed to support representations of British Vice Consul, who has been directed to communicate with Carranza regarding protection of British interests. 863 [Pg. 863 includes portions of Doc. 1519 and Doc. 1520]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Bevan (telegram). do Protection of German interests. Directs investigation and use of good offices to obtain release of property of German firm of Eversbusch at Tampico. 890 [Pg. 890 includes portions of Doc. 1586, Doc. 1587, Doc. 1588, and Doc. 1589]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hanna (telegram). do Same subject. Directed to ask Carranza to restore Eversbusch property and that Germans be not subjected to forced contributions. 890 [Pg. 890 includes portions of Doc. 1586, Doc. 1587, Doc. 1588, and Doc. 1589]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 19 Same subject. Says Carranza asks that German Ambassador be informed that General Obregon has received strict orders to protect all foreigners and foreign property during and after attack on Guadalajara.
(Communicated to German Ambassador June 20.) 890 [Pg. 890 includes portions of Doc. 1586, Doc. 1587, Doc. 1588, and Doc. 1589]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Miller (telegram). do Protection of oil interests. If adequate protection is not given to Panuca-Topila section by this time inform Department and energetic protest will be made to General Carranza. 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, and Doc. 1157]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of Spanish interests. Refers to Department’s telegram about forced loan at Tampteo and reports that Carranza says he has not authorized it and has issued orders to Gen. Caballero not to collect it. Carranza has ordered investigation of persecution of Spaniards at Monterey. 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 1424, Doc. 1425, Doc. 1426, and Doc. 1427]

Mr. Jusserand to Mr. Bryan June 20 Protection of French interests. Transmits statements of two French clergymen concerning their ill treatment and expulsion from Mexico for Department’s consideration. 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 1528]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Taxation. Local officials now refuse to accept Constitutional currency in payment of bar taxes. 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1217, Doc. 1218, Doc. 1219, and Doc. 1220]

Mr. dodge to Mr. Bryan. do Political affairs. Encloses copy of letter from Sr. Rabasa to Mr. Lamar, together with reply of the latter 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 797, Doc. 798, and Doc. 799]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 21 Protection of Spanish interests. Reports that Villa’s decree permitting return of certain Spaniards to Torreon and Chihuahua will be published in newspapers to-morrow. Is forwarding copy of text by mail. 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 1424, Doc. 1425, Doc. 1426, and Doc. 1427]

Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 22 Political affairs. Mediators have invited Constitutionalist representatives to come to Niagara Falls or elsewhere to confer with Huerta representatives on internal affairs. Sends, in parallel columns, the mediators plan and the one proposed by Commissioners. 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 799 and Doc. 800]

Mr. Bryan to Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann (telegram). June 23 Same subject. The President approves of including in protocol subjects covered by amendments mentioned in telegram of 22d; not willing to fix definite time for evacuation of Vera Cruz. 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 800 and Doc. 801]

Messrs. Lamar and Lehmenn to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. June 24 Same subject. Mediators furnish copy of paragraphs Department is willing to protocolize; paragraph on evacuation of Vera Cruz postponed. If Mexican representatives fail to agree as to internal policy, adoption of paragraphs is without prejudice to have matter again brought up if necessary or desirable. 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Barclay. do Protection of American mining interests. Proposes an agreement to withhold all diplomatic support from claimants who have acquired mining rights by reason of cancellation of contracts, etc., or by confiscation by de facto authorities. 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 1168, Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, and Doc. 1171]

207 Mr. Barclay to Mr. Bryan. do Same subject. Accepts for his Government proposal of agreement. 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 1171 and Doc. 1172]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher (telegram) do Protection of British interests. Directed to support representations of British Vice Consul to prevent sequestration of Benton property. (Same to Mr. Edwards at Juarez.) 864 [Pg. 864 includes portions of Doc. 1520, Doc. 1521, Doc. 1522, and Doc. 1523]

24 Mr Dodge to Mr. Bryan. June 25 Political affairs. Incloses summary of Fourth Plenary Conference. 547 [Pg. 547 includes portions of Doc. 802 and Doc. 803]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram.) do Taxation. Arbitrary rate of two pesos for one American gold dollar is considered unjust when exchange is three for one. May have the effect of stopping shipments from this port. 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1217, Doc. 1218, Doc. 1219, and Doc. 1220]

Same to same (telegram). June 26 Same subject. Bar dues is not a Government tax but a railway rate collected by the Government for the upkeep of the harbor by the railway under contract. It was established in 1910 and payable in Mexican currency 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1217, Doc. 1218, Doc. 1219, and Doc. 1220]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hanna (telegram). do Same subject. Customs authorities demand payment of taxes in Mexican gold or American gold at rate of two for one when exchange is three for one, and refuse to accept Constitutionalist currency. Make representations to General Carranza. 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 1220, Doc. 1221, and Doc. 1222]

Same to same (telegram). do Protection of French interests. Instructs him to report in regard to expulsion of Brothers of the Christian Schools and disposition of school property. 868 [Pg. 868 includes portions of Doc. 1528, Doc. 1529, Doc. 1530, and Doc. 1531]

Mr. Hanna to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 27 Same subject. Reports assistance rendered to Brothers of Christian Schools. Will inquire as to matter of school property and as to return of Brothers to Mexico. 868 [Pg. 868 includes portions of Doc. 1528, Doc. 1529, Doc. 1530, and Doc. 1531]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Taxation. Decree is strictly enforced for collection of oil production tax in gold or in American gold at the rate of two for one. Ships are detained until production tax is paid. 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 1220, Doc. 1221, and Doc. 1222]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan June 28 Protection of Spanish interests. Reports desire of Gen. Carranza that foreign diplomatic representatives in Washington make representations direct to him. If Spanish Ambassador would take such action Carranza would appreciate it. 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 1424, Doc. 1425, Doc. 1426, and Doc. 1427]

Mr. Hanna to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 29 Protection of French interests. Reports additional particulars in regard to expulsion of Brothers of the Christian Schools and status of school property. Can not recommend their returning to Mexico at present. 868 [Pg. 868 includes portions of Doc. 1528, Doc. 1529, Doc. 1530, and Doc. 1531]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of oil interests. Authorities manifest disposition to afford adequate protection in the Panuco-Topila section. 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, and Doc. 1157]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Taxation. Strongly represent to General Carranza the injustice of refusing Constitutionalist currency in payment of bar dues or accepting New York exchange at current rates. 744 [Pg. 744 includes portions of Doc. 1222, Doc. 1223, and Doc. 1224]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. One American oil company made contract with Mexican Government in 1908 by which it is exempted from payment of exportation tax. Present authorities refuse to recognize contract with Government. Several ships are held up on account of refusal to pay bar tax in gold. 744 [Pg. 744 includes portions of Doc. 1222, Doc. 1223, and Doc. 1224]

Messrs. Lamar and Lehmann to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Discusses question of signing protocols; while agreement as to international affairs between Mexico and the United States is provided for, it is pointed out that this Government does not recognize Mexican delegates as representing the United Mexican States. 549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 803, Doc. 804, and Doc. 805]

Mr. Hanna to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 30 Protection of oil interests. Gen. Carranza has given directions for the proper protection of American property in the Panuco-Topila section. 710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 1158, Doc. 1159, and Doc. 1160]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothei (telegram). 1914. July 1 Same subject. Make representations to General Carranza that this Government is deeply concerned over the alarming reports from the Panuco district. Ask him to rescind the order for foreigners to surrender arms, and to take immediate steps to afford adequate protection. 710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 1158, Doc. 1159, and Doc. 1160]

Mr. Bryan to Messrs. Lam and Lehmann (telegram) do Political affairs. Directs that the minutes may be signed upon understanding that such signing shall not be construed as a recognition by the United States of the government of General Huerta. 549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 803, Doc. 804, and Doc. 805]

25 Mr Dodge to Ma Bryan. do Same subject. Encloses English text of protocols of 1st, 2nd, and 3rd Plenary Conference. 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 805 and Doc. 806]

Mr. Bryan to certain American consuls. do Same subject. The Department is about to send Mr. Leon J. Canova to Mexico as a special representative. Requests cooperation. 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Riaño July 2 Protection of mining interests. Proposal for an agreement to withhold all diplomatic support from claimants who have acquired mining rights by confiscation by de facto authorities. 720 [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 1173, Doc. 1174, and Doc. 1175]

26 Mr Dodge to Mr. Bryan. July 3 Political affairs. Encloses copy of note to Commissioners from the Mediators and reply thereto regarding delay requested by Carranza in order that he may consult his companions in arms regarding appointment of delegates to confer with delegates of Huerta. Mediators postpone meetings pending action by Carranza. 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 807 and Doc. 808]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers do Same subject. Urges importance of bringing constitutionalist leaders into hearty accord. Also directs that Carranza be urged to send representatives to confer with Huertista representatives. 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 808 and Doc. 809]

Mr. Riaño to Mr. Bryan. July 4 Protection of Spanish interests. Informs Department of advices that Bishop Segiira and Father Vilalta have been imprisoned at Tepic. Good offices requested. 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 1427, Doc. 1428, Doc. 1429, and Doc. 1430]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do. Taxation. The Secretary of the Treasury has directed port authorities at Tampico to accept New York exchange at prevailing gold rate. 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 1224, Doc. 1225, Doc. 1226, and Doc. 1227]

Mr. Hanna to Mr. Bryan (telegram). July 5 Same subject. Favorable answers have been received from the Secretary of Hacienda in the matter of exchange, kind of money to be accepted, clearance of ships, and American oil interests. 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 1224, Doc. 1225, Doc. 1226, and Doc. 1227]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan do Political affairs. Villa realizes that break with Carranza would be disastrous, and intimates that he will do everything possible to arrive at an understanding. 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 809, Doc. 810, and Doc. 811]

29 Mr. Dodge to Mr. Bryan. July 6 Same subject. Incloses copy of material part of letter sent by Carranza to Mediators; he has addressed the generals of the Constitutionalist Army and as soon as replies are received he will consider appointment of delegates. 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 809, Doc. 810, and Doc. 811]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. At request of Carranza communicates why Constitutionalists consider plan proposing Provisional President inadvisable. 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 811 and Doc. 812]

Mr. Riaño to Mr. Bryan. do Protection of mining interests. Accepts for his government proposal of agreement of July 2, 1914. 720 [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 1173, Doc. 1174, and Doc. 1175]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Miller (telegram). do Taxation. Asks information about banking facilities at Tampico. and whether port authorities are observing Villareal’s directions. 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 1224, Doc. 1225, Doc. 1226, and Doc. 1227]

Mr. Bryan to American Missions in Argentina Brazil, and Chile (telegram). July 7 Political affairs. Directs that thanks and appreciation of this Government be conveyed to Minister for Foreign Affairs for good offices and for what has so far been accomplished in mediation. 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 812, Doc. 813, and Doc. 814]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Key (telegram). do Protection of Spanish interests. Instructs him to investigate reported imprisonment at Tepic of Bishop Segura and Father Vilalta and if circumstances warrant to request release of prisoners. 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 1427, Doc. 1428, Doc. 1429, and Doc. 1430]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Clausse. July 8 Same subject. Informs him of desire of Gen. Carranza that diplomatic representatives at Washington make representation directly to Carranza through the Foreign Relations office. (Mutatis mutandis to representatives of the Netherlands, Germany, and Spain.) 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 1427, Doc. 1428, Doc. 1429, and Doc. 1430]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Taxation. Local authorities have not yet received orders to accept New York exchange at prevailing rates. If this ruling is fairly enforced there will be no further complaint. 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 1228, Doc. 1229, and Doc. 1230]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan July 9 Political affairs. Encloses copy of agreement between Carranza and Villa. 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 812, Doc. 813, and Doc. 814]

Mr. Hanna to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914.July 9 Same subject. Carranza says satisfactory under standing between all chiefs is assured; they are all opposed to treating with Huerta’s people, the only way being to fight it out and take Mexico City and the whole country. 560.

82 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). July 10 Same subject. The protocol signed at Niagara Falls was read before the Mexican Congress; Francisco Carbajal was then appointed Minister for Foreign Affairs, and according to reliable information will become Provisional President. Requests views. 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 815, Doc. 816, and Doc. 817]

560 Mr. Agacio to Mr. Bryan do Same subject. Quotes telegram from Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs expressing thanks for President’s message of July 7. 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 815, Doc. 816, and Doc. 817]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Carranza will not treat with the Huertistas except upon basis of unconditional surrender. He has telegraphed in this sense to Mr. Zubaran for communication to the mediators. Discusses provisional presidency. 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 818]

293 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher. do Protection of British interests. Encloses note from British Embassy concerning sequestration of Benton property, and requests expression of views in regard to taking matter up with Carranza for purpose of having Villa’s order in the matter countermanded. 864 [Pg. 864 includes portions of Doc. 1520, Doc. 1521, Doc. 1522, and Doc. 1523]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hanna (telegram). do Taxation. Point out to Carranza the injustice of authorities declining to accept Constitutionalist currency, in view of decree of Feb. 28, 1914, making it obligatory upon officials as well as public to Accept such currency. 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 1228, Doc. 1229, and Doc. 1230]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Miller (telegram). do Same subject. Asks what arrangement can be made at Tampico for New York exchange requirements 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 1228, Doc. 1229, and Doc. 1230]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canova (telegram). do Same subject. Tampico reports that ideal authorities have not received orders to accept New York exchange. Request that order be repeated and that it be sent to Tuxpam also. 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 1230, Doc. 1231, Doc. 1232, and Doc. 1233]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). July 11 Same subject. Substance of department’s telegram of the 10th inst. has been forwarded to Villareal. 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 1230, Doc. 1231, Doc. 1232, and Doc. 1233]

Mr. Lorillard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Do Political affairs. Transmits acknowledgment of Argentine Minister for Foreign Affairs to telegram of July 7 expressing thanks for good offices 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 818, Doc. 819, and Doc. 820]

Mr. Riaño to Mr. Bryan. July 12 Protection of Spanish interests. Informs Department of receipt of telegram stating that the Constitutionalists at Zaeatecas have shot three priests, expelled about twenty and that several Sisters oi St. Therese are in hiding at that place. Good offices requested. 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 1430, Doc. 1431, Doc. 1432, and Doc. 1433]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Taxation. There will be no difficulty about obtaining New York exchange. Makes suggestions as to obtaining quotations of rates. 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 1230, Doc. 1231, Doc. 1232, and Doc. 1233]

Mr. Hanna to Mr. Bryan (telegram). July 13 Same subject. Villareal states that decree of March made export duties, bar and other port dues, payable in gold. 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 1234 and Doc. 1235]

Mr. Spring Rice to Mr. Bryan. do Same subject. Makes statement of the Mexican demand to have bar dues paid in gold and expresses the hope that the American Government will do everything it can to induce the Constitutionalists to withdraw that demand. 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 1234 and Doc. 1235]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). July 14 Same subject. Quotes telegrams from Consul General Hanna showing that the Constitutionalists have not issued instructions to accept New York exchange at prevailing currency rates instead of arbitrary rate of two for one. 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 1235, Doc. 1236, and Doc. 1237]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hanna (telegram). July 15 Same subject. Department does not understand what you mean by one for two when exchange rate is one for three. Will not General Carranza arrange payment of la barra and other taxes in Constitutionalist currency. 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 1235, Doc. 1236, and Doc. 1237]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). do Same subject. Consul Miller going on leave. If he has left, go with Carranza to Tampico and take up the matter of payment of taxes. Endeavor to agree upon some practical basis. 750 [Pg. 750 includes portions of Doc. 1237, Doc. 1238, Doc. 1239, and Doc. 1240]

84 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Huerta will resign this afternoon and Carbajal will become Provisional President, with best disposition to facilitate arrangements for pacification. Department’s views would be appreciated. 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 818, Doc. 819, and Doc. 820]

162 Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira. do Same subject. Resignation and departure of Huerta will simplify matters. It is taken for granted that the new President will arrange with Carranza for peaceful transfer of authority. This Government will use influence to bring parties together. 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, and Doc. 823]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). 1914July 16 Same subject. Instruction to accompany Carranza until further orders, and to urge him to receive any representatives sent by Carbajal. In case none is sent advise him to make known to Carbajal terms upon which transfer of government may be made. 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, and Doc. 823]

87 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. He has congratulated the new President, who, while disposed to made arrangements with revolutionists, fears complications; points out some reasons for fears; prefers to negotiate through mediators. 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, and Doc. 823]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Miller (telegram) do Taxation. Quotes exchange rates. Will port authorities accent these quotations 750 [Pg. 750 includes portions of Doc. 1237, Doc. 1238, Doc. 1239, and Doc. 1240]

Mr. Hanna to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. The Secretary of Finance insists that production taxes, etc., are payable in gold coin, neither bank bills nor silver are acceptable. The Mexican gold peso is quoted at 49 cents and a fraction, which is practically two for one. 750 [Pg. 750 includes portions of Doc. 1237, Doc. 1238, Doc. 1239, and Doc. 1240]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hanna (telegram). do Protection of Spanish interests. Informs him of purport of July 12 from the Spanish Ambassador and instructs him to bring the matter to the attention of Carranza with renewed suggestion as to advisability of moderate and kind treatment of persons connected with religious organizations. 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 1430, Doc. 1431, Doc. 1432, and Doc. 1433]

Mr. Clausse to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of French interests. Inquiries as to correctness of information concerning the murder of two French Christian Brothers, Messrs. Astru and Gills at Zacatecas. 869 [Pg. 869 includes portions of Doc. 1531, Doc. 1532, and Doc. 1533]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Same subject. Instructs him to use his influence to secure release of Brothers of Christian School imprisoned at Zacatecas and to secure punishment of those responsible for killing of two of the Brothers. Urge upon authorities imperative importance of protecting those engaged in religious teaching. (Same to the American vice to Consul at Saltillo.) 869 [Pg. 869 includes portions of Doc. 1531, Doc. 1532, and Doc. 1533]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). July 17 Same subject. There are twelve French Christian Brothers at Saltillo who are safe and unmolested. Is assured by local government that, subject to certain restrictions, they will receive full protection. 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 1533, Doc. 1534, and Doc. 1535]

Mr. Hanna to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do . Protection of Spanish interests. Informs Department that reports coming to the Spanish Ambassador concerning priests being shot and imprisoned have been brought to the attention of Carranza. 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 1430, Doc. 1431, Doc. 1432, and Doc. 1433]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Taxation. Absolutely no concessions have been made in response to representations by Department. 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 1240, Doc. 1241, Doc. 1242, and Doc. 1243]

88 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Diplomatic corps attends official reception of Provisional President, who in reply to usual address of dean, confirmed good intentions to promote pacification of country. 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, and Doc. 826]

90 Same to same (telegram). July 18 Same subject. President Carbajal instructs military commanders not to execute prisoners. Railroad line ordered repaired and mail service properly reestablished. 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, and Doc. 826]

Memorandum from War Department. do Same subject. Commanding General at Vera Cruz reports Huerta, Blanquet, and party, reached Puerto Mexico at 8.15 p.m. 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, and Doc. 826]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Taxation. Reports failure to obtain concessions from the Secretary of the Treasury in the matter of payment of export duties. 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 1240, Doc. 1241, Doc. 1242, and Doc. 1243]

Mr. Clausse to Mr Bryan do Protection of French interests. Reports additional particulars in regard to killing of Messrs Astru and Gilles. French Government indignantly protests against criminal attempts of this character and reserves the right later to demand all reparations. 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 1533, Doc. 1534, and Doc. 1535]

Mr. Phillips to Mr. Clausse. do Same subject. Acknowledges receipt of note of the 20th ultimo. 871 [Pg. 871 includes portions of Doc. 1535, Doc. 1536, and Doc. 1537]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram.) do Same subject. Gen. Natero, Governor of Zacatecas, disclaims any knowledge of death and persecution of Christian Brothers. Has made representations of Governor Carranza in the matter. 871 [Pg. 871 includes portions of Doc. 1535, Doc. 1536, and Doc. 1537]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). July 19 Political affairs. Carranza has been handed Department’s message of July 16 and expresses willingness to meet duly accredited representatives of Carbajal. Names Saltillo as place of meeting. 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828]

167 Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). July 20 Same subject. Informs him of Carranza’s willingness to treat with representatives of Carbajal. 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). do Same subject. Brazhan Minister has been asked to inform Carbajal of Carranza’s willingness to meet representatives at Saltillo. Expresses hope that this action will result in meeting. President much gratified. 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 829, Doc. 830, and Doc. 831]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Cobb (telegram). 1914 July 20 Same subject. Quotes telegram for delivery to Mr. Carothers, or Villa, if the latter is at Ciudad Juarez. Impress upon Villa duty of using influence to prevent discord among Constitutionalists. Personal quarrels should not jeopardize victory. 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 1050, Doc. 1051, and Doc. 1052]

Mr. de Oliveira to Mr Bryan (telegram). July 22 Same subject. Carbajal willing to treat with Constitutionalists and suggests New York as place of meeting. Situation dangerous on account of attacks near capital; Carranza will resort to reprisals upon reaching Mexico. Frank statement from Carranza would tend to ease situation. 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 829, Doc. 830, and Doc. 831]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Spring Rice. do Taxation. Gives status of controversy. 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 1240, Doc. 1241, Doc. 1242, and Doc. 1243]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canova (telegram). do Protection of French interests. Instructs him to proceed to Zacatecas to investigate and report concerning death and imprisonment of French priests as well as treatment of religious orders. 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 1537, Doc. 1538, Doc. 1539, and Doc. 1540]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). July 23 Same subject. Instructs him to urge Carranza to give instructions to prevent injury to persons or property of Christian Brothers at certain named places.
(Same to Special Agent Carothers) 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 1537, Doc. 1538, Doc. 1539, and Doc. 1540]

Mr. Clausse to Mr. Bryan do Same subject. Transmits report of French Consular Agent at El Paso giving names of those responsible for the murder and ill treatment of Christian Brothers at Zacatecas. 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 1537, Doc. 1538, Doc. 1539, and Doc. 1540]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of Spanish interests. Reports arrival at Tampico of Marcial Cuerruro, a Spanish priest who is being expelled from Mexico by order of the military commander at Cerritos. 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 1434, Doc. 1435, and Doc. 1436]

170 Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). do Political affairs. It would be unwise to suggest New York as meeting place. As early agreement is important, suggests compliance with Carranza’s plan to meet at Saltillo. Importance of amnesty is being urged upon Carbajal and Carranza. Promise of amnesty should be made before delegates are sent. Urge importance of immediate action. 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 831, Doc. 832, and Doc. 833]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). do Same subject. By direction of the President transmits message for communication to Carranza. Calls particular attention to treatment of foreigners, their lives, property, and rights; treatment of political and military opponents; treatment of Roman Catholic Church. Directed to urge these matters upon attention of appropriate Constitutionalist authorities. 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 831, Doc. 832, and Doc. 833]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram) do Same subject. By direction of the President transmits message for communication to Villa. (Same as telegram of this date to Mr. Silliman.) 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, and Doc. 837]

Mr. Bundy to Mr. Bryan (telegram). July 24 Same subject. The Vice Consul at Kingston, Jamaica, reports arrival there of General Huerta. 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, and Doc. 837]

do Same subject, Carbajal has decided to appoint two delegates to go to Saltillo; hopes Constitutionalist delegates will be there. He has stopped hostilities against Constitutionalists, and would be pleased if they would do likewise. 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, and Doc. 837]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of French interests. Reports attitude or revolutionists toward the Catholic priesthood and suggests that diplomatic representatives of Spain, France, and Italy earnestly urge their nationals engaged in religious work in Mexico to retire from the country. 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 1540, Doc. 1541, Doc. 1542, and Doc. 1543]

Same to same (telegram) do Same subject. Reports compliance with Department’s telegram of July 23, 3 p m. 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 1540, Doc. 1541, Doc. 1542, and Doc. 1543]

Mr. Phillips to Mr. Carothers (telegram). July 25 Same subject. Informs him of mission of Mr. Canova to Zacatecas and instructs him as to informing Villa of same. 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 1540, Doc. 1541, Doc. 1542, and Doc. 1543]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Riaño. do Protection of Spanish interests. Informs him of sentence of Father Vilalta to imprisonment for eight years and representations made by the Department in the matter. 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 1434, Doc. 1435, and Doc. 1436]

Mr. Phillips to Mr. Silliman (telegram). do Political affairs. Directs that he use his own judgment as to whether the present is an opportune time to suggest to Carranza that he issue statement as suggested in Mr. de Oliveira’s telegram of the 22d. 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, and Doc. 837]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject Informs him of Mr. de Oliveira’s telegram of the 24th, and expresses hope that Carranza will do his utmost to arrange for prompt and amicable transfer of government. 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 837, Doc. 838, and Doc. 839]

Mr. Hanna to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Quotes note from Secretary of Foreign Relations acknowledging note handed General Carranza by Mr. Silliman July 19, containing points set forth in Department’s July 16 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 837, Doc. 838, and Doc. 839]

Mr. de Oliveirato Mr. Bryan 1914. l July 26 Same subject. Carbajal has appointed two delegates to confer with Constitutionalists. 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 840, Doc. 841, and Doc. 842]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram) do Protection of French interests. Transmits translation of a part of edict of Governor of Nuevo Leon in regard to expulsion of foreign Catholic priests 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 1544 and Doc. 1545]

July 27 Same subject. Transmits translation of a decree of Governor of Nuevo Leon regarding the Catholic clergy and the Roman Catholic Church in that State. 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 1544 and Doc. 1545]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Requests instructions in regards to proceeding to Zacatecas. 876 [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 1546, Doc. 1547, and Doc. 1548]

Mr. Clausse to Mr. Bryan. do Same subject. Informs Department of the arrest and expulsion from Monterey of fourteen French citizens of the Christian Brothers and requests protection of French interests in North Mexico. 876 [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 1546, Doc. 1547, and Doc. 1548]

Mr. Miller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Taxation. Decrees just published in Tampico provide increase in oil production tax from 20 cents gold to 60 cents gold. 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 1243, Doc. 1244, and Doc. 1245]

178 Mr. Bryan to Mr de Oliveira (telegram). do Political affairs. The substance of his telegram or July 24 has been communicated to Mr. Silliman for presentation to Carranza, if thought desirable. 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 840, Doc. 841, and Doc. 842]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). do Same subject. Informs him of appointment or delegates by Carbajal. Directs that he inform Carranza, and request full protection. 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 840, Doc. 841, and Doc. 842]

181 Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). do Same subject. Informs him that his telegram of July 26 has been communicated to Mr. Silliman with instructions to convey same to Carranza. 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, and Doc. 846]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Carranza will issue statement in accordance with Department’s suggestion. Demand of Constitutionalists is for unconditional surrender. Protection will be accorded as circumstances of each case demand. 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, and Doc. 846]

100 Mr.de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Carbajal’s delegates have left for Vera Cruz, thence to Tampico with instructions to negotiate at any place agreeable to Constitutionalists. Change of itinerary made necessary by break in railway. 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, and Doc. 846]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). July 28 Same subject. Informs him concerning departure of Carbajal delegates, and directs that this be brought to attention of Carranza for purpose of having him issue appropriate instructions looking to protection and comfort of delegates. Requests names of Constitutionalist delegates, and to urge armistice. 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, and Doc. 846]

181 Mr Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram) do Same subject Informs him of instructions sen to Mr. Silliman, and adds that names of Constitutionalist delegates will be sent as soon as received. 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, and Doc. 849]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Carranza will leave to-morrow for Saltillo. He will not name representatives, but will treat personally with representatives of Carbajal. He will try to arrange for prompt, amicable transfer of government and surrender of army. 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, and Doc. 849]

Mr. Bryan to Mr Canova. (telegram). July 29 Protection of French interests. Instructs him to proceed to Zacatecas in accordance with instructions of July 22, and to secure information as to opinion of Constitutionalist leaders regarding effect of decree of July 14 of Governor of Nuevo Leon. 876 [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 1546, Doc. 1547, and Doc. 1548]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). do Protection of Spanish interests. Instructs him to request Gen. Carranza to give personal consideration to the case of Father Vilalta. 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 1434, Doc. 1435, and Doc. 1436]

Mr. Bevan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). July 30 Taxation. The chief military officer at Tampico has advised him that a war tax has been laid on all business houses regardless of nationality. Has asked for a list of firms and amounts assessed against them 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 1243, Doc. 1244, and Doc. 1245]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Carranza’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, Fabela, draws distinction between armistice and suspension of military operations; the former may be voluntary concession, while latter presupposes an agreement. 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, and Doc. 849]

Same to same July 31 Same subject. Transmits copy of note from Fabela acknowledging communication based on instruction of July 23. 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 850 and Doc. 851]

Same to same do Same subject. Incloses copy of note from Fabela saying Carranza has issued directions for the preservation of order in the capital. 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 850 and Doc. 851]

Same to same do Same subject. Incloses copy of note from Fabela saying Carranza has given appropriate directions for protection of Carbajal delegates. 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 851, Doc. 852, and Doc. 853]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). 1914 July 31 Same subject. Outlines circumstances upon which success of Carranza depends. Warns against excesses of any kind; vindictive and harsh measures adopted at outset and carried into effect by military force and authority might have far reaching and disastrous results. 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 851, Doc. 852, and Doc. 853]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canova. do Protection of French interests. Incloses copy of report of French Consular Agent at El Paso, Tex., transmitted to Department in note of July 23 from the French Embassy. (Same to Special Agent Carothers.) 877 [Pg. 877 includes portions of Doc. 1548, Doc. 1549, Doc. 1550, and Doc. 1551]

Mr. Hanna to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports statement by Secretary of Foreign Relations Fabela that Carranza had official report that no French priests were killed or imprisoned at Zacatecas but that they were deported. 877 [Pg. 877 includes portions of Doc. 1548, Doc. 1549, Doc. 1550, and Doc. 1551]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Aug. 1 Same subject. Reports statement by Governor of Nuevo Leon that his decree was a revolutionary measure and when normal conditions prevail will be subject to action of State Legislature. Governor of Tamaulipas states that he has not closed a single Catholic church but that he has expelled every Catholic priest from the State. 877 [Pg. 877 includes portions of Doc. 1548, Doc. 1549, Doc. 1550, and Doc. 1551]

1361 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Clausse. do . Same subject. Informs him that copies of report transmitted in his July 23d have been sent to Department’s special representatives in Mexico for their information in connection with future representations in behalf of the Christian Brothers. 878 [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 1552, Doc. 1553, and Doc. 1554]

143 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Morgan. do Arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers. Quotes from Mr. Silliman’s report and instructs him to convey to Brazilian Government expression of this Government’s appreciation and thanks for services rendered by the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City. 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 1050, Doc. 1051, and Doc. 1052]

284 Mr. Bryan to Mr. W. H. Page. do Same subject. Quotes from Mr. Silliman’s report and instructs him to convey to British Government expression of this Government’s appreciation and thanks for services rendered by the British Vice consul at Saltillo and his assistant. 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 1050, Doc. 1051, and Doc. 1052]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Bevan (telegram). do Taxation. Advise Department fully of the amount and character of the war tax and to what extent American interests are affected. 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 1245, Doc. 1246, Doc. 1247, and Doc. 1248]

Mr. Bevan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. There are over 100 American firms in this district, only nine of whom appear on the war tax list. If Americans are compelled to pay the remaining 90 per cent will surely be assessed later on. 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 1245, Doc. 1246, Doc. 1247, and Doc. 1248]

190 Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). do Political affairs. Informs him of distinction made by Constitutionalists between armistice and suspension of military operations, and that Carranza will suspend military operations upon arrival of duly accredited representatives of Carbajal. 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 853 and Doc. 854]

Mr. Hanna to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports arrival of peace delegates who complain of treatment shown by Constitutionalist officials, and show desire to quit. States that he finally persuaded them to continue. Requests approval of action. 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hanna (telegram). Aug. 2 Same subject. Approves course in urging delegates to continue journey to Saltillo. Any seeming discourtesy must have been due to oversight rather than intention. Expresses anxiety to have conference take place 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857]

Mr. Bevan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of German interests. Reports German consul requests assistance to prevent local authorities from boarding steamship Antonina and taking off Mexican accused of homicide, which is believed to be mere pretext to cover political charge. 891 [Pg. 891 includes portions of Doc. 1590, Doc. 1591, Doc. 1592, and Doc. 1593]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of French interests. Reports concerning the killing and expulsion of French priests at Zacatecas by order of Gen. Chao. 878 [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 1552, Doc. 1553, and Doc. 1554]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Clausse. Aug. 3 Same subject. Informs him of purport of August 1 from Vice Consul Silliman. (Same to the Spanish Ambassador). 878 [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 1552, Doc. 1553, and Doc. 1554]

Same to same do Same subject. Refers to his July 27 and informs | him that the Consul General at Monterey has very broad instructions covering the protection of religious orders, including those that are French. 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 1554, Doc. 1555, and Doc. 1556]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan. do Political affairs. Incloses copy of letter to Carranza communicating views expressed in Department’s telegram of July 31. 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Aug. 3 Same subject. Communicates translation of text of statement made public by representatives of Carranza giving reason why there could be no conference with the representatives of Carbajal. 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 857 and Doc. 858]

Same to same (telegram) do Same subject. Carbajal envoys manifest surprise that they were expected to make unconditional surrender, and have asked for instructions from their Government. No suspension of military operations has been ordered. 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 858, Doc. 859, Doc. 860, Doc. 861, and Doc. 862]

Same to same (telegram) do Same subject. Envoys submitted six conditions from Government at Mexico City. Hope of settlement has disappeared and campaign will continue. 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 858, Doc. 859, Doc. 860, Doc. 861, and Doc. 862]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Bevan (telegram). do Protection of German interests. Directs that he advise local authorities to proceed with extreme caution and to use moderation in dealing with German steamship officials. 891 [Pg. 891 includes portions of Doc. 1590, Doc. 1591, Doc. 1592, and Doc. 1593]

Same to same (telegram) Aug. 4 Same subject. Informs him of sending a telegram to Mr. Silliman concerning political refugees on Antonina. 891 [Pg. 891 includes portions of Doc. 1590, Doc. 1591, Doc. 1592, and Doc. 1593]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan. do Political affairs. Envoys request that departure for Mexico City be announced. 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 858, Doc. 859, Doc. 860, Doc. 861, and Doc. 862]

523 Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan. do Protection of mining interests. Forwards copy of a decree issued by the Governor of the State of Chihuahua requiring renewal of suspended industrial and mining operations within one month. Comments and asks instructions. 720 [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 1173, Doc. 1174, and Doc. 1175]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Bevan (telegram). do Taxation. Send at once detailed information about the war tax. This Government can not consent to the levy of a war tax which is discriminatory or unreasonable. 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 1245, Doc. 1246, Doc. 1247, and Doc. 1248]

Mr. Haniel to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of German interests. Asks that protection of German life and property be formally assumed by American land forces and war vessels. 891 [Pg. 891 includes portions of Doc. 1590, Doc. 1591, Doc. 1592, and Doc. 1593]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). do Same subject. Directs that Carranza be asked to order release of steamship Antonina without removal of Nueva and Pesos, political refugees. 892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 1594, Doc. 1595, and Doc. 1596]

Mr. Bevan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports search of Antonina by armed force of Constitutionalists. 892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 1594, Doc. 1595, and Doc. 1596]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). do Protection of French interests. Informs him of purport of Aug. 2 from Mr. Canova and instructs him to present the matter to Gen. Carranza and urgently insist that the guilty parties be adequately punished. 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 1554, Doc. 1555, and Doc. 1556]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Clausse. do Same subject. Informs him of purport of Aug. 2 from Mr. Canova and Aug. 4 to Mr. Silliman. American Ambassador at Paris informed. 880 [Pg. 880 includes portions of Doc. 1557, Doc. 1558, and Doc. 1559]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Riaño Aug. 5 Same subject. Informs him of suggestion telegram from Vice Consul Silliman that Spanish Govt, urge her Nationals engaged in religious work in Mexico to retire from that country for the present. (Mutatis mutandis to French and Italian Ambassadors.) 880 [Pg. 880 includes portions of Doc. 1557, Doc. 1558, and Doc. 1559]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Inquires if Department can fully confirm information given in its Aug. 4. It is stated that Chao was executed prior to June 27. 880 [Pg. 880 includes portions of Doc. 1557, Doc. 1558, and Doc. 1559]

Mr. Hanna to Mr. Bryan do Same subject. Quotes translation of statement of Minister of Foreign Relations showing that Gen. Villa did not order the execution of two Christian Brothers nor the imprisonment of eleven others at Zacatecas. but he did order their expulsion. 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 1560, Doc. 1561, Doc. 1562, and Doc. 1563]

Mr. Riaño to Mr. Bryan do Protection of Spanish interests. Asks protection of property of Spaniards at San Luis Potosi where Constitutionalists are said to be enforcing loans and confiscating cattle. 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 1437, Doc. 1438, and Doc. 1439]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). do Same subject. Informs him of contents of Mr. Riano’s note of this date and directs that he require Carranza to telegraph orders with view to discontinuance of practice. 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 1437, Doc. 1438, and Doc. 1439]

Mr. Hanna to Mr. Bryan do Same subject. Quotes Mr. Fabela’sreply concerning persecution of Spanish subjects, especially persons connected with religious organizations. 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 1437, Doc. 1438, and Doc. 1439]

524 Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan Aug. 6 Protection of British interests. Reports parceling out of Benton property under Villa’s orders. Says that order from Carranza would not be respected by Villa. 864 [Pg. 864 includes portions of Doc. 1520, Doc. 1521, Doc. 1522, and Doc. 1523]

Mr. Bevan to Mr. Bryan do Protection of German interests. Reports release of Antononia. 892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 1594, Doc. 1595, and Doc. 1596]

1171 Same to same do Same subject. Makes full report concerning the detention, search, and release of the Antononia. 893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 1597]

Mr. Bevan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Aug. 6 Taxation. Quotes letter received from the chief military officer at Tampico stating that the contribution asked for is not a forced loan but a war tax upon the general commerce of the port. Has requested an extension of time. 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 1248, Doc. 1249, and Doc. 1250]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). do Political affairs. Directed to express to Carranza regret that any lack of attention or consideration has been shown Carbajal delegates. Outlines further considerations to be urged upon Carranza. 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 858, Doc. 859, Doc. 860, Doc. 861, and Doc. 862]

Same to same (telegram). Aug. 7 Same subject. Emphasize to Carranza fact that unless political amnesty is assured there may be fighting in Mexico City and resulting deaths would be hard to justify. This Government’s action in matter of recognition must depend in part upon manner in which his authority is acquired. 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 862, Doc. 863, and Doc. 864]

Same to same (telegram) do Protection of French interests. Informs him that Department has most reliable information from two sources that Astruc and Giles were shot June 24. 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 1560, Doc. 1561, Doc. 1562, and Doc. 1563]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Haniel (telegram). Aug. 8 Protection of German interests. Acknowledges his Aug. 4; this Government will continue to use its good offices. 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 1597, Doc. 1598, and Doc. 1599]

Mr. Hamel to Mr. Bryan Do Same subject. Expresses thanks for action taken at Guadalajara which resulted in Constitutionalists respecting German interests. 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 1597, Doc. 1598, and Doc. 1599]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). Do Taxation. Advises him of the war tax levy at Tampico and instructs him to urge General Carranza to have the decrees withdrawn. 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 1248, Doc. 1249, and Doc. 1250]

Same to same (telegram). Do Political affairs. It is hoped that Carbajal and Carranza may reach agreement that will bring about peaceful transfer of government. Department is sure Carbajal is willing to waive all conditions excepting amnesty to political prisoners. 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 862, Doc. 863, and Doc. 864]

119 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Transmits statement from Carranza which seems to leave no hope for peaceful transfer of power; also a note from Carbajal which he asks be transmitted to Carranza’s Secretary of War Velasco regarding disposition of Federal troops and entry of Constitutionalist army. 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 864, Doc. 865, and Doc. 866]

120 Same to same (telegram) Aug. 9 Same subject. It would be a deplorable mistake should Carranza decline Velasco’s suggestion; he has been informed that in case of refusal the Army contemplates starting new revolution against Constitutionalists by proclaiming General Angeles candidate for Presidency and trying to unite with Villa. 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 864, Doc. 865, and Doc. 866]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). do Same subject. Urge upon Carbajal the folly of resistance; it is of the highest importance that agreement should be reached. 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 866, Doc. 867, Doc. 868, and Doc. 869]

Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Department’s Aug. 9 communicated to Carbajal, but probably too late, as Obregon is near city and demands unconditional surrender. President and army willing to comply; the latter being ready to evacuate without fighting. Good offices of Diplomatic Corps asked by Carbajal and Carranza’s agent to facilitate occupation by Constitutionalists. 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 866, Doc. 867, Doc. 868, and Doc. 869]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman. (telegram). do Same subject. Quotes Mr. de Oliveira’s Aug. 9 and instructs to urge upon Carranza the importance of continuing negotiations in conciliatory spirit until a basis is reached for peaceful transfer of authority. 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 866, Doc. 867, Doc. 868, and Doc. 869]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). Aug. 10 Same subject. Instruction to do everything possible to assist in peaceful transfer of the Government. 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 869, Doc. 870, and Doc. 871]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers. Aug. 11 Same subject. Instruction to use good offices with Villa, as Mr. Silliman has been instructed to do with Carranza, to secure adjustment of differences between the two chiefs. 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 869, Doc. 870, and Doc. 871]

124 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Aug. 12 Same subject. Reports interview with Carranza, who does not accept the idea of an arrangement with Carbajal to save the situation. 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, and Doc. 874]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Taxation. General Carranza is without advice on war tax decree. He has asked Tampico for explanation. 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 1251, Doc. 1252, Doc. 1253, and Doc. 1254]

Mr. Bevan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Aug. 13 Same subject. American firms were notified that war tax would have to be paid within 24 hours. Rather than pay companies will close. Companies have requested that consular seal be placed on their doors. 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 1251, Doc. 1252, Doc. 1253, and Doc. 1254]

125 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Aug. 13 Political affairs. Carbajal has dissolved his government and left for Vera Cruz with several members of Cabinet. Capital delivered to Governor of Federal District, who will sign agreement with General Obregon for delivery of the city. Believes this agreement will fulfill stipulations of Niagara protocol. Requests views of Department. 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, and Doc. 874]

206 Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). do Same subject. Congratulates him on arrangements made, which it is felt are the best possible under the circumstances. Asks that compliments be presented to Carranza and Governor of District; this Government trusts this will be the beginning of an era of peace, prosperity, and progress for Mexico. 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, and Doc. 874]

126 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Transmit translation of agreement signed by Governor of Federal District and General Obregon. 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 874, Doc. 875, and Doc. 876]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Quotes translated text of articles of treaty terminating the war. 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 874, Doc. 875, and Doc. 876]

207 Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). Aug. 14 Same subject. The agreement is satisfactory; peaceful transfer of power is assured. The President appreciates the ability with which the matter was handled. 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 876 and Doc. 877]

1182 Mr. Bevan to Mr. Bryan do Protection of oil interests. Incloses copy of a decree issued by the Governor of Vera Cruz relating to the lease of oil lands in that State. 710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 1158, Doc. 1159, and Doc. 1160]

Mr. Hanna to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Aug. 15 Severance of diplomatic relations. Transmits Mr. Silliman’s Aug. 13: “To the Brazilian Minister solely is due the preparation of the document signed Aug. 15 terminating the civil war in Mexico.” 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 1004, Doc. 1005, Doc. 1006, and Doc. 1007]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). do Taxation. If not already done so take immediate action on Department’s telegram of the 8th instant regarding war tax. 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 1251, Doc. 1252, Doc. 1253, and Doc. 1254]

Mr. Bevan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Americans have not paid war tax and no forceful measures have been taken by authorities. 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 1251, Doc. 1252, Doc. 1253, and Doc. 1254]

Same to same (telegram). Aug. 17 Same subject. War tax measure has been referred to Governor Callero and no further action will be taken pending instructions from him. 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 1254, Doc. 1255, Doc. 1256, and Doc. 1257]

130 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Quotes note from Mr. Fabela expressing Carranza’s thanks for congratulations. 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 878, Doc. 879, and Doc. 880]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Da Gama. Aug. 18 Severance of diplomatic relations. Incloses Mr. Hanna’s Aug. 15 and requests him to express to his Government the thanks of this Government for the excellent work done by the Brazilian Minister in behalf of Americans. 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 1004, Doc. 1005, Doc. 1006, and Doc. 1007]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Protection of mining interests. Make representations to General Villa against the decree issued by the Governor of Chihuahua concerning mining operations and ask him to order modification of the decree. 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 1175 and Doc. 1176]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Aug. 19 Taxation. Quotes letter from Secretary Bonillas concerning payment of mining taxes in which he states that payments made to the Huerta Government since Mar. 1, 1913, will not be recognized as valid. 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 1254, Doc. 1255, Doc. 1256, and Doc. 1257]

Same to same (telegram) Aug. 20 Political affairs. Report Carranza’s triumphal entry into the capital. 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 878, Doc. 879, and Doc. 880]

132 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Aug. 22 Same subject. Carranza has notified Governors of States and other Mexican authorities of assumption of executive power without stating in what capacity. Notice not given diplomatic corps. Use of good offices prevents passports being given British Minister, who leaves voluntarily tomorrow. All Mexican Government Secretaries and Consuls dismissed. 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 878, Doc. 879, and Doc. 880]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). do Same subject. Instruction to urge avoidance of anything which could be construed as a lack of courtesy to diplomatic representatives. Due regard should be had by Carranza for diplomatic usage and respect for diplomatic character of foreign representatives. 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, and Doc. 883]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman. (telegram). do Taxation. Bring Sr. Bonillas’s letter to the attention of General Carranza with the statement that this Government assumes that the stand taken by Sr. Bonillas does not have his concurrence. 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 1254, Doc. 1255, Doc. 1256, and Doc. 1257]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Aug. 23 Political affairs. Carranza states that nothing has been arranged regarding relations with Zapata, but intimates that good offices of United States might be effective in arranging a conference. 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, and Doc. 883]

Same to same (telegram). 1914. Aug. 23 Same subject. Quotes communication from Carranza asking that President Wilson be notified that he has assumed the Executive Authority of the Mexican Republic, in conformity with the Plan of Guadalupe; text of the Plan. 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, and Doc. 883]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). Aug. 24 Same subject. Carranza’s message has been brought to the attention of the President. Expresses hope for lasting peace, prosperity, and progress in Mexico. 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 884, Doc. 885, and Doc. 886]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Carranza has not assumed title of President, and proper address is First Chief in charge of the Executive Authority. 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 884, Doc. 885, and Doc. 886]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). Aug. 25 Same subject. The President will be pleased to render any assistance in his power in securing conference between Carranza and Zapata. This Government is ready to assist in every legitimate way to advance welfare of people of Mexico. 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 886, Doc. 887, Doc. 888, and Doc. 889]

Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Reports conference with Carranza concerning diplomatic corps. Has convinced him of necessity of showing due consideration, and he will notify corps of his having taken possession of the Executive Power. 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 884, Doc. 885, and Doc. 886]

Mr. Zubaran Capmany to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. As Confidential Agent of the Chief of the Constitutional Army of Mexico he informs this Government of the assumption of the Executive Power by Carranza. 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 886, Doc. 887, Doc. 888, and Doc. 889]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Aug. 26 Same subject. The attitude of Zapata toward Carranza is decidedly unfriendly; will meet him in conference at his own military camp. Carranza states that he will not go to the camp. Villa emissaries are with Zapata. 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 886, Doc. 887, Doc. 888, and Doc. 889]

1190 Mr. Bevan to Mr. Bryan Aug. 27 Protection of oil interests. Incloses a decree issued by Candido Aguilar, Governor of Vera Cruz, declaring null and void all leases, concessions, and contracts celebrated during the Huerto administration. 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 1160 and Doc. 1161]

217 Mr. Bryan to Sr. Oliveira (telegram). do Taxation. Demand has been made upon certain American companies to again pay mining taxes already paid to Huerta Government. Request that orders be issued against the exaction of double taxes. 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 1258, Doc. 1259, and Doc. 1260]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). Aug. 28 Protection of French interests. Instructs him to inquire as to the future attitude of General Carranza toward the Brothers of the Christian Schools. 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 1560, Doc. 1561, Doc. 1562, and Doc. 1563]

Memorandum to Mr. Zubaran Capmany. do Political affairs. Acknowledges note of the 25th instant. 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 890, Doc. 891, Doc. 892, and Doc. 893]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). do Same subject. Directs that he inform Carranza that an American named Hall is being sent to Mexico with the view of bringing about a meeting between Carranza and Zapata. The President is sending a personal representative, Mr. Fuller, to confer with Carranza. Directs that he meet them at Vera Cruz. 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 890, Doc. 891, Doc. 892, and Doc. 893]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Aug. 29 Same subject. Carranza wishes to arrange meeting with Zapata himself, but failing in this he will then use the good offices of the United States. 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 890, Doc. 891, Doc. 892, and Doc. 893]

Same to same (telegram) do Protection of French interests. States that the attitude of the present Governmental organization in Mexico is decidedly unfriendly toward all Catholic schools. It is not expected that schools will be permitted to reopen at any time in the near future. 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 1560, Doc. 1561, Doc. 1562, and Doc. 1563]

Same to same (telegram) do Taxation. Department’s objection concerning payment of mining taxes is sustained except where payment could have been made to Constitutionalists in territory occupied by them. 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 1258, Doc. 1259, and Doc. 1260]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Davis (telegram). do Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Directs endeavor to obtain postponement of loan said to have been imposed on A. A. Neil and J. L. Burt, Americans, at Guadalaiara. 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 1322, Doc. 1323, Doc. 1324, and Doc. 1325]

Mr. Bevan to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Aug. 31 Protection of American interests. About one hundred Americans have returned to Tampico, now destitute and seek financial assistance which has been refused. Suggests press notice advising against return to Tampico for work. 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 1106, Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, and Doc. 1109]

298 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher Sept. 1 Protection of British interests. Refers to his 524 of Aug. 6; instructs him to inform Villa that Benton property has been in charge of representative of estate and rents of tenants must be paid to representative. 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 1523, Doc. 1524, and Doc. 1525]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do. Political affairs. Carranza delegates sent to confer with Zapata have returned without accomplishing anything. Zapata says differences may be settled by signing of Plan of Ayala by Carranza; otherwise he will agree to nothing Villa has not first approved. 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 890, Doc. 891, Doc. 892, and Doc. 893]

General Obregon to Mr. Cobb. 1914. Sept. 1 Same subject. General Obregon acknowledges with friendly expressions a personal letter from Mr. Bryan. 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 893, Doc. 894, and Doc. 895]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). Sept. 2 Taxation. Inform General Carranza that this Government can not consent to the exception referred to in Consul’s telegram of the 29th ultimo. 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 1258, Doc. 1259, and Doc. 1260]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Bevan (telegram). Sept. 3 Protection of American interests. Approves action reported in his telegram of Aug. 31. Notice given to press. 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 1109, Doc. 1110, Doc. 1111, Doc. 1112, and Doc. 1113]

634 do. Protection of oil interests. Obtain information whether the decree issued by Governor Aguilar, releasing of oil lands, is intended to relate to future transactions only. 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 1161 and Doc. 1162]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Cobb (telegram). Sept. 4 Political affairs. The Department appreciates the friendly expressions contained in General Obregon’s note, copy of which has been sent to the President. 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 893, Doc. 894, and Doc. 895]

Mr. Fuller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Sept. 5 Same subject. Carranza disclaims intention of prolonging interim government, and has issued call for convention of governors and generals for Oct. 1, in accordance with plans of Guadalupe and Torreon to provide for permanent Government. Zapata adjustment paralyzed by refusal of Zapata to confer with Carranza except at former’s remote headquarters. Suggests President send a message to Zapata. 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 896, Doc. 897, and Doc. 898]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). Sept. 7 Same subject. Directs that he inform Zapata that this Government earnestly desires that he confer and cooperate with Constitutionalists in securing needed reforms; he should call on Carranza personally at Mexico City, or some intermediate place. Carranza should give guaranties of safe conduct. 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 896, Doc. 897, and Doc. 898]

Mr. Fuller to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Villa and Obregon sign joint programme for establishment of civil government; outlines of provision. Call for convention is unsatisfactory and new programme should be carried out. 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 896, Doc. 897, and Doc. 898]

Mr. da Gama to Mr. Bryan. Sept. 10 Severance of diplomatic relations. Acknowledges with measure his Aug. 18. 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 1007 and Doc. 1008]

508 Mr. Davis to Mr. Bryan do Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Refers to correspondence had with military governor of State and asks whether he should request exemption in certain cases of Mexican companies, stock in which is largely controlled by Americans. 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 1322, Doc. 1323, Doc. 1324, and Doc. 1325]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Sept. 11 Political affairs. Quotes translation of telegram sent by Obregon to Villa and Gonzalez concerning continued occupation of Vera Cruz by American troops, and suggesting communication to the Provisional President requesting that he take up question of evacuation of territory. 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 898, Doc. 899, and Doc. 900]

Same to same (telegram) do Same subject. Note from Minister for Foreign Affairs says that as Constitutionalists have taken over the government, he will be glad to receive any representations this Government may think proper to make. 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 898, Doc. 899, and Doc. 900]

Same to same (telegram) Sept. 12 Same subject. Attempts to come to agreement with Zapata without assistance of United States have resulted in failure and increased friction. 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 901, Doc. 902, Doc. 903, and Doc. 904]

Same to same (telegram) do Same subject. Quotes Villa’s reply to Obregon’s telegram concerning occupation of Vera Cruz. 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 901, Doc. 902, Doc. 903, and Doc. 904]

1210 Mr. Bevan to Mr. Bryan do Protection of oil interests. Incloses copy of letter to Governor Aguilar asking for an interpretation of his decree relating to the leasing of oil lands. 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 1163]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Sept. 14 Political affairs. Carranza is in open rupture with Zapata and does not desire interview with him. Zapata envoys will continue prisoners. Under the circumstances conference with Zapata would not have, approval of Carranza. 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 901, Doc. 902, Doc. 903, and Doc. 904]

Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Sept. 15 Same subject. Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs Fabela called regarding recognition of Mexican Government as now formed, and the evacuation of Vera Cruz. Suggests that Department’s views be made known. 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 901, Doc. 902, Doc. 903, and Doc. 904]

Mr. Garrison to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. The President has directed evacuation of Vera Cruz. Asks that Government at Mexico City be notified in order that appropriate official be designated to take city and customhouse. 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 904 and Doc. 905]

246 Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Olivera (telegram). 1914. Sept. 15 Same subject. Instruction to deliver Department’s message to Carranza through Mr. Silliman, notifying him of intention to evacuate Vera Cruz, and to turn over city and customhouse to appropriate officials to be designated. 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 906, Doc. 907, and Doc. 908]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Sept. 16 Same subject. Message regarding evacuation of Vera Cruz delivered, and gave greatest satisfaction. Reply being prepared. 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 906, Doc. 907, and Doc. 908]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Quotes part of a speech made at the Independence celebration commending President Wilson. 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 906, Doc. 907, and Doc. 908]

Mr. Hurst to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Sept. 17 Same subject. General Huerta and suite now in Barcelona. General Porfirio Diaz reported to have been there recently. 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 909, Doc. 910, Doc. 911, and Doc. 912]

General Villa to President Wilson (telegram). do Same subject. Expresses appreciation of President’s action in ordering evacuation of Vera Cruz. 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 909, Doc. 910, Doc. 911, and Doc. 912]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). do Same subject. Instruction to discourage any immediate requests for recognition. He will be advised whenever the President feels that the time is ripe for such action. 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 909, Doc. 910, Doc. 911, and Doc. 912]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Sillimar (telegram). do Same subject. Directed to confer with Carranza regarding evacuation of Vera Cruz. 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 909, Doc. 910, Doc. 911, and Doc. 912]

151 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Note from Carranza designates General Aguilar, Governor of State of Vera Cruz, to receive port. 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 912, Doc. 913, and Doc. 914]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Sept. 18 Same subject. General Aguilar appointed to receive entire Federal and municipal government of Vera Cruz, and is empowered to name persons who are to assume charge of various posts. Aguilar desires to be informed when to proceed, Mr. Silliman to accompany him, if Department approves. 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 912, Doc. 913, and Doc. 914]

Same to same (telegram). do Taxation. All questions regarding payment of taxes will hereafter be equitably adjusted at the General Stamp Office at Mexico City. 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 1260, Doc. 1261, Doc. 1262, and Doc. 1263]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Garrison do Political affairs. Incloses copies of correspondence concerning evacuation of Vera Cruz, and asks to be informed when it will be convenient for General Funston to receive General Aguilar. 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 915 and Doc. 916]

Mr. Garrison to Mr. Bryan. Sept. 21 Same subject. The President desires that the following questions be taken up with the Mexican Government before evacuation of Vera Cruz takes place: Further payment of duties on goods already passed through customhouse; protection of refugees; and disposal of customs funds. 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 915 and Doc. 916]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Carother (telegram). s Sept. 22 Same subject. Acknowledges Villa’s telegram to the President, which was received with much pleasure. 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 916 and Doc. 917]

252 Mr. Lansing to Mr. de Oliveira. do Same subject. Asks that he take up with Carranza questions relating to exaction of further customs duties, or local and municipal taxes, imposition of fines on Mexicans employed in connection with civil government of city since American occupation, and protection of refugees. Assurances in definite form should be given as soon as possible in order to prevent delay in evacuation of Vera Cruz. 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 917, Doc. 918, and Doc. 919]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of American interests. Asks whether transportation to the United States shall be furnished certain destitute Americans who declined to leave when chartered ships were available. 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 1109, Doc. 1110, Doc. 1111, Doc. 1112, and Doc. 1113]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Garrison Sept. 23 Political affairs. Acknowledges letter of 21st and encloses copy of telegram of 22d to Mr. de Oliveira. 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 917, Doc. 918, and Doc. 919]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan do Same subject. Incloses copy of his communication to Carranza regarding evacuation of Vera Cruz, and reply made thereto. 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 919 and Doc. 920]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Break between Villa and Carranza hopeless. Villa disowns Carranza as First Chief and will not participate in convention, which is expected to be held as announced. At instance of Carranza, Mr. Silliman is coming to Washington, leaving Mr. Belt to represent him. 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Canada (telegram). Sept. 25 Protection of American interests. Directed to decline all applications for assistance and transportation. Inform Consul, Tampico. 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 1109, Doc. 1110, Doc. 1111, Doc. 1112, and Doc. 1113]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Hanna (telegram). do Same subject. Directs that he decline all further applications for assistance and transportation, and to so inform all Consuls in his district. (Same to Vera Cruz.) 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 1109, Doc. 1110, Doc. 1111, Doc. 1112, and Doc. 1113]

1041 Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan. 1914. Sept. 25 Protection of French interests. Encloses copy of decree of Governor of Vera Cruz regarding the expulsion of foreign clergymen. 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 1564, Doc. 1565, and Doc. 1566]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan. (telegram). Sept. 26 Political affairs. Quotes telegram from Villa to certain Generals in Mexico City setting forth reasons for repudiating Carranza, and suggesting, as means to avoid armed conflict, that Carranza deliver Provisional Government to Sr. Calderon. Villa says he would not accent Presidency. 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922]

165 Sr. Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Sept. 28 Protection of mining interests. The Mexican Government, on Aug. 29, issued a decree canceling all mining titles and declaring null and void all proceedings relating to the acquiring of mining claims started during the Huerta administration. 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 1176, Doc. 1177, and Doc. 1178]

Mr. Garrett to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of American interests. Says a few destitute Americans are coming from Mexico and asks whether funds are available for transportation. 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1113, Doc. 1114, Doc. 1115, and Doc. 1116]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Garrett (telegram). Sept. 29 Same subject. Informs him of instructions sent to consuls discontinuing assistance to refugees. 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1113, Doc. 1114, Doc. 1115, and Doc. 1116]

Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Severance of diplomatic relations. Desires to take a vacation and makes suggestions in connection therewith. 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 1009, Doc. 1010, and Doc. 1011]

43 Same to same do Protection of mining interests. Incloses translation of circular issued Sept. 3, making effective decree of Aug. 29, relating to mining titles. 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 1176, Doc. 1177, and Doc. 1178]

Mr. Belt to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Gives salient points in Carranza’s answer to demand by Villa’s generals for his resignation. 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 923 and Doc. 924]

Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan Sept. 30 Same subject. Incloses manifesto issued at Chihuahua by Villa against the Provisional Government of Carranza. 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 923 and Doc. 924]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Bevan do Protection of oil interests. Department awaits reply of Governor Aguilar to the inquiry addressed to him. 714 [Pg. 714 includes portions of Doc. 1163, Doc. 1164, and Doc. 1165]

Mr. Germon to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Oct. 1 Forced 1oans imposed on American citizens. Local State Government has issued decree declaring forced loan. 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 1322, Doc. 1323, Doc. 1324, and Doc. 1325]

265 Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira. do. Severance of diplomatic relations. Replies to his Sept. 29 and makes suggestions as to disposal of American interests in his absence. 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 1009, Doc. 1010, and Doc. 1011]

267 Same to same (telegram) do Political affairs. Department anxiously awaits reply to its telegram of Sept. 22, concerning guaranties against exaction of further import duties, etc., upon evaucation of Vera Cruz. 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 924, Doc. 925, and Doc. 926]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Oct. 2 Same subject. Convention of generals will adjourn to Aguas Calientes beginning on the 5th and lasting until the 10th. Carranza approves program and is willing to abide by decision of the convention. 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 924, Doc. 925, and Doc. 926]

176 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Oct. 5 Same subject. Foreign Office has not replied to notes based on Department’s telegram of Sept. 22, but newspapers announce report that Government will ask whether evacuation order is still in force and to fix date. 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, and Doc. 929]

178 Same to same (telegram) do Same subject. Two notes received from Foreign Office. One stating that convention refuses to accept resignation of Carranza, and other that Carranza has given instructions to Gen. Aguilar to receive port of Vera Cruz and appoint representatives. Carranza asks that date for evacuation be fixed. 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, and Doc. 929]

52 Sr. Oliveira to Mr. Bryan Oct. 6 Taxation. Refers to Department’s No. 217 of Aug. 27. The Foreign Office states that orders have been issued to the tax collector at Guanajuato not to collect double taxes from the American Mining and Milling Co. 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 1260, Doc. 1261, Doc. 1262, and Doc. 1263]

54 Same to same Oct. 7 Revolutionary claims. Incloses copy of claims decree issued by Carranza on May 10, 1913, with suggestion that it be given publicity. 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 1020 and Doc. 1021]

281 Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). do Political affairs. Quotes message from Mr. Silliman for delivery to Mr. Fabela regarding questions arising in connection with evacuation of Vera Cruz, and asking clear and explicit statement from Carranza. 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, and Doc. 929]

158 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Davis Oct. 8 Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Approves action in making representations against forced loan imposed upon National Cracker Co. 1 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 1325, Doc. 1326, and Doc. 1327]

Mr. Riaño to Mr. Bryan 1914. Oct. 9 Protection of Spanish interests. Asks that warships take up question of protection of Spaniards at Mazatlan and Acapulco. 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 1440, Doc. 1441, and Doc. 1442]

Same to same do Same subject. Requests warship be sent for protection of Spaniards at Matzatlan. 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 1440, Doc. 1441, and Doc. 1442]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Daniels Oct. 10 Same subject. Encloses copy of note from Spanish Ambassador and requests orders be sent to have naval vessel go to Mazatlan to investigate. 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 1440, Doc. 1441, and Doc. 1442]

Same to same Oct. 12 Same subject. Encloses copy of note from Spanish Ambassador and asks that naval vessel be sent to Acapulco to investigate. 828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 1442, Doc. 1443, and Doc. 1444]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Oct. 14 Political affairs. Temporary organization of convention made permanent. Convention will not take up question of the First Chief until Zapata is fully represented. 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 929, Doc. 930, Doc. 931, and Doc. 932]

187 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Foreign Office advises that note outlines in Department’s telegram 281 of Oct. 7 has been sent to convention of governors and generals at Aguas Calientes for action. 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 929, Doc. 930, Doc. 931, and Doc. 932]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Oct. 15 Same subject. Convention decides to telegraph General Zapata and Governor Maytorena to suspend hostilities. Committee appointed to invite Zapata to attend convention. 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 929, Doc. 930, Doc. 931, and Doc. 932]

Mr. Roosevelt to Mr. Bryan do Protection of Spanish interests. Quotes telegram from Commander of Pacific Fleet concerning conditions at Mazatlan, Acapulco, La Paz, and Santa Rosalia. 828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 1442, Doc. 1443, and Doc. 1444]

297 Mr. Lansing to Sr. Oliveira (telegram). Oct. 16 Protection of mining interests. American citizens who acquired mining titles in good faith and in conformity with Mexican laws during the Huerta regime should not be bound by the decree annulling such proceedings. 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 1178 and Doc. 1179]

Mr. Jusserand to Mr. Lansing. Oct. 17 Protection of French interests. Requests protection of the employees of the Boleo Company at Santa Rosalia. 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 1564, Doc. 1565, and Doc. 1566]

Mr. Davis to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Forced loan imposed on American citizens. Government threatens attachment Company Galletera Nacional. notwithstanding protest. 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 1325, Doc. 1326, and Doc. 1327]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Oct. 18 Political affairs. Villa says that he will support any provisional President selected by convention except Carranza. 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 932, Doc. 933, Doc. 934, Doc. 935, and Doc. 936]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Daniels. Oct. 19 Protection of Spanish interests. Suggests that naval vessel at Mazatlan be asked to report as to welfare of Spanish Consular Agent. 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 1445 and Doc. 1446]

Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan do Same subject. Outlines report received from Parral concerning arrest and subsequent release of Antonio Larfucea, a Spanish subject, upon payment of $2,500, and occupation of Parral by Villa upon withdrawal of Ilerrera. 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 1445 and Doc. 1446]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Jusserand. do Protection of French interests. Refers to his note of Oct. 17 and informs him of measures taken by American naval vessels to give protection to foreigners. 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 1564, Doc. 1565, and Doc. 1566]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). do Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Asks that appropriate authorities be requested to withdraw demand for payment of tax imposed on Company Galletera Nacional. 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 1328, Doc. 1329, and Doc. 1330]

301 Same to same (telegram) do Protection of mining interests. His No. 43 of Sept. 29 did not enclose decree of Aug. 29, which is desired. 725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 1179, Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, and Doc. 1182]

1248 Mr. Bevan to Mr. Bryan Oct. 20 Protection of oil interests. Incloses copy of letter from Governor Aguilar, replying to his inquiry relating to the decree of oil land leases. The Governor strongly implies that the decree is retroactive. 714 [Pg. 714 includes portions of Doc. 1163, Doc. 1164, and Doc. 1165]

168 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Young. Oct. 22 Forced loan imposed on American citizens. Instructs that there are no treaty provisions bearing upon payment by Americans of contributions or taxes in Mexico. Informs him concerning payment of such contributions or taxes levied in accordance with laws of Mexico. 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 1328, Doc. 1329, and Doc. 1330]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Carranza has not heard from convention: regarding Vera Cruz. He considers it inexpedient to issue statement such as desired by the Department, but says no one will be molested on account of service rendered Americans and no back duties or taxes will be collected. 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 932, Doc. 933, Doc. 934, Doc. 935, and Doc. 936]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. He has been asked whether Department’s telegram of Oct. 7 is an expression of its desires or a stipulation for the evacuation of Vera Cruz. 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 932, Doc. 933, Doc. 934, Doc. 935, and Doc. 936]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Oct. 23 Same subject. Villa says Carranza was willing to submit resignation so long as he believed that he controlled convention, but when a representative convention was convened his ambition came to light and now he will stop at nothing. Villa is awaiting action of convention. 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 932, Doc. 933, Doc. 934, Doc. 935, and Doc. 936]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Carranza informs convention that he will not submit his resignation, and will deliver Executive power only to President elected by the people. 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 936, Doc. 937, Doc. 938, and Doc. 939]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Canova (telegram). Oct. 24 Same subject. Mr. Silliman’s telegram of Oct. 7 to Mr. Fabela is restatement of Department’s desires as expressed in its telegram to Brazilian Minister on Sept. 22, copy of which should be furnished convention. 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 936, Doc. 937, Doc. 938, and Doc. 939]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Oct. 26 Same subject. Outlines proclamation by Carranza replying to Chihuahua proclamation of Villa. He charges Villa with insincerity. No mention of convention or Vera Cruz. 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 936, Doc. 937, Doc. 938, and Doc. 939]

191 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Oct. 27 Same subject. Is sending by mail note from Foreign Office concerning guaranties desired by Department regarding evacuation of Vera Cruz. 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 939 and Doc. 940]

Admiral Blue to Mr. Bryan. do Protection of Spanish interests. Quotes telegrams reporting arrest of Spanish Consular Agent at Mazatlan. 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 1446, Doc. 1447, and Doc. 1448]

66 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan. Oct. 28 Political affairs. Incloses note referred to in his telegram 191 of the 27th. Says Carranza did not anticipate that Department would make conditions for evacuation of Vera Cruz. Amplest instructions have been given Aguilar, Governor of Vera Cruz. Carranza can not issue manifesto or make statement as desired. Asks that date for evacuation be set. 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 941]

192 Same to same (telegram). do Protection of mining interests. Mexican Government has informed him that mining regulations shall apply. 725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 1179, Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, and Doc. 1182]

65 do Same subject. Quotes note from the Foreign Office reiterating that all decisions passed under the Huerta regime are null and void. 725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 1179, Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, and Doc. 1182]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Oct. 29 Political affairs. Carranza’s communication to convention received. He will not attend or send delegate, and will not recognize sovereignty of convention until informed of extent of sovereignty. “Willing to retire if Villa and Zapata also retire. Accuses Villa of desire to dictate naming of the President. 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 942 and Doc. 943]

Same to same (telegram) Oct. 30 Same subject. Outlines report of committee to which Carranza’s communication was referred. 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 942 and Doc. 943]

68 Sr. Oliveira to Mr. Bryan. do Protection of mining interests. Encloses translation of decree of Aug. 29. relating to mining titles. 726 [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 1182, Doc. 1183, and Doc. 1184]

311 Mr. Lansing to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). Nov. 1 Political affairs. Bequests him to inform Acting Secretary for Foreign Affairs concerning position of this Government regarding guaranties requested of Carranza, and to say that date of evacuation will be fixed when desires of this Government outlined in its telegram of Sept. 22 are met. 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 944 and Doc. 945]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Canova (telegram). Nov. 2 Same subject. Asks that paraphrase of Department’s telegram of Nov. 1 to Mr. de Oliveira be brought to the attention of the convention. 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 944 and Doc. 945]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Convention declares General Gutierrez, Governor of San Luis Potosi, Provisional President for 20 da vs. 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948]

Same to same (telegram). do Same subject. Committee named to notify Carranza of convention’s action. Villa, who reiterates allegiance to Gutierrez, will also be informed. 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 3 Same subject. Gutierrez says that upon taking oath as Provisional President he will issue proclamation desired by Department regarding Vera Cruz. Villa will support proclamation. 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Bevan (telegram). do Protection of oil interests. Inform appropriate authorities that it is the view of this Government that the decree of Governor Aguilar, declaring null and void all leases, concessions, and contracts celebrated under the Huerta regime, should not be applied to American citizens. 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 1166 and Doc. 1167]

313 Mr. Lansing to Mr. Oliveira (telegram). Nov. 4 Protection of mining interests. Inform appropriate authorities that this Government can not submit to the application of the decree of Aug. 29 to the rights of American citizens acquired during the Huerta administration. 726 [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 1182, Doc. 1183, and Doc. 1184]

Mr. Davis to Mr. Bryan 1914. Nov. 5 Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Discusses articles of concession of the Compañía Galletera Nacional. 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 1328, Doc. 1329, and Doc. 1330]

1277 Mr. Bevan to Mr. Bryan. do Protection of oil interests. Incloses copy of letter to Governor Aguilar re oil lands in Vera Cruz, and states that it would be unwise to press General Aguilar at this time to decide the question. 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 1166 and Doc. 1167]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Carranza insists on conditions. Obregon asks for extension of time for Carranza. Decided to send ultimatum to Carranza demanding delivery of Executive power by Nov. 10 to Gutierrez, who takes oath of office to-morrow. 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 949, Doc. 950, Doc. 951, and Doc. 952]

Memorandum from German Embassy. Nov. 7 Protection of German interests. Quotes report of Oct. 28 from German Legation at Mexico City concerning confiscation of estate of German Vice Consul at Guanajuato, and incloses copy of order of confiscation issued by Villa. 895 [Pg. 895 includes portions of Doc. 1600, Doc. 1601, and Doc. 1602]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Same subject. Directs use of best efforts to have property of German Vice Consul at Guanajuata returned. 895 [Pg. 895 includes portions of Doc. 1600, Doc. 1601, and Doc. 1602]

Mr. Bryan to certain consular officers (telegram). Nov. 9 Severance of diplomatic relations. Instructions in regard to departure from their posts. 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 1009, Doc. 1010, and Doc. 1011]

532 Mr. Davis to Mr. Bryan do Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Loan imposed on Compañia Galletera Nacional has been abrogated. 781 [Pg. 781 includes portions of Doc. 1330, Doc. 1331, and Doc. 1332]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Carranza issues manifesto disowning convention and its proceedings. 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 949, Doc. 950, Doc. 951, and Doc. 952]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Committee sent to see Carranza telegraph Gutierrez that Carranza asks more time and states willingness to deliver Executive power if convention elects Provisional President not for twenty days but until Constitutional President is elected and inaugurated. Request is inadmissible. 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 949, Doc. 950, Doc. 951, and Doc. 952]

201 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 10 Same subject. Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, transmits note embodying decrees issued by Carranza declaring that repayment of customs dues or taxes will not be demanded, and that general amnesty is granted persons employed in administering affairs at Vera Cruz. Asks that evacuation be not delayed. 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 949, Doc. 950, Doc. 951, and Doc. 952]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Convention declares Carranza in rebellion. 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 952, Doc. 953, Doc. 954, and Doc. 955]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 11 Protection of German interests. Says Villa has ordered investigation and return of property of German Vice Consul. 895 [Pg. 895 includes portions of Doc. 1600, Doc. 1601, and Doc. 1602]

203 Same to same (telegram) do Revolutionary claims. Carranza has issued regulations requiring that claimants prove their nationality. Requests instruction. 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 1021, Doc. 1022, and Doc. 1023]

320 Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). Nov. 12 Same subject. Reply to his No. 203 of Nov. 11. The Department considers its statement that claimants are American citizens should be accepted as prima facie correct, subject to rebutting evidence by Mexican authorities. 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 1021, Doc. 1022, and Doc. 1023]

Mr. Jusserand to Mr. Bryan do Protection of French interests. Informs Department of the inimical policy of the new Mexican Government toward the National Bank of Mexico, a large quantity of the stock of which is owned by French holders, and requests support of representations to be made to Gen. Carranza’s Government by the French Charge” d’Affaires at Mexico City. 883 [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 1566 and Doc. 1567]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 13 Political affairs. Carranza generals appear to have allied themselves with him against convention. Convention committed to Villa, appointing him Commander-in-Chief. 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 952, Doc. 953, Doc. 954, and Doc. 955]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Transmits note from General Gutierrez outlining events since the elimination of Huerta, and announcing purpose of new government under his charge to move to Mexico City. Expresses hope for good relations with United States, and for evacuation of Vera Cruz. 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 952, Doc. 953, Doc. 954, and Doc. 955]

323 Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). do Same subject. Instruction to give to Carranza, and make public, a statement that as Carranza and the convention have given assurances and guaranties requested, it is the purpose of this Government to withdraw from Vera Cruz on Nov. 23. 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 955 and Doc. 956]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). do Same subject and tenor, for delivery to Villa 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 955 and Doc. 956]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canova (telegram). do Same subject and tenor, for delivery to Gutierrez 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 955 and Doc. 956]

Mr. Bryan to certain American missions. do Same subject and tenor 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 955 and Doc. 956]

Mr. Bryan to certain foreign missions 1914. Nov. 13 Same subject and tenor 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 955 and Doc. 956]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 14 Same subject. President Gutierrez has set hour for hostilities to begin. The convention has appointed a permanent commission. 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 956, Doc. 957, and Doc. 958]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan. Nov. 15 Political affairs. Carranza will deliver the Executive power to the Provisional President. 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 956, Doc. 957, and Doc. 958]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canova (telegram). Nov. 16 Same subject. Inform General Gutierrez that his telegram of Nov. 13 was brought to attention of the President. Sentiments expressed therein appreciated and it is hoped that lasting peace in Mexico will be brought about. 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 956, Doc. 957, and Doc. 958]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Carranza offers to resign military command to Gonzalez. He proposes that Villa resign to Gutierrez, and that he and Villa retire to Habana. Also proposes that convention reconvene at Mexico City and elect Provisional President, to whom Gutierrez and Gonzalez shall deliver forces. 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 959, Doc. 960, and Doc. 961]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Carranza repudiates yesterday’s offer and makes a new proposal for delivery of Executive power. Villa starts for Mexico City to-morrow. 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 959, Doc. 960, and Doc. 961]

82 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan do Same subject. Transmits two notes from the Foreign Office regarding the evacuation of Vera Cruz. 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 959, Doc. 960, and Doc. 961]

The British Embassy to the Department of State. Nov. 17 Protection of British interests. Calls attention to serious state of affairs reported to exist at Tampico, and asks that naval vessel be sent to protect British lives and interests and to afford refuge in event of danger. 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 1523, Doc. 1524, and Doc. 1525]

1602 Mr. Lansing to Mr. Oliveira. Nov. 18 Protection of mining interests. Acknowledges his No. 65. 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 1184, Doc. 1185, Doc. 1186, and Doc. 1187]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Daniels. Nov. 19 Protection of British interests. Informs of contents of memorandum of the 17th from the British Embassy and suggests that protection be accorded foreigners at Tampico. 866 [Pg. 866 includes portions of Doc. 1525, Doc. 1526, and Doc. 1527]

Mr. Belt to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Obregon issues formal declaration of war against Villa, and expects to leave for Salina Cruz on the 21st. 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 961 and Doc. 962]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). .do Same subject. After conference between Gutierrez and Villa, it was decided that Villa remain at head of Convention troops. 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965]

Mr. Breckinridge to General Funston (telegram). Nov. 20” Same subject. Order to evacuate Vera Cruz on Nov. 23, with directions for disposition of funds and records. He is to avoid any declaration which might be interpreted as committing this Government to recognition of any faction. 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965]

Mr. Riaño to Mr. Bryan. do Protection of Spanish interests. Requests that American Consular Agent at Tampico be permitted to use own judgment as to first reporting to Department before taking action in cases seeming to require prompt action. 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 1446, Doc. 1447, and Doc. 1448]

Mr. Daniels to Mr. Lansing. do Protection of British interests. Acknowledges his Nov. 19. 866 [Pg. 866 includes portions of Doc. 1525, Doc. 1526, and Doc. 1527]

1605 Mr. Lansing to Mr. Oliveira. Nov. 21 Protection of mining interests. Acknowledges his No. 43. 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 1184, Doc. 1185, Doc. 1186, and Doc. 1187]

557 Mr. Letcher to Mr. Bryan. do Same subject. Requests instructions how to advise American citizens in regard to decree of Aug. 29, 1914. relating to mining titles. 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 1184, Doc. 1185, Doc. 1186, and Doc. 1187]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 22 Political affairs. General Blanco assumes charge in Mexico City and appoints necessary sub officials. Outlines action had at conference of generals, elimination of Carranza and Villa and formation of provisional government. 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965]

218 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. General Blanco takes full command of the federal district. 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 965, Doc. 966, Doc. 967, and Doc. 968]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 23 Same subject. Transports have left Vera Cruz. No friction between American and Constitutionalist troops. 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 965, Doc. 966, Doc. 967, and Doc. 968]

Mr. Bonney to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. San Luis Potosi is now the temporary-capital of Mexico. Convention troops have advanced easterly and southerly. 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 965, Doc. 966, Doc. 967, and Doc. 968]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 26 Same subject. Constitutionalist Government establishing offices at Vera Cruz. General Aguilar extends congratulations upon orderly evacuation and clean condition of city. Carranza, Obregon and Alvarado announced to arrive to-day. 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, and Doc. 972]

Mr. Riaño to Mr. Bryan 1914. Nov. 26 Protection of Spanish interests. Calls attention to murder of Spaniards and plunder of property in Mexico City, despite assurances. 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1448, Doc. 1449, Doc. 1450, and Doc. 1451]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 27 Political affairs. President Gutierrez at Queretaro awaiting developments. Villa expected to enter Mexico City. General Blanco reported to have withdrawn troops from Mexico City. 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, and Doc. 972]

7 Mr. Willard to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of Spanish interests. Quotes telegram received by Foreign Office from Spanish Minister, Mexico City, concerning outrages on Spaniards. 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1448, Doc. 1449, Doc. 1450, and Doc. 1451]

336 Mr. Lansing to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). Nov. 28 Same subject. Ask investigation of reported outrages on Spaniards by Zapata forces, and requests representations be made if reports confirmed. 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1448, Doc. 1449, Doc. 1450, and Doc. 1451]

227 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 29 Same subject. Replies to telegram of 28th and says only few isolated cases of violence by irresponsible bands in suburbs, and that Zapatista authorities are trying best to redress damage done. 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 1451, Doc. 1452, Doc. 1453, and Doc. 1454]

Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. Carranza issues decree ordering transfer of government offices to places dictated by circumstances, National Government remaining at Vera Cruz. 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, and Doc. 972]

227 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Zapata arrived 27th. Angeles arrived on 28th with advance guard and is awaiting Villa, who has issued general order according full guaranties to all. 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, and Doc. 972]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Miller (telegram). Nov. 30 Protection of Spanish interests. Instructs that in cases calling for prompt action friendly offices may be extended Spaniards prior to receiving Department’s instructions in particular cases. 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 1451, Doc. 1452, Doc. 1453, and Doc. 1454]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Willard. Dec. 1 Same subject. Refers to his No. 7 of Nov. 27, and gives substance of telegram from Brazilian Minister at Mexico City. (Also communicated to Spanish Ambassador.) 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 1451, Doc. 1452, Doc. 1453, and Doc. 1454]

1412 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Jusserand. Dec. 2 Protection of French interests. States reasons why it is not advisable for American Government to make representations to the Mexican authorities in the sense indicated in his note of Nov. 12. 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 1568, Doc. 1569, and Doc. 1570]

Mr. Riaño to Mr. Bryan Dec. 4 Protection of Spanish interests. Reports cutting of railway between Vera Cruz and Mexico City and requests good offices with Carranza for protection of certain merchandise being shipped to Mexico City for Spaniards and other foreigners. 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 1454, Doc. 1455, and Doc. 1456]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canada (telegram). Dec. 5 Same subject. Requests that good offices be used with Carranza for safe arrival of goods mentioned by Spanish Ambassador. 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 1454, Doc. 1455, and Doc. 1456]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. The Permanent Commission to call full Convention for Jan. 1, thirty Zapata delegates to participate. Commission criticizes Gutierrez for some appointments. 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 973, Doc. 974, and Doc. 975]

Mr. Bevan to Mr. Bryan Dec. 8 Protection of Spanish interests. Reports shooting at Tampico of Vincente Vidal and Eduardo Sabugal, Spanish subjects, and detention of Julian Zorilla. Suggests Carranza be requested to release the latter. (Transmitted through Vera Cruz Consulate.) 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 1457, Doc. 1458, and Doc. 1459]

Mr. Canova to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Political affairs. President Gutierrez, accompanied by Villa and number of members of Convention entered city Dec. 3. Villa and Zapata have conference at Xochimilco on Dec. 4. Villa and Zapata forces enter capital on Dec. 6. 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 973, Doc. 974, and Doc. 975]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canada (telegram). Dec. 9 Firing across the boundary. Directs that he inform Carranza that conditions along border at Naco are becoming serious. Several Americans killed and wounded by shots fired across border. Urge that Carranza instruct those under him to avoid further violations, otherwise it will be duty of this Government to take steps necessary for protection of American lives. Repeat to Silliman for attention of Gutierrez. 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 1012 and Doc. 1013]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canada (telegram). Dec. 10 Protection of Spanish interests. Directs that he request Carranza for reason execution of Vidal and Sabugal, and ask that no summary action be taken against Zorrilla. 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 1457, Doc. 1458, and Doc. 1459]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Riaño. do Same subject. Informs him of Vidal, Sabugal, and Zorrilla cases. 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 1457, Doc. 1458, and Doc. 1459]

1315 Mr. Bevan to Mr. Bryan Dec. 11 Same subject. Makes report concerning Vidal, Sabugal. and Zorrilla. 835 [Pg. 835 includes portions of Doc. 1459 and Doc. 1460]

Mr. Riaño to Mr. Bryan do Same subject. Acknowledges note concerning Vidal, Sabugal, and Zorrilla, and expresses hope that no efforts will be spared to save the latter. 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 1460 and Doc. 1461]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Dec. 11 Firing across the boundary. Encloses note from President Gutierrez to Convention Commander at Naco directing that serious situation be remedied. 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 1012 and Doc. 1013]

Mr. Capmany to Mr. Bryan Dec. 12 Same subject. Discusses conditions at Naco and says that shots reaching American territory come from the forces of Governor Maytorena, and suggests that representations be made to him. 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 1013 and Doc. 1014]

1316 Mr. Bevan to Mr. Bryan. do Taxation. Villa authorities are demanding payment of taxes imposed by the Carranza Government. Suggests that the Department endeavor to have Carranza send a sufficient force to protect the oil fields and relieve companies from double tax. 781 [Pg. 781 includes portions of Doc. 1330, Doc. 1331, and Doc. 1332]

do Protection of Spanish interests. Says military authorities advise that Zorrilla will be allowed to leave the country. (Communicated to Spanish Ambassador Dec. 14.) 837 [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 1461, Doc. 1462, and Doc. 1463]

1085 Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan. Dec. 13 Firing across the boundary. Encloses reply of Carranza to representations concerning the Naco situation. Reviews conditions and says that any use of force by this Government would be looked upon as an act of hostility. 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 1014 and Doc. 1015]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Silliman (telegram). do Political affairs. Instruction to do his utmost to prevent executions of political prisoners and harm to religious orders. 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 973, Doc. 974, and Doc. 975]

23 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Letcher. Dec. 14 Protection of mining interests. Informs him of representations made to the Carranza Government in regard to decree of Aug. 29, 1914, relating to mining titles. 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 1187 and Doc. 1188]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Carothers (telegram). Dec. 15 Forced loans imposed on American citizens. Directs that Villa be asked whether Pelaez is his representative; and, if so, to order withdrawal of demand against Perm Mexico Oil Company. 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 1332 and Doc. 1333]

Mr. Arredondo to Mr. Bryan. Dec. 16 Political affairs. Encloses copy of decree issued by Carranza outlining the political program of the Constitutionalist Government under the Plan of Guadalupe. 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 975 and Doc. 976]

360 Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). do Same subject. Quotes for the information of General Gutierrez and in order that he may know the President’s earnest desires in the premises, telegram of July 23 sent to Mr. Silliman at Tampico and to Mr. Carothers at Torreon. 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 976, Doc. 977, and Doc. 978]

1095 Mr. Canada to Mr. Bryan Dec. 18 Protection of Spanish interests. Encloses replies to representations made to Carranza concerning cases of Vidal, Sabugal, and Zorrilla, from which it appears that Carranza desires matter taken up by duly accredited Spanish representative at Mexico City or Vera Cruz. 837 [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 1461, Doc. 1462, and Doc. 1463]

241 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Dec. 19 Political affairs. Reports conference with Gutierrez and delivery of telegram of 16th. Gutierrez in complete accord with suggestions. 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 976, Doc. 977, and Doc. 978]

1323 Mr. Bevan to Mr. Bryan. do Forced loans. Reports the demoralized state of the Tampico oil industry due to the demands of Pelaez and others. 783 [Pg. 783 includes portions of Doc. 1333 and Doc. 1334]

Mr. Carothers to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Firing across the boundary. Reports conference with Maytorena concerning conditions at Naco. If port of Naco were closed he could withdraw with assurance that forces under General Hill could not continue securing munitions. 652 [Pg. 652 includes portions of Doc. 1015 and Doc. 1016]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Dec. 20 Political affairs. Provisional President informs him that another effort is being made to get Villa to resign. As Carranza will not resign, they expect eventually to drive him out. 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 978, Doc. 979, Doc. 980, Doc. 981, and Doc. 982]

Mr. Bevan to Mr. Bryan Dec. 22 Protection of Spanish interests. Reports release of Zorrilla upon payment of 10,000 pesos and condition he leave Mexico. (Communicated to Spanish Ambassador, Dec. 24.) 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 1463, Doc. 1464, and Doc. 1465]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Dec. 23 Political affairs. Gutierrez announces, after interview with Villa, that the latter will remain in the city indefinitely. 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 978, Doc. 979, Doc. 980, Doc. 981, and Doc. 982]

251 Sr. Oliveira to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Protection of mining interests. The Provisional Government has issued a decree extending the time for the revalidation of mining titles until Mar. 31. 1915. 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 1188 and Doc. 1189]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Canada (telegram). Dec. 24 Taxation. Request Carranza to send sufficient force to Tamapache to protect oil companies from imposition of double taxes. 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 1334, Doc. 1335, and Doc. 1336]

376 Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). 1914. Dec. 26. Political affairs. Say to General Gutierrez that the President heartily approves of order directing generals to abstain from summary executions, and to urge upon Villa acceptance of order as best means of strengthening Provisional Government 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 978, Doc. 979, Doc. 980, Doc. 981, and Doc. 982]

375 Same to same (telegram) do Firing across the boundary. Instruction to call upon President Gutierrez and General Villa and obtain, if possible, instruction to Governor Maytorena to carry out agreement with General Hill concerning evacuation of Naco. Text of agreement. If ratified and carried out, this agreement will stop fighting and relieve conditions on the border. 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 1016 and Doc. 1017]

Mr. Llorente to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. As confidential agent of the Provisional Government states that Villa will act in harmony with suggestions concerning Naco. 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 1017, Doc. 1018, and Doc. 1019]

378 Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Oliveira (telegram). Dec. 27 Same subject. Directs that Villa be informed of this Government’s appreciation of his friendly interest concerning the agreement in regard to cessation of firing along the international border. 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 1017, Doc. 1018, and Doc. 1019]

257 Mr. de Oliveira to Mr. Mr. Bryan (telegram). Dec. 28 Same subject. Quotes answer received from Villa expressing willingness to accept special arrangement to prevent firing across international border. 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 1017, Doc. 1018, and Doc. 1019]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Dec. 29 Political affairs. Rupture between President Gutierrez on the one hand and Villa and Zapata on the other has begun. Arrests continue; prominent citizens executed by Zapata commander at Pachuca. Gutierrez issues circular letter to generals asking that arrests and executions by subordinates be prevented. Some members of convention leave for San Luis Potosi and will convoke new convention. Villiata and Zapata elements hold convention at Mexico City. 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 978, Doc. 979, Doc. 980, Doc. 981, and Doc. 982]

Same to same (telegram) Dec. 30 Same subject. The rupture in his Dec. 29 confirmed through Zapatista sources. Convention will meet at Mexico City Jan. 1. 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 982, Doc. 983, and Doc. 984]

1615 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Oliveira. do Protection of mining interests. Approves his course of action in regard to the decree invalidating mining titles. 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191]

Mr. Silliman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Dec. 31 Political affairs. If convention meets on Jan. 1 Zapata’ element will endeavor to dominate, and support of Villa is expected. Supporters of President expect unlooked-for strength in his behalf. Rumored Villa will declare himself dictator. 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 982, Doc. 983, and Doc. 984]

morocco.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

Mr. Jusserand to Mr. Bryan. 1913. Jan. 8 French Protectorate in Morocco. Transmits text of Franco-Moroccan Protectorate Treaty, signed at Fez. Mar. 30, 1912, and asks adhesion of the United States thereto. 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 1628 and Doc. 1629]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Jusserand. Jan. 22 Same subject. Acknowledges note of 8th instant, and gives reasons why the United States must refrain from expression of opinion on the treaty. Reviews part of treaty and states understanding on which this Government would view with favor reforms which French Protectorate contemplate introducing into Morocco. 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 1628 and Doc. 1629]

Mr. de la Rocca to Mr. Bryan Oct. 7 Same subject. Incloses copy of Official Bulletin of Morocco Protectorate promulgating new judiciary system in French zone, together with decree relating to that organization, and asks that American citizens be placed under new jurisdiction. 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 1629 and Doc. 1630]

Mr. Moore to Mr. Jusserand. 1914 Feb. 13 Same subject. Reviews the more important matters under discussion between the United States and Morocco, and expresses hope that a definite understanding and settlement of pending questions may be reached preliminary to recognition of contemplated change in Government of Morocco. 907 [Pg. 907 includes portions of Doc. 1630 and Doc. 1631]

Mr. Jusserand to Mr. Bryan Apr. 22 Same subject. Incloses form of declaration for signature by the United States relinquishing, together with its consular courts, its extraterritorial privileges in Morocco. Says French Government is ready to settle pending Questions. 914 [Pg. 914 includes portions of Doc. 1631 and Doc. 1632]

1315 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Jusserand Apr. 30 Same subject. American Legation at Tangier has been instructed to present memorandum of pending American claims in Morocco, settlement of which would greatly aid this government in replying to note asking for formal recognition of French protectorate in Morocco. 915 [Pg. 915 includes portions of Doc. 1632 and Doc. 1633]

Mr. Jusserand to Mr. Bryan 1914. June 10 Same subject. Says that steps had been taken to bring about settlement of pending questions, and asks early recognition of French protectorate. 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 1634 and Doc. 1635]

Mr. Clausse to Mr. Bryan. July 16 Same subject. Discusses protection of Moorish protégés. 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 1634 and Doc. 1635]

do Same subject. Discusses pending questions in which the United States is interested and expresses hope for early accession to request for recognition of French protectorate. 917 [Pg. 917 includes portions of Doc. 1635 and Doc. 1636]

1358 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Clausse. July 24 Same subject. This Government has assured the French Government of its favorable disposition toward the reform proposed by the French protectorate and will carefully consider Mr. Clausse’s note of July 16. 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 1636, Doc. 1637, and Doc. 1638]

Mr. Jusserand to Mr. Bryan Nov. 4 Same subject. Discusses further claims against Morocco in which the United States is interested, and again asks for early reply to requests concerning abrogation of capitulations. 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 1636, Doc. 1637, and Doc. 1638]

Mr. Blake to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Dec. 20 Same subject. Great Britain consents to recognition of French protectorate over Morocco in exchange for recognition British protectorate in Egypt. All powers excepting the United States have now recognized French protectorate. No reason seen for departing from position that recognition be deferred until settlement outstanding cases. 923 [Pg. 923 includes portions of Doc. 1638 and Doc. 1639]

netherlands.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

Mr. Schmolck to Mr. Bryan. 1913. Sept. 22 Second International Opium Conference. Transmits copy of the Final Protocol of the Second International Opium Conference. 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 1640]

1688 Mr. de Rappard to Mr. Bryan. 1914 Jan. 19 Third International Opium Conference. Summary, showing that the powers not yet signatories of the Convention of Jan. 23, 1912, were, on Dec. 31, 1913: Austria-Hungary, Bulgaria, Greece, Serbia, Turkey, and Uruguay. 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 1640, Doc. 1641, and Doc. 1642]

1740 Jan. 27 Same subject. Refers to his No. 1688, and states that Bulgaria, Greece, and Uruguay have promised to sign the Convention; Austria-Hungary will probably sign; Serbia has declared that she will provisionally withhold her signature; and Turkey persists in refusing to sign. In accordance with the Final Protocol of the Second Opium Conference he has been instructed to ask that the United States be represented at the Conference to be held at The Hague in May next, to consider whether the Convention can be put into operation. 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 1640, Doc. 1641, and Doc. 1642]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. de Rappard. Apr. 18 Same subject. Acknowledges the foregoing and states that the United Statel will be represented at the Conference, but would prefer, for the reasons of preparation, that the date of the Conference should be not earlier than June 15. 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 1642, Doc. 1643, and Doc. 1644]

2324 Mr. de Rappard to Mr. Bryan. Apr. 27 Same subject. Notifies him that the Convention has been signed by Bulgaria, Uruguay, and Great Britain on behalf of certain dependencies, with dates of respective signatures. The Convention has been ratified by China. 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 1642, Doc. 1643, and Doc. 1644]

2424 May 12 Same subject. Refers to the Department’s Apr. 18, and notifies him that the Opium Conference will meet on June 15. 927 [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. 1644, Doc. 1645, Doc. 1646, and Doc. 1647]

2494 May 22 Same subject. Refers to his No. 2424 of May 12 and informs him that Austria-Hungary has declared its adhesion to the contents of the Convention and its readiness to enforce its provisions if the other Governments decide that the Convention may be put into operation. 927 [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. 1644, Doc. 1645, Doc. 1646, and Doc. 1647]

Mr. Bryan to Messrs. van Dyke and Denby. June 5 Same subject. Instructions to the American Delegates to the Third International Opium Conference. 927 [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. 1644, Doc. 1645, Doc. 1646, and Doc. 1647]

Mr. Van Dyke to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 20 Same subject. Owing to the refusal of Turkey, Greece, and Serbia to sign the Convention, inquires whether the American delegates may agree to put the Convention into effect with a limited number of Powers. 931 [Pg. 931 includes portions of Doc. 1648, Doc. 1649, and Doc. 1650]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Van Dyke (telegram). 1914. June 22 Same subject. Reply to his June 20. Not believing the course suggested to be advisable, instructs him to secure an adjournment to Aug. 15 if appropriate, meantime letting the Conference request the United States and Netherlands endeavor to secure the signatures of Turkey, Greece, and Serbia. The present situation is embarrassing antinarcotic legislation now before the Senate. 931 [Pg. 931 includes portions of Doc. 1648, Doc. 1649, and Doc. 1650]

Mr. Van Dyke to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 23 Same subject. Reply to Department’s June 22. Adjournment would not be accepted. Turkey is immovable. A disposition to put the Convention into effect now is general in the Conference and participated in by the American delegates. Instructions desired. 931 [Pg. 931 includes portions of Doc. 1648, Doc. 1649, and Doc. 1650]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Van Dyke (telegram). June 24 Same subject. Reply to his June 23, instructing him that he may concur in the proposal to put the Convention into effect among as many powers as are disposed thereto, but that in any case it should be made effective by all the powers that have signed. 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 1651 and Doc. 1652]

103 Messrs. Van Dyke and Denby to Mr. Bryan. June 26 Same subject. Report of the American Delegates to the Third International Opium Conference relating to the proceedings and inclosing resolutions and speeches. 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 1651 and Doc. 1652]

Mr. Williams to Mr. Bryan (telegram). July 10 Same subject. The Opium Convention has been accented by Greece without reservations. 937 [Pg. 937 includes portions of Doc. 1652, Doc. 1653, and Doc. 1654]

3717 Mr. de Rappard to Mr. Bryan. Dec. 17 Same subject. Incloses copy of the Final Protocol of the Third Conference, authorizing the Powers that have ratified the Opium Convention to declare their intention to put it into operation by signing a protocol to be opened for that purpose. Such a protocol has been opened at The Hague; text thereof. 937 [Pg. 937 includes portions of Doc. 1652, Doc. 1653, and Doc. 1654]

nicaragua.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

Mr. Bryan to Messrs. Br Brown Bros. & Co. and Seligman & Co. 1914. Jan. 13 Financial affairs. The Minister of Nicaragua having stated that his Government desires to borrow perhaps as much as $500,000 the Department will be glad to discuss the matter with them. 944 [Pg. 944 includes portions of Doc. 1662, Doc. 1663, Doc. 1664, and Doc. 1665]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Jefferson (telegram). Jan. 17 Same subject. Refers to Department’s Aug. 17, 1913, and renews instruction to request of the Nicaraguan Government a complete financial statement in order that the Department may be prepared to assist in effecting a complete reorganization of Nicaragua’s finances. 945 [Pg. 945 includes portions of Doc. 1665, Doc. 1666, and Doc. 1667]

48 Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Bryan Feb. 8 Same subject. Refers to the foregoing and transmits as complete a statement as has been obtainable of Nicaragua’s finances. 945 [Pg. 945 includes portions of Doc. 1665, Doc. 1666, and Doc. 1667]

Mr. Chamorro to Mr. Bryan Feb. 12 Proposed interoceanic canal treaty. States the policy of Nicaragua toward the United States and urges the early submission to the Senate of the Canal Treaty. 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 1685, Doc. 1686, and Doc. 1687]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Dueñas Feb. 18 Same subject. Replies to his Oct. 21, 1913, and denies the cogency of his argument regarding the alleged joint dominion over the Gulf of Fonseca; denies that a United States coaling station in that gulf would have the effect stated that a plebiscite should be held. 954 [Pg. 954 includes portions of Doc. 1687 and Doc. 1688]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Chamorro. Feb. 21 Same subject. Acknowledgment of his Feb. 12 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 1688, Doc. 1689, and Doc. 1690]

57 Same to same. Mar. 5 Financial affairs. Refers to the foregoing and reports the unwillingness of the Government to divulge additional financial information. 946 [Pg. 946 includes portions of Doc. 1667, Doc. 1668, Doc. 1669, Doc. 1670, and Doc. 1671]

Mr. Dueñas to Mr. Bryan Mar. 11 Proposed interoceanic canal treaty. Rejoinder to the Department’s Feb. 18: reiterates his previous contentions, and insists on a plebiscite in regard to the naval station concession contained in the proposed treaty. 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 1688, Doc. 1689, and Doc. 1690]

Mr. Chamorro to Mr. Bryan. May 25 Same subject. Submits papers to reinforce the position taken by this Government in its note of Feb. 18 to Mr. Dueñas. 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 1690 and Doc. 1691]

President Diaz to Mr. Chamorro (telegram). July 6 Political affairs. Attack on the barracks at Bluefields and other insurrections implicating American citizens. Asylum sought at American Consulate. Attitude of the United States. Clifford D. Sands, an American citizen, led an unsuccessful attack on the police barracks at Bluefields; Sands took refuge in the American Consulate. 940 [Pg. 940 includes portions of Doc. 1655, Doc. 1656, and Doc. 1657]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Clare (telegram). 1914. July 7 Same subject. Informs him of substance of the foregoing and instructs him that if the report is true Sands should not be sheltered in the Consulate. 940 [Pg. 940 includes portions of Doc. 1655, Doc. 1656, and Doc. 1657]

Mr. Calvo to Mr. Bryan do Proposed interoceanic canal treaty. The treaty pending in the Senate contains a clause like the Platt Amendment, which would establish a protectorate over Nicaragua. Protests against the same, and renews the protest against the provision relating to a naval station. 959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 1691 and Doc. 1692]

Mr. Meza to Mr. Bryan. July 8 Same subject and purport. 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 1693 and Doc. 1694]

Mr. Clare to Mr. Bryan (telegram). July 9 Political affairs. Reply to his July 7. Sands was badly wounded; authorities gave consent to keeping him at Consulate a few days and he was delivered to the authorities July 8 and sent to the hospital. 940 [Pg. 940 includes portions of Doc. 1655, Doc. 1656, and Doc. 1657]

35 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Jefferson. July 14 Same subject and purport 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 1658 and Doc. 1659]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Calvo July 16 Proposed interoceanic canal treaty. Replies to his July 7; his Government has been misinformed, as no treaty has been presented to the Senate for ratification; gives status of the draft treaty; if the matter should become a practical one this Government will examine his protest. 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 1693 and Doc. 1694]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Meza. do Same subject. Identical with the foregoing 961 [Pg. 961 includes portions of Doc. 1695 and Doc. 1696]

Mr. Calvo to Mr. Bryan. July 18 Same subject. Reply to Department’s July 16. 961 [Pg. 961 includes portions of Doc. 1695 and Doc. 1696]

Mr. Meza to Mr. Bryan. July 21 Same subject. Reply to Department’s July 16 962 [Pg. 962 includes portions of Doc. 1696 and Doc. 1697]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hale July 24 Same subject. Refers to Mr. Calvo’s communications and instructs him to ascertain the cause of Costa Rica’s attitude. 963 [Pg. 963 includes portions of Doc. 1697 and Doc. 1698]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Calvo Aug. 1 Same subject. Reply to his Apr. 17, 1913. Denies the alleged joint interest of Costa Rica in the matters affected by the proposed treaty with Nicaragua. 964 [Pg. 964 is part of Doc. 1699]

President Diaz to Mr. Chamorro (telegram). Aug. 3 Same subject. Approves Canal Treaty; requests notification when signed. 966 [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 1700, Doc. 1701, and Doc. 1702]

Mr. Bryan to the President. Aug. 8 Same subject. Submits the Canal Convention, signed Aug. 5, for transmission to the Senate. 966 [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 1700, Doc. 1701, and Doc. 1702]

Mr. Hale to Mr. Bryan Aug. 13 Same subject. Reply to Department’s July 24. 966 [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 1700, Doc. 1701, and Doc. 1702]

109 Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Bryan Aug. 19 Political affairs. Transmits copies of correspondence regarding Sands. 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 1658 and Doc. 1659]

Same to same (telegram) Aug. 24 Same subject. President Diaz will deport Sands. Information as to landing of marines. 943 [Pg. 943 includes portions of Doc. 1660 and Doc. 1661]

115 Same to same Aug. 30 Same subject. Sands sailed for New Orleans on Aug. 26: the incident is believed to be closed. 943 [Pg. 943 includes portions of Doc. 1660 and Doc. 1661]

Mr. Brenes Mesen to Mr. Bryan. Aug. 31 Proposed interoceanic canal treaty. Urges insertion in the treaty of a specific declaration that the rights of Costa Rica are not involved. 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 1702 and Doc. 1703]

Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Sept. 5 Financial affairs. There is to be an extraordinary session of the Nicaraguan Congress to grant power for issuance of bonds, reduce the budget, and enact a moratorium law. 946 [Pg. 946 includes portions of Doc. 1667, Doc. 1668, Doc. 1669, Doc. 1670, and Doc. 1671]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Jefferson (telegram). Sept. 9 Same subject. Brown Bros, fear the proposed action of the Nicaraguan Congress will seriously affect business. Instruction to endeavor to obtain a postponement while the Department tries to secure the passage of the Canal Treaty in the Senate. 946 [Pg. 946 includes portions of Doc. 1667, Doc. 1668, Doc. 1669, Doc. 1670, and Doc. 1671]

Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Sept. 10 Same subject. Refers to Department’s Sept. 9. The Government can not promise a postponement of the moratorium but agreed to take no action as to issue of bonds or paper money without notice to the Legation. Other financial news, including contemplated reduction of salaries of Americans officially employed. 946 [Pg. 946 includes portions of Doc. 1667, Doc. 1668, Doc. 1669, Doc. 1670, and Doc. 1671]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Jefferson (telegram). Sept. 14 Same subject. Refers to the foregoing. Instructs him to report as to reductions of Americans’ salaries: views of the Department thereon. 947 [Pg. 947 includes portions of Doc. 1671, Doc. 1672, and Doc. 1673]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Jefferson Sept. 18 Political affairs. Acknowledges receipt of his No. 109 of Aug. 19. 947 [Pg. 947 includes portions of Doc. 1671, Doc. 1672, and Doc. 1673]

Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Sept. 23 Financial affairs. Refers to the foregoing. There is no means of reducing Americans’ salaries. Moratorium bill has passed lower, House; financial situation; a new issue of billetes may be ordered. He suggests the negotiation of a loan of from $50,000 to $75,000 for urgent current expenses. 944 [Pg. 944 includes portions of Doc. 1662, Doc. 1663, Doc. 1664, and Doc. 1665]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Jefferson (telegram). Oct. 1 Same subject. Instructs him to say to the Government that the Department is unable to obtain action in the Senate on the Canal Treaty. 948 [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 1673, Doc. 1674, Doc. 1675, and Doc. 1676]

President Diaz to President Wilson (telegram). Oct. 2 Same subject. Thanks for his and Mr. Bryan’s efforts in behalf of Nicaragua. 948 [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 1673, Doc. 1674, Doc. 1675, and Doc. 1676]

Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Oct. 2 Same subject. President Diaz has signed the new budget; all other financial legislation suspended awaiting action on the Canal Treaty. In view of the crisis the Minister has suggested an additional tax law and internal revenue reorganization. 948 [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 1673, Doc. 1674, Doc. 1675, and Doc. 1676]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Jefferson (telegram). Oct. 3 Same subject. Department approves general principles of contract now being made with the bankers; hopes Congress will adopt system of taxation sufficient to provide for needs of the Government. 949 [Pg. 949 includes portions of Doc. 1676, Doc. 1677, and Doc. 1678]

Mr. Lansing to Messrs. Brown Bros. & Co. and Seligman & Co. Oct. 14 Same subject. Incloses telegram from Nicaraguan Foreign Office to Nicaraguan Minister urging him to obtain a loan of $50,000 for present needs, to which is added autographic statement by Mr. Bryan seconding the request. 949 [Pg. 949 includes portions of Doc. 1676, Doc. 1677, and Doc. 1678]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Chamorro. do Same subject. Informs him of the foregoing 950 [Pg. 950 includes portions of Doc. 1678, Doc. 1679, and Doc. 1680]

Mr. Chamorro to Mr. Bryan. Oct. 16 Same subject. Informs him that, trusting to the ratification of the Canal Treaty within four months, during which the moratorium will be in effect, his Government will find it very difficult to obtain approval of the proposed contracts with the bankers, and requests that this Government will induce the bankers to abide by the moratorium. 950 [Pg. 950 includes portions of Doc. 1678, Doc. 1679, and Doc. 1680]

133 Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Bryan. Oct. 24 Same subject. Refers to his own Sept. 10 and Sept. 23 and reports the passage of a moratorium law. 951 [Pg. 951 includes portions of Doc. 1680, Doc. 1681, and Doc. 1682]

Same to same (telegram) Nov. 10 Political affairs. Reports imminence of insurrection in Mosquito Territory. Suggests that Americans there be reminded that protection can not be given to those implicated in any uprising against the Government, and that a cruiser be sent to Bluefields. 944 [Pg. 944 includes portions of Doc. 1662, Doc. 1663, Doc. 1664, and Doc. 1665]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Jefferson (telegram). Nov. 14 Same subject. Informs him that the American Consul at Bluefields has been instructed that this Government will not countenance insurrection and Americans interfering with the Government do so at their peril. 944 [Pg. 944 includes portions of Doc. 1662, Doc. 1663, Doc. 1664, and Doc. 1665]

Mr. Chamorro to Mr. Bryan. Nov. 17 Financial affairs. Finding it impossible to secure a loan, his Government has determined to issue currency to the amount of $1,500,000, guaranteed by certain taxes; further details of the plan. His Government requests the Department’s opinion. 951 [Pg. 951 includes portions of Doc. 1680, Doc. 1681, and Doc. 1682]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Chamorro. Nov. 19 Same subject. Refers to Department’s note of Oct. 14 and informs him that the bankers decline to lend the $50,000 desired. 952 [Pg. 952 includes portions of Doc. 1682, Doc. 1683, Doc. 1684, and Doc. 1685]

11 Same to same do Same subject. Refers to his Oct. 16; the Department views with sympathy the efforts of Nicaragua to arrange a difficult financial situation. 952 [Pg. 952 includes portions of Doc. 1682, Doc. 1683, Doc. 1684, and Doc. 1685]

Mr. Chamorro to Mr. Bryan. Nov. 21 Same subject. Informs him that an agreement has been reached between the bankers and his Government which will be furnished with $500,000 for payment of overdue salaries. Therefore he requests the Department to suspend negotiations and to consider it unnecessary to call upon the bankers. 952 [Pg. 952 includes portions of Doc. 1682, Doc. 1683, Doc. 1684, and Doc. 1685]

Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 29 Same subject. The Nicaraguan Congress has approved the contract with the banker, and adjourned. 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 1685, Doc. 1686, and Doc. 1687]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Jefferson, (telegram). Dec. 16 Proposed interoceanic canal treaty. The Senate Committee to-day favorably reported the Nicaraguan treaty. Consideration in the Senate is hoped for soon after the holidays. 969 [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 1703 and Doc. 1704]

norway.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

337 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Bryn 1914. Feb. 21 International Conference on Spitzbergen. Acceptance of invitation to participate in the conference opening June 16, and will be represented by the American Minister, Mr. Schmedeman and perhaps another delegate. 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 1707, Doc. 1708, and Doc. 1709]

Apr. 15 Arbitration agreement between the United States and Norway, extending the duration of the Convention of Apr. 4.1908. Text. 970 [Pg. 970 is part of Doc. 1705]

370 Same to same May 1 International Conference on Spitzbergen. Advises him of the appointment of the American Minister, Mr. Schmedeman, and Mr. William Miller Collier of Auburn, N. Y., as delegates to the Conference. 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 1707, Doc. 1708, and Doc. 1709]

Mr. Bryn to Mr. Bryan May 4 Same subject. Acknowledges the foregoing, which he has forwarded to his Government. 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 1707, Doc. 1708, and Doc. 1709]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Schmedeman (telegram). 1914. May 19 Same subject. Instruction to inform the Foreign Office of the appointment of Fred K. Nielsen, Assistant Solicitor of the Department, as its Technical Delegate to the Conference. 975 [Pg. 975 includes portions of Doc. 1710 and Doc. 1711]

Mr. Bryan to Messrs. Collier and Schmedeman. May 23 Same subject. Instructions. Spitzbergen will continue to be treated by this Government as European. In all their negotiations they are constantly to remember the traditional policy of the United States to refrain from interference in European affairs, and scrupulously to avoid committing this Government, even tentatively, to any plan in any degree at variance therewith. Both the interests and the established policy of this Government forbid contributing to the expense of maintaining a government in Spitzbergen or sharing in its administration. 975 [Pg. 975 includes portions of Doc. 1710 and Doc. 1711]

Messrs Collier and Schmedeman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 16 Same subject. Announces convening of the Conference and submission of an amended plan by Norway, Sweden, and Russia; Conference adjourning to consider it. No other plans yet submitted. Gunther appointed Secretary of American Delegation. 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 1712, Doc. 1713, Doc. 1714, and Doc. 1715]

Same to same (telegram) June 18 Same subject. The American plan for Spitzbergen has been considered but can not be used as a substitute for the one prepared by the three northern powers; reasons. Suggests that it be used only as a guide in suggesting amendments to the plan before the Conference. 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 1712, Doc. 1713, Doc. 1714, and Doc. 1715]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Collier (telegram). June 19 Same subject. Approves the foregoing suggestion 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 1712, Doc. 1713, Doc. 1714, and Doc. 1715]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hagerup (telegram). June 24 Same subject. Informs him of appointment of Mr. Franklin Mott Gunther as additional Technical Delegate owing to the illness and incapacity of Mr. Miller. 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 1712, Doc. 1713, Doc. 1714, and Doc. 1715]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Schmedeman (telegram). June 27 Same subject. Informs him of the appointment of the Honorable Alvey A. Adee, Second Assistant Secretary of State, as a Delegate to the Conference. 981 [Pg. 981 includes portions of Doc. 1715, Doc. 1716, Doc. 1717, and Doc. 1718]

Mr. Schmedeman to Mr. Bryan (telegram). July 29 Same subject. Russian delegates apparently instructed not to sign separate arbitration convention. The Conference will probably adjourn to-morrow. 981 [Pg. 981 includes portions of Doc. 1715, Doc. 1716, Doc. 1717, and Doc. 1718]

Same to same (telegram) July 30 Same subject. The Conference adjourned on this date, to meet again in February next. No acts were signed. Nielson and Adee are leaving. 981 [Pg. 981 includes portions of Doc. 1715, Doc. 1716, Doc. 1717, and Doc. 1718]

Oct. 22 Treaty between the United States and Norway for the advancement of peace. Text. 971 [Pg. 971 includes portions of Doc. 1705 and Doc. 1706]

panama.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

Mr. Snyder to Mr. Bryan. 1913 Apr. 2 Railroad construction in Panama. Incloses copy of law authorizing study to determine what railways should be constructed. Contract for surveys awarded. 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 1753, Doc. 1754, and Doc. 1755]

Mr. Breckinridge to Mr. Bryan. Aug. 26 Control of Wireless Telegraph Stations in Panama by the United States. Refers to Joint Board recommendation of 1911, and to contracts made or about to be made with Panama for the installation of wireless stations, and expresses opinion that private installations should be prohibited from the Canal Zone and from the territory of the Republic of Panama. Asks status of matter and Department’s intentions in the premises. 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 1766 and Doc. 1767]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Garrison. Aug. 29 Same subject. Discusses question and says that Department is ready to undertake negotiations with Panama. Asks views as to provisions to be included in agreement. (Same to Navy Department). 1037 [Pg. 1037 is part of Doc. 1768]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Daniels. do Same subject and tenor 1038 [Pg. 1038 is part of Doc. 1768]

Mr. Daniels to Mr. Bryan Nov. 22 Same subject. Sets forth recommendations of Joint Army and Navy Board concerning proposed agreement with Panama. 1039 [Pg. 1039 is part of Doc. 1769]

16 Mr. Moore to Mr. Bryan. 1914 Jan. 9 Assault on American citizens in Panama. Approves action in assisting on prompt action. 985 [Pg. 985 includes portions of Doc. 1720, Doc. 1721, and Doc. 1722]

69 Mr. Price to Mr. Bryan Jan. 16 Control of Wireless Telegraph Stations in Panama by the United States. Panaman Government is anxious to enter into an agreement for interchange of wireless messages. 1040 [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 1769 and Doc. 1770]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Price (telegram). 1914. Jan. 29 Same subject. States that Joint Board report, which has been approved by the President, provides for giving the United States monopoly on radio communication within Panaman territory and cancellation of all concessions. Directed to so inform the Panaman Government in informal manner. 1041 [Pg. 1041 includes portions of Doc. 1770 and Doc. 1771]

Same to same Feb. 4 Same subject. Incloses copy of Navy Department letter of Nov. 22, 1913, and directs that recommendations of Joint Board be communicated to Government of Panama as basis of proposed agreement, and to report views of that Government. 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 1771, Doc. 1772, and Doc. 1773]

Mr. Price to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Railroad construction in Panama. Contract signed with Hebard and Company for construction of railway, estimated cost million and half. 1029 [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 1755 and Doc. 1756]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Price (telegram). Feb. 7 Same subject. Directs consultation with Colonel Goethals concerning details railway contract. Points out objections of Department. 1030 [Pg. 1030 includes portions of Doc. 1757, Doc. 1758, and Doc. 1759]

Mr. Price to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Feb. 9 Same subject. Discusses railway contract features. 1030 [Pg. 1030 includes portions of Doc. 1757, Doc. 1758, and Doc. 1759]

Mr. Garrison to Mr. Bryan. Apr. 4 Same subject. Incloses correspondence relating to railway contract and calls attention to part of letter to Panaman Minister concerning submission of contract through diplomatic channels. 1030 [Pg. 1030 includes portions of Doc. 1757, Doc. 1758, and Doc. 1759]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Price (telegram). Apr. 7 Assault on American citizens in Panama. Directs foreign office be informed that this Government insists on immediate settlement of matter. 985 [Pg. 985 includes portions of Doc. 1720, Doc. 1721, and Doc. 1722]

Mr. Price to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Apr. 9 Same subject. Has been insistent in the matter and has been informed by Minister for Foreign Affairs that “progress was real.” 986 [Pg. 986 includes portions of Doc. 1723, Doc. 1724, and Doc. 1725]

40 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Price Apr. 16 Same subject. Says that assurance that “progress in the matter was real” is, at this late date, unsatisfactory. This Government must insist on immediate settlement. 986 [Pg. 986 includes portions of Doc. 1723, Doc. 1724, and Doc. 1725]

Mr. Price to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Apr. 18 Same subject. Minister for Foreign Affairs says that conference will be had for purpose of hastening proceedings. 986 [Pg. 986 includes portions of Doc. 1723, Doc. 1724, and Doc. 1725]

133 do Same subject. Incloses copy of correspondence with Foreign Office concerning prompt settlement of case. Minister for Foreign Affairs promises immediate conference with officials for purpose of hastening matter. 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 1725 and Doc. 1726]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Price (telegram). Apr. 20 Same subject. Directs continued pressure for immediate settlement. 989 [Pg. 989 includes portions of Doc. 1726, Doc. 1727, and Doc. 1728]

144 Mr. Price to Mr. Bryan Apr. 25 Same subject. Incloses correspondence with Foreign Office, which says decision will be handed down within a few days and then reviewed by Supreme Court. Judicial “whitewashing” predicted. 989 [Pg. 989 includes portions of Doc. 1726, Doc. 1727, and Doc. 1728]

Same to same (telegram). Apr. 28 Same subject. Minister for Foreign Affairs advised that judge in charge of case would render decision at once, and that supreme court after review would render decree within fifteen days. Opinion not received. Will make further demand. 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 1728, Doc. 1729, and Doc. 1730]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Price (telegram). Apr. 29 Control of Wireless Telegraph Stations in Panama by the United States. Expresses views of the United States in the matter, and directs that these views be brought to the attention of the Panaman Government for the purpose of urging an agreement containing substantially the stipulations set forth in the Navy Department’s letter of Nov. 22.1913. 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 1771, Doc. 1772, and Doc. 1773]

42 Same to same May 6 Assault on American citizens in Panama. Acknowledges No. 133, and says response of Foreign Office is highly unsatisfactory, and that long delay creates impression that Panama is not desirous of performing just international obligations, which impression can only be removed by prompt action taken in accordance with principles of justice and equity. 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 1728, Doc. 1729, and Doc. 1730]

Same to same (telegram).(telegram). May 11 Control of Wireless Telegraph Stations in Panama by the United States. Directed to urge adhesion of Panama to International Radio Telegraph Convention of London, in order that ratification may take place before the opening of the Panama Canal. 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 1773, Doc. 1774, and Doc. 1775]

Mr. Price to Mr. Bryan (telegram). May 16 Assault on American citizens in Panama. Decision, which will be reviewed by Supreme Court, dismisses proceedings against accused. Minister for Foreign Affairs says new sources of evidence discovered, and that this may produce impression on Supreme Court different from that had by the lower court. Demands for justice will be continued. 991 [Pg. 991 includes portions of Doc. 1730, Doc. 1731, and Doc. 1732]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Price (telegram). 1914. May 18 Same subject. Directs that Foreign Office be informed that if Supreme Court affirms decision of lower court such action would be regarded as clear evidence that Panama does not desire to do justice this matter. 991 [Pg. 991 includes portions of Doc. 1730, Doc. 1731, and Doc. 1732]

Mr. Price to Mr. Bryan (telegram). May 19 Control of Wireless Telegraph Stations in Panama by the United States. Minister for Foreign Affairs says granting of wireless monopoly would make it improper to sign London Radio Convention. Action on monopoly might have to be ratified by National Assembly,which meets in September. Proposal for erection of only four stations can not be accepted. 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 1773, Doc. 1774, and Doc. 1775]

Same to same (telegram). May 23 Assault on American citizens in Panama. Minister for Foreign Affairs now says Panama can pay money indemnity, but can not control decisions of judicial authorities. After conference with American officials in Canal Zone, suggests taking over police force of Panama in Panama City and Colon. 992 [Pg. 992 includes portions of Doc. 1732, Doc. 1733, and Doc. 1734]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Morales. June 29 Railroad construction in Panama, Outlines Department’s position concerning contemplated loan. 1032 [Pg. 1032 includes portions of Doc. 1761 and Doc. 1762]

Mr. Price to Mr. Bryan (telegraph). July 8 Control of Wireless Telegraph Stations m Panama by the United States. Panaman Minister at Washington directed to discuss agreement directly with Department. 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 1775, Doc. 1776, Doc. 1777, and Doc. 1778]

Mr. Osborne to Mr. Bryan (telegram). July 12 Same subject. This Government feels it more desirable that agreement continue to be handled by Legation at Panama. 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 1775, Doc. 1776, Doc. 1777, and Doc. 1778]

Mr. Price to Mr. Bryan (telegram). July 25 Same subject. Panama accepts proposal for erection of wireless stations. 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 1775, Doc. 1776, Doc. 1777, and Doc. 1778]

Mr. Daniels to Mr. Bryan. Aug. 12 Same subject. Navy Department is of belief that terms outlined in recommendations of joint board should be insisted upon in representations to Panama, and that consent of that Government to absolute control by the United States should be obtained at earliest practicable moment. 1045 [Pg. 1045 includes portions of Doc. 1778 and Doc. 1779]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Price (telegram). Aug. 13 Same subject. Directs that Panaman Government be requested to issue immediate orders to enable United States to exercise monopoly over wireless. 1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 1779, Doc. 1780, and Doc. 1781]

Mr. Price to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Aug. 14 Same subject. Panama agrees that United States take complete control of wireless situation in the Republic and its territorial waters, General Goethals notified, and situation now in charge of Lieutenant Crenshaw. President issues decree carrying out agreement. 1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 1779, Doc. 1780, and Doc. 1781]

253 Same to same. do. Same subject and purport. 1047 [Pg. 1047 includes portions of Doc. 1781 and Doc. 1782]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Price (telegram). Aug. 17 Same subject. Directs that he convey to Minister for Foreign Affairs gratification of this Government at prompt action of Panama in acceding to request for control of wireless. 1048 [Pg. 1048 includes portions of Doc. 1782, Doc. 1783, and Doc. 1784]

Mr. Price to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Aug. 23 Same subject. Control of wireless now being exercised pursuant to verbal authority. President’s decree gives only temporary control. Protest made and publication of decree withheld. Decree to be redrawn granting permanent control. 1048 [Pg. 1048 includes portions of Doc. 1782, Doc. 1783, and Doc. 1784]

263 Same to same Aug. 27 Same subject and purport 1049 [Pg. 1049 includes portions of Doc. 1784 and Doc. 1785]

Same to same (telegram). Aug. 29 Same subject. President signs decree granting complete and permanent control of wireless. 1051 [Pg. 1051 includes portions of Doc. 1786 and Doc. 1787]

265 Same to same Sept. 2 Same subject. Incloses copy of decree granting complete and permanent control of radio situation. 1051 [Pg. 1051 includes portions of Doc. 1786 and Doc. 1787]

269 Same to same Sept. 4 Message of the President. Incloses copy thereof 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 1719]

The President of Costa Rica to the President. Sept. 13 Boundary dispute between Costa Rica and Panama. Applauds the decision of the arbitrator. 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 1735, Doc. 1736, and Doc. 1737]

56 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Price Sept. 15 Control of wireless telegraph stations in Panama by the United States. Express gratification at successful termination of the matter. 1052 [Pg. 1052 is part of Doc. 1788]

Mr. Price to Mr. Bryan Sept. 19 Assault on American citizens. Reports revocation by Supreme Court of the lower court’s decision but without ordering prosecutions, rendering the decree valueless. 992 [Pg. 992 includes portions of Doc. 1732, Doc. 1733, and Doc. 1734]

Same to same (telegram) Sept. 20 Boundary dispute between Costa Rica and Panama. Decision occupies much attention. Assembly and Senate present protest refusing to abide by it. 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 1735, Doc. 1736, and Doc. 1737]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Price (telegram). Sept. 28 Assault on American citizens. No objection to reexamination of available witnesses. Urge early conclusion of investigation. 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 1735, Doc. 1736, and Doc. 1737]

Mr. Price to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Oct. 1 Boundary dispute between Costa Rica and Panama. Rejection of the award by Panama is probable. 994 [Pg. 994 includes portions of Doc. 1737, Doc. 1738, Doc. 1739, and Doc. 1740]

Same to same (telegram) Oct. 7 994 [Pg. 994 includes portions of Doc. 1737, Doc. 1738, Doc. 1739, and Doc. 1740]

1914. Oct. 10 Neutrality in the waters of the Isthmus of Panama. Protocol of an agreement between the United States and Panama. Text. 984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 1719 and Doc. 1720]

302 Mr. Price to Mr. Bryan. Oct. 10 Railroad construction in Panama. Incloses copies of President’s message and correspondence between the Executive, the Panama Legation, and the National City Bank regarding loan required to build railway. Message refers to railways of Chiriqui and Los Santos. 1032 [Pg. 1032 includes portions of Doc. 1761 and Doc. 1762]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Price (telegram). Oct. 15 Same subject. Inform Panaman Government Department’s approval of loan based on hypothecation of income of $6,000,000 permanently invested in New York, was based on understanding that this money would be used only for railroads in Chiriqui. 1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 1762, Doc. 1763, Doc. 1764, and Doc. 1765]

Mr. Morales to Mr. Bryan Oct. 20 Boundary Dispute between Costa Rica and Panama. Sets forth at length reasons of his Government for declining to accept or recognize as valid decision of arbitrator. 994 [Pg. 994 includes portions of Doc. 1737, Doc. 1738, Doc. 1739, and Doc. 1740]

Mr. Cresson to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Oct. 21 Railroad construction in Panama. President of Panama regrets Los Santos Railway could not be included, but expressed willingness to meet position of Department. 1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 1762, Doc. 1763, Doc. 1764, and Doc. 1765]

Same to same (telegram) Oct. 22 Boundary Dispute between Costa Rica and Panama. Panaman Congress rejects boundary decision. 999 [Pg. 999 includes portions of Doc. 1740, Doc. 1741, and Doc. 1742]

Mr. Morales to Mr. Bryan. Nov. 2 Railroad construction in Panama. Outlines arrangement for bond issue of $3,000,000. 1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 1762, Doc. 1763, Doc. 1764, and Doc. 1765]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Morales Nov. 7 Same subject. Acquiesces in arrangement for bond issue. 1035 [Pg. 1035 includes portions of Doc. 1765 and Doc. 1766]

Mr. Brenes Mesen to Mr. Bryan. do Boundary dispute between Costa Rica and Panama. Incloses copy of the opinion and decision of the arbitrator, Mr. Chief Justice White, rendered Sept. 12, 1914. Costa Rica hopes that, in view of the finality of this award, international difficulties have vanished. 999 [Pg. 999 includes portions of Doc. 1740, Doc. 1741, and Doc. 1742]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Brenes Mesen. Nov. 16 Same subject. Acknowledgment of the foregoing. 1015 [Pg. 1015 includes portions of Doc. 1742 and Doc. 1743]

331 Mr. Cresson to Mr. Bryan. Nov. 18 Same subject. Incloses translation of correspondence between Panama and Costa Rica concerning the award. 1016 [Pg. 1016 includes portions of Doc. 1743 and Doc. 1744]

Mr. Brenes Mesen to Mr. Bryan. Nov. 25 1021 [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 1744 and Doc. 1745]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Cresson (telegram). do Same subject. Instruction to urge that no action be taken which could provoke hostilities between Costa Rica and Panama. Expresses hope that report that Panama has sent civil authorities into disputed territory is not true, but if true that they will be withdrawn. 1022 [Pg. 1022 includes portions of Doc. 1745, Doc. 1746, Doc. 1747, and Doc. 1748]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hale do Same subject and purport 1022 [Pg. 1022 includes portions of Doc. 1745, Doc. 1746, Doc. 1747, and Doc. 1748]

Mr. Cresson to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Nov. 27 Same subject. Minister for Foreign Affairs assures him that no change in status quo has occurred or is contemplated on Costa Rican boundary. 1022 [Pg. 1022 includes portions of Doc. 1745, Doc. 1746, Doc. 1747, and Doc. 1748]

347 do Same subject and purport 1022 [Pg. 1022 includes portions of Doc. 1745, Doc. 1746, Doc. 1747, and Doc. 1748]

49 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Brenes Mesen. Dec. 2 Same subject Acknowledges is Nov. 25 1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 1748, Doc. 1749, and Doc. 1750]

Mr. Hale to Mr. Bryan Dec. 5 Same subject. Reports compliance with the instruction of Nov. 25. 1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 1748, Doc. 1749, and Doc. 1750]

Mr. Brenes Mesen to Mr. Bryan. Dec. 7 Same subject. Expresses his surprise at the attitude of Panama. 1024 [Pg. 1024 includes portions of Doc. 1750 and Doc. 1751]

The Legation of Panama to the Department of State. Dec. 8 Same subject. Memorandum seeking to show the position of Costa Rica untenable. 1025 [Pg. 1025 includes portions of Doc. 1751 and Doc. 1752]

50 Mr. Hale to Mr. Bryan. Dec. 18 Same subject. Incloses copy of note to Foreign Office tendering good offices. 1026 [Pg. 1026 includes portions of Doc. 1752 and Doc. 1753]

The Department of State to the Legation of Panama. Dec. 19 Same subject. The Legation’s memorandum of Dec. 8 appears to communicate no matter requiring the present attention of the Department. 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 1753, Doc. 1754, and Doc. 1755]

paraguay.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

1914. Jan. 24 Extradition treaty. Text 1053 [Pg. 1053 is part of Doc. 1789]

persia.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

Mirza Ali Kuli Khan to Mr. Bryan. 1914. Feb. 14 Coronation of the Shah. Announces date of coronation. 1059 [Pg. 1059 includes portions of Doc. 1790, Doc. 1791, and Doc. 1792]

Mr. Russell to Mr. Bryan (telegram). July 14 Same subject. Suggests appointment as Special Ambassador. 1059 [Pg. 1059 includes portions of Doc. 1790, Doc. 1791, and Doc. 1792]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Russell (telegram). July 21 Same subject. Appoints him special representative of the President with rank of Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary. 1059 [Pg. 1059 includes portions of Doc. 1790, Doc. 1791, and Doc. 1792]

The President to the Shah (telegram). July 23 1080 [Pg. 1080 is part of Doc. 1831]

The Shah to the President (telegram). July 28 Same subject. Expresses thanks for expressions of felicitation. 1060 [Pg. 1060 includes portions of Doc. 1793 and Doc. 1794]

peru.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

Mr. McMillin to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914. Feb. 4 Political affairs. Reports outbreak of revolution headed by Augusto Durand. President arrested, later resigns. 1061 [Pg. 1061 is part of Doc. 1795]

Same to same (telegram). Feb. 5 Same subject. Situation improved. Junta formed by members of political parties. Leguia offered presidency. 1062 [Pg. 1062 includes portions of Doc. 1796 and Doc. 1797]

Mr. Pezet to Mr. Bryan do Same subject. Informs of change in Government. Executive Power entrusted to Junta which has entered upon its duties. 1062 [Pg. 1062 includes portions of Doc. 1796 and Doc. 1797]

Mr. McMillin to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Feb. 8 Same subject. Question of recognition being raised, and ultimate recognition new power seems inevitable. 1063 [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 1798, Doc. 1799, Doc. 1800, and Doc. 1801]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. McMillin (telegram). Feb. 12 Same subject. Directs recognition of Junta as a Provisional Government pending establishment of a permanent executive. 1063 [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 1798, Doc. 1799, Doc. 1800, and Doc. 1801]

Mr. McMillin to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Feb. 13 Same subject. Majority of countries have recognized Junta. Others will follow. 1063 [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 1798, Doc. 1799, Doc. 1800, and Doc. 1801]

Same to same (telegram). Feb. 18 Same subject. Ex-President Billinghurst, by order of Junta, removed from prison and taken north on war vessel. Junta appreciates action of recognition. 1063 [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 1798, Doc. 1799, Doc. 1800, and Doc. 1801]

35 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Pezet. Feb. 21 Same subject. Acknowledges note of 5th instant and informs him of instructions issued to recognize Junta. 1064 [Pg. 1064 includes portions of Doc. 1801, Doc. 1802, Doc. 1803, and Doc. 1804]

Mr. McMillin to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Mar. 2 Same subject. Effort to convoke Congress fails. Opposition to reappointment of Leguia. Junta to call extra session Congress Mar. 11. 1064 [Pg. 1064 includes portions of Doc. 1801, Doc. 1802, Doc. 1803, and Doc. 1804]

Same to same (telegram). Mar. 26 Same subject. Leguistas consider having him sworn in as President and then seek asylum in Legation. 1064 [Pg. 1064 includes portions of Doc. 1801, Doc. 1802, Doc. 1803, and Doc. 1804]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. McMillin (telegram). Mar. 27 Same subject. Legation can not be party to schemes of any political faction, and asylum must be refused. 1065 [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 1805, Doc. 1806, Doc. 1807, Doc. 1808, and Doc. 1809]

Mr. McMillin to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Conferences fail to reach final agreement. Decree calling extra session of Congress May 15 issued. 1065 [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 1805, Doc. 1806, Doc. 1807, Doc. 1808, and Doc. 1809]

Same to same (telegram). May 13 Same subject. No threats against foreigners or their property. 1065 [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 1805, Doc. 1806, Doc. 1807, Doc. 1808, and Doc. 1809]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. McMillin (telegram). May 14 Same subject. Glad to learn no threats of disturbances. Use influence to secure peaceful adjustment of difference and establishment of government on permanent basis. 1065 [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 1805, Doc. 1806, Doc. 1807, Doc. 1808, and Doc. 1809]

Mr. McMillin to Mr. Bryan (telegram). May 15 Same subject. Congress meets and Benavides sworn in as Provisional President. 1065 [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 1805, Doc. 1806, Doc. 1807, Doc. 1808, and Doc. 1809]

Mr. Pezet to Mr. McMillin (telegram). May 16 Same subject. Informs of election of General Benavides as Provisional President. Names Cabinet. 1066 [Pg. 1066 includes portions of Doc. 1810, Doc. 1811, and Doc. 1812]

Mr. McMillin to Mr. Bryan (telegram). May 19 Same subject. Officials and business firms call on Provisional President Benavides. Congress expected to meet shortly and confirm earlier action. 1066 [Pg. 1066 includes portions of Doc. 1810, Doc. 1811, and Doc. 1812]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. McMillin (telegram). May 26 Same subject. Directs recognition of Colonel Benavides as the Provisional Government of Peru. Inform representatives of Argentina, Brazil, and Chile, in order that they may recognize at same time. 1066 [Pg. 1066 includes portions of Doc. 1810, Doc. 1811, and Doc. 1812]

Mr. McMillin to Mr. Bryan (telegram). May 27 Same subject. Reports joint action in recognizing provisional government. 1057 [Pg. 1057 is part of Doc. 1789]

portugal.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

1914 Oct. 27 Treaty for the advancement of general peace, signed at Lisbon, Feb. 4, 1914. Proclamation. 1068 [Pg. 1068 is part of Doc. 1814]

Oct. 27 Agreement extending the Arbitration Treaty of Apr. 6, 1908. Proclamation. 1070 [Pg. 1070 includes portions of Doc. 1814 and Doc. 1815]

roumania.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

Mr. Vopicka to Mr. Bryan (telegram). 1914 Oct. 10 Death of King Carlos and Accession to the Throne of King Ferdinand I. Announces death of the King. 1072 [Pg. 1072 includes portions of Doc. 1816, Doc. 1817, Doc. 1818, and Doc. 1819]

Same to same (telegram) Oct. 11 Same subject. Ferdinand, Prince of Rumania, proclaimed King, with title of Ferdinand I. 1072 [Pg. 1072 includes portions of Doc. 1816, Doc. 1817, Doc. 1818, and Doc. 1819]

President Wilson to Queen Elizabeth (telegram). Oct. 12 Same subject. Condolences 1072 [Pg. 1072 includes portions of Doc. 1816, Doc. 1817, Doc. 1818, and Doc. 1819]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Vopicka (telegram). do Same subject. Informs of sending of condolences by the President to Queen Elizabeth, and directs sorrow of this Government be expressed to Council of Ministers for Foreign Affairs, as well as expression of personal sympathy. 1072 [Pg. 1072 includes portions of Doc. 1816, Doc. 1817, Doc. 1818, and Doc. 1819]

President Wilson to King Ferdinand (telegram). do Same subject. Conveys good wishes for reign 1073 [Pg. 1073 includes portions of Doc. 1819, Doc. 1820, and Doc. 1821]

143 Mr. Vopicka to Mr. Bryan. Oct. 24 Same subject. Incloses letter from King Ferdinand to the President announcing the death of King Carlos and his own accession to the Throne. 1073 [Pg. 1073 includes portions of Doc. 1819, Doc. 1820, and Doc. 1821]

35 Mr. Bryan to Mr. Vopicka Dec. 23 Same subject. Transmits letter from the President to King Ferdinand acknowledging letter transmitted with despatch of Oct. 24. 1074 [Pg. 1074 is part of Doc. 1822]

salvador.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

Mr. Heimke to Mr. Brvan. 1914. Feb. 25 Message of the President. Transmits copy thereof. 1075 [Pg. 1075 is part of Doc. 1823]

364 Mr. Tennant to Mr. Bryan. June 30 Transfer of the Presidency. Encloses clipping relative to desire of President Melendez to resign in order to comply with the Constitution and legally become candidate for the Presidency for the next term. 1077 [Pg. 1077 includes portions of Doc. 1824, Doc. 1825, and Doc. 1826]

Aug. 21 Arbitration convention between the United States and Salvador, extending the duration of the Convention of Dec. 21.1908. Text. 1076 [Pg. 1076 is part of Doc. 1824]

Mr. Tennant to Mr. Bryan (telegram). Aug. 29 Transfer of the Presidency. President Melendez turns over executive power to first designate, Dr. Alfonso Ouiñónez M. 1077 [Pg. 1077 includes portions of Doc. 1824, Doc. 1825, and Doc. 1826]

Mr. Dueñas to Mr. Bryan Aug. 30 Same subject. Informs of delivery of Presidency by Melendez to Dr. Quiñónez. 1078 [Pg. 1078 includes portions of Doc. 1827, Doc. 1828, and Doc. 1829]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Dueñas. Sept. 4 Same subject. Acknowledges note of Aug. 29 concerning transfer of Presidency. 1078 [Pg. 1078 includes portions of Doc. 1827, Doc. 1828, and Doc. 1829]

Mr. Dueñas to Mr. Bryan. Sept. 23 Same subject. Inclosed letter from Dr. Quiñónez to President Wilson informing him of the assumption of the office of chief executive of Salvador. 1078 [Pg. 1078 includes portions of Doc. 1827, Doc. 1828, and Doc. 1829]

Mr. Lansing to Mr. Dueñas. Oct. 3 Same subject. Letter delivered to the President; reply will be forwarded through the American Minister at San Salvador. 1079 [Pg. 1079 includes portions of Doc. 1829, Doc. 1830, and Doc. 1831]

2 Mr. Lansing to Mr. Long Oct. 17 Same subject. Incloses President Wilson’s acknowledgment of President Quiñónez’s letter of Aug. 29. 1079 [Pg. 1079 includes portions of Doc. 1829, Doc. 1830, and Doc. 1831]

spain.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

1914. Mar. 23 Arbitration agreement between the United States and Spain, extending the duration of the Convention of Apr. 20, 1908. Text. 1081 [Pg. 1081 is part of Doc. 1832]

Dec. 23 Treaty between the United States and Spain for the advancement of peace. Text. 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 1832 and Doc. 1833]

sweden.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

1914. Mar. 6 Arbitration agreement between the United States and Sweden, extending the duration of the Convention of May 2, 1908. Text. 1086 [Pg. 1086 is part of Doc. 1834]

switzerland.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

1914 Apr. 28 Arbitration agreement between the United States and Switzerland, extending the duration of the Convention of Feb. 29, 1908. Text. 1088 [Pg. 1088 is part of Doc. 1835]

turkey.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

37 Mr. Morgenthau to Mr. Bryan. 1914. Mar. 17 Treaty of Peace between Turkey and Serbia. Transmits copy. 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 1836, Doc. 1837, and Doc. 1838]

41 Mr. Rustem to Mr. Bryan. Sept. 10 Abrogation of the Capitulations. The abrogation dates from Oct. 1, 1914. 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 1836, Doc. 1837, and Doc. 1838]

Mr. Morgenthau to Mr. Bryan (telegram). do Same subject. Requests instruction to protest against the judicial and administrative capitulations and to intimate that there is no serious objection to the economic capitulations. He has not joined the other Powers in their identic protest which is in an ineffective form. 1091 [Pg. 1091 includes portions of Doc. 1838 and Doc. 1839]

115 Same to same Sept. 11 Same subject. Incloses copy of the notice of abrogation, and of his acknowledgment thereof. 1091 [Pg. 1091 includes portions of Doc. 1838 and Doc. 1839]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Morgenthau (telegram). Sept. 16 Same subject. Instruction to notify the Ottoman Government that this Government does not acquiesce in the attempt to abrogate the capitulations and does not recognize that the Ottoman Government has a right to abrogate them, or that its unilateral action has any effect upon the rights and privileges enjoyed thereunder. 1093 [Pg. 1093 includes portions of Doc. 1839 and Doc. 1840]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Rustem. do Same subject and tenor 1094 [Pg. 1094 includes portions of Doc. 1841 and Doc. 1842]

Mr. Rustem to Mr. Bryan. Sept. 17 Same subject. Acknowledgment of the foregoing. 1094 [Pg. 1094 includes portions of Doc. 1841 and Doc. 1842]

venezuela.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

99 Mr. Caffery to Mr. Bryan. 1911. Oct. 26 Application of the law of ecclesiastical patronage to foreign missionary societies. Incloses copy of decree extending provisions of law to missionary societies, and says that this gives Government direct supervision of their affairs. 1099 [Pg. 1099 includes portions of Doc. 1849 and Doc. 1850]

134 1912. Jan. 2 Same subject. Incloses letter from American missionaries established in Venezuela. 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 1851 and Doc. 1852]

2 Mr. Wilson to Mr. Northcott. 1914. Feb. 27 Same subject. Discusses question at length, and points out that no actual hardship or injury has yet been suffered. However, should it eventually develop that decree will terminate privileges of freedom of worship hitherto guaranteed, Department will bring matter to attention of Venezuelan Government. 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 1851 and Doc. 1852]

43 Mr. McGoodwin to Mr. Bryan. Jan. 30 Certificates of good conduct required of immigrants to Venezuela. Reports issuance of decree requiring foreigners entering Venezuela to present “certificates of good conduct” and “documents attesting their personal status.” British Minister notifies Government action will not be recognized as applying to British subjects. No protest from Americans. Asks instructions. 1097 [Pg. 1097 includes portions of Doc. 1845, Doc. 1846, and Doc. 1847]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. McGoodwin. Feb. 28 Same subject. Directs protest against application of decree to Americans. 1097 [Pg. 1097 includes portions of Doc. 1845, Doc. 1846, and Doc. 1847]

Mr. McGoodwin to Mr. Bryan. Apr. 11 Same subject. Reports protest made, and inclosed copy of reply of Minister for Foreign Affairs. 1098 [Pg. 1098 includes portions of Doc. 1847 and Doc. 1848]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. McGoodwin (telegram) Apr. 16 Application of the law of ecclesiastical patronage to foreign missionary societies. Directs expression of this Government’s interest in obtaining permission for American clergymen to exercise the ministry in Venezuela and the introduction of this measure into the revised constitution. 1102 [Pg. 1102 includes portions of Doc. 1852, Doc. 1853, and Doc. 1854]

136 Mr. McGoodwin to Mr. Bryan. 1914. May 6 Same subject. Further discusses question. 1102 [Pg. 1102 includes portions of Doc. 1852, Doc. 1853, and Doc. 1854]

48 Mr. Bryan to Mr. McGoodwin. May 6 Certificates of good conduct required of immigrants to Venezuela. Acknowledges dispatch and directs report and protest in any specific cases wherein attempt is made to enforce the decree against American citizens. 1099 [Pg. 1099 includes portions of Doc. 1849 and Doc. 1850]

184 Mr. McGoodwin to Mr. Bryan. June 12 Constitution. Enumerates changes in the new constitution. 1095 [Pg. 1095 includes portions of Doc. 1843 and Doc. 1844]

Mr. Churión to Mr. Bryan (telegram). June 26 Death of the Venezuelan Minister to the United States. Informs of the death of Minister Rojas. 1104 [Pg. 1104 includes portions of Doc. 1855, Doc. 1856, and Doc. 1857]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. McGoodwin (telegram). do Same subject. Directed to call at Foreign Office and express suitable condolences. 1104 [Pg. 1104 includes portions of Doc. 1855, Doc. 1856, and Doc. 1857]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Churión (telegram). do Same subject. Condolences, and offer of assistance in making funeral arrangements. 1105 [Pg. 1105 includes portions of Doc. 1857, Doc. 1858, Doc. 1859, and Doc. 1860]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. Rodriguez (telegram). do Same subject. Condolences 1105 [Pg. 1105 includes portions of Doc. 1857, Doc. 1858, Doc. 1859, and Doc. 1860]

Mr. Bryan to Mr. McGoodwin (telegram). do Same subject. Informs him of arrangement for conveying remains to La Guira on U. S. S. Kansas, and directs that he ascertain whether this is agreeable to Minister for Foreign Affairs. 1105 [Pg. 1105 includes portions of Doc. 1857, Doc. 1858, Doc. 1859, and Doc. 1860]

198 Mr. McGoodwin to Mr. Bryan. do Application of the law of ecclesiastical patronage to foreign missionary societies. Refers to telegram of Apr. 16, and says that the National Constituent Assembly has acted in accordance with the suggestion made therein. 1104 [Pg. 1104 includes portions of Doc. 1855, Doc. 1856, and Doc. 1857]

Mr. Rodriguez to Mr. Bryan (telegram). July 1 Death of the Venezuelan Minister to the United States. Expresses gratitude for expressions of condolence. 1106 [Pg. 1106 includes portions of Doc. 1861 and Doc. 1862]

204 Mr. McGoodwin to Mr. Bryan. July 5 Same subject. Incloses letter from Minister for Foreign Affairs expressing gratitude for consideration shown in connection with the death and funeral of the late Minister. 1106 [Pg. 1106 includes portions of Doc. 1861 and Doc. 1862]

212 Same to same July 14 Authorization of American Consular Officers to visit vessels bound for the United States. Reports granting of privilege to salaried consular officers to visit vessels of whatever nationality bound for the United States, Porto Rico, and Colon. 1095 [Pg. 1095 includes portions of Doc. 1843 and Doc. 1844]

90 Mr. Bryan to Mr. McGoodwin. Sept. 11 Same subject. Acknowledges dispatch of July 14, and expresses appreciation of action taken. 1096 [Pg. 1096 includes portions of Doc. 1844 and Doc. 1845]

international conventions.

No. From and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

593 1914. July 13 Convention between the United States and other powers on literary and artistic copyright. Text of proclamation. 1108 [Pg. 1108 is part of Doc. 1863]

594 July 29 Convention between the United States and other powers for the arbitration of pecuniary claims. Text. 1109 [Pg. 1109 is part of Doc. 1864]

595 do Convention between the United States and other powers for the protection of inventions, patents, designs, and industrial models. Text. 1110 [Pg. 1110 is part of Doc. 1865]

The World War: Editorial noteThe World War: Editorial note

[1] editorial note.

editorial note. [Document 1]

editorial note.

Diplomatic correspondence concerning the World War will be printed in separate volumes of “Foreign Relations of the United States: The History of the World War, as shown by the records of the Department of State.”

Correspondence Circulars:Correspondence
Circulars:

Contents

Admission into the United States of adopted children of Chinese of American birthAdmission into the United States of adopted children of Chinese of American birth

[2] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, January 12, 1914.

File No. 151.10/199.

[Untitled] File No. 151.10/199.

General Instruction No. 263. Consular.

[Document 2]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, January 12, 1914.

To the American Consular Officers.

Gentlemen: The Department has received a letter dated January 5, 1914, from the Secretary of Labor1 saying that by a recent decision of the Department of Labor the adopted children of Chinese of American birth can not be permitted to enter the United States unless they are provided with the certificate prescribed by section 6 of the act approved July 5, 1884.

This decision does not affect directly or indirectly the existing practice with regard to the admission of the wives of United States citizens of the Chinese race or the adopted children of members of the exempted classes of Chinese, and admission may occur in these cases as heretofore if the claims advanced are affirmatively and satisfactorily established.

As stated above, however, Chinese persons claiming to be adopted children of Chinese of American birth will need to be provided with a section 6 certificate regularly issued as a prerequisite to admission into the United States.

I am [etc.],

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

1  This letter reads as follows: Department of Labor,
Washington, January 5, 1914.

Sir: Referring to Department of State letter of February 14, 1908 (file No. 11637/-1), and to a letter written to you by former Secretary of Commerce and Labor Straus on February 24, 1908, I have the honor to inclose a copy of a circular letter of instructions this day issued by the Bureau of Immigration to immigration officials in charge of the enforcement of the Chinese-exclusion laws, advising such officers of a recent decision of this Department to the effect that the adopted children of Chinese of American birth cannot be permitted to enter the United States unless they are provided with the certificate prescribed by section 6 of the act approved July 5, 1884.

In rendering the decision in question the Department holds that citizenship cannot be acquired by adoption, following the views expressed by Mr. Moore in his International Law Digest, vol. 3, pp. 484–485, and by Mr. Van Dyne in his work on naturalization, pp. 223, 224. In the Department’s judgment, not only has past experience shown that the claim of right to enter the United States as adopted children of citizens has been used for the purpose of defeating the intent of the exclusion laws, but the frequency with which the privilege may be abused is likely to increase in the future. In enforcing the general immigration statute, the Department has always held that adoption of an alien child by a United States citizen does not remove the child from the operation of said law, and there seems to be no good reason why the same practice should not be followed in enforcing the exclusion laws.

Kindly advise all consular officers having an interest in this matter of the purport of the Department’s decision.

Respectfully,

W. B. Wilson, Secretary.

Third International Peace ConferenceThird International Peace Conference

[3] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, January 31, 1914.

File No. 500.A3/29a.

[Untitled] File No. 500.A3/29a.

[Document 3]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, January 31, 1914.

To the Diplomatic Officers of the United States accredited to the Governments which took part in the Second International Peace Conference at The Hague.

Gentlemen: By the Final Act of the Second Peace Conference at The Hague in 1907 it was recommended to the Powers that a Third Peace Conference should be held within a period corresponding to that which had elapsed since the preceding Conference, at a date to be fixed by common agreement between the Powers, and attention was called to the necessity of preparing a program of the Third Conference a sufficient time in advance to ensure the conduct of the deliberations of the Conference with the necessary authority and expedition.

In order to attain this object it was by the Final Act further declared to be very desirable that, some two years before the probable date of the meeting, a preparatory committee should be charged by the Governments with the task of collecting the various proposals which might be brought forward for submission to the Conference, of ascertaining what subjects were ripe for embodiment in an international regulation, and of preparing a program for the Conference. It was also proposed that this committee should be entrusted with the task of formulating for the Conference a system of organization and procedure.

On June 10, 1912, the President of the United States appointed an advisory committee to this Government to consider proposals for a program for the next Conference. This committee has submitted an elaborate preliminary report. The necessary steps have not, however, been taken by the Governments concerned for the appointment of the international preparatory committee contemplated by the Final Act of the last Conference. It having been in effect recommended to the Powers by the last Conference that the Third Conference should be held within a period of eight years, which would make the meeting fall in the year 1915, a space of a year and a half still remains within which the preparation of the program may be accomplished. This is a period much longer than that which was found to be sufficient for the preparation of the programs of the First and Second Conferences.

With a view to facilitate the consideration and preparation of the program of the next Conference, the President desires you immediately to propose to the Governments to which you are respectively accredited that the duties of the international preparatory committee shall be committed to the Administrative Council of the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague, this Council being composed of the Netherlands Minister of Foreign Affairs and the diplomatic representatives of the Contracting Powers accredited to The Hague. To this Council the task of preparation for the Conference may readily and appropriately be committed. The place at which the Council sits leaves nothing to be desired from the point of view of convenience, while the entrusting of the work to a competent body already in existence would result in an appreciable saving both in time and in expense. If the membership of the Council were found to be too large for the efficient carrying on of the work in detail, this difficulty could at once be solved by the appointment of subcommittees to deal with particular subjects.

I am [etc.]

William Jennings Bryan.

Status of Chinese wives or widows of American citizensStatus of Chinese wives or widows of American citizens

[4] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, February 21, 1914.

File No. 132.22/3.

[Untitled] File No. 132.22/3.

[Document 4]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, February 21, 1914.

To the Diplomatic and Consular Officers of the United States in China.

Sir: The Department sends you herewith, for your information, a copy of its instruction No. 16 of February 13, 1914, to the Consul General at Shanghai concerning the status of Chinese women and women partly of Chinese descent who are the wives or widows of American citizens.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

[Inclosure.]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Sammons.

No. 16.] Department of State,
Washington, February 13, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received from your office despatch No. 785 of November 13, 1913,2 concerning Chinese wives or widows of American citizens, with especial reference to the question of their right to obtain passports of this Government and to be registered in American consulates. You refer to the cases of women partly of Chinese descent as well as those who are wholly Chinese. In this connection you call attention to the provision of section 1994 of the Revised Statutes concerning the naturalization of alien women by marriage to American citizens. The provision of law to which you refer reads as follows: Any woman who is now or may hereafter be married to a citizen of the United States, and who might herself be lawfully naturalized, shall be deemed a citizen.

On January 20, 1914, the Department sent a copy of your despatch to the Department of Labor for an expression of opinion as to the status of women of the class mentioned, and I enclose herewith a copy of a letter of January 28 in reply.

Because of the apparent lack of a judicial decision of the question involved, and in view of the apparent opinion of the Department of Labor, which has supervision of naturalization matters, namely that women having a trace of Chinese blood are not eligible to naturalization as citizens of the United States, this Department can not authorize you to treat them as such. Regular passports are not issued by this Government to persons who are not citizens of the United States, and the Department has not authorized the separate registration in consulates of such persons. Accordingly you should not register separately the wives or widows of American citizens if they have a trace of Chinese blood. However, upon the same principle that Chinese wives of American citizens are admitted into this country with their husbands, they may be included in passports and registration certificates issued to their husbands, and in case of need they may be given the benefit of your unofficial good offices.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

[Subinclosure.]

The Acting Secretary of Labor to the Secretary of State.

Department of Labor,
Washington, January 28, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 20th instant,2 with which you transmit copy of a despatch from the Consul General at Shanghai, asking for a ruling as to the status of women of part Chinese blood who are married to American citizens, particularly whether they may be considered citizens of the United States under the provisions of section 1994 of the Revised Statutes.

As I understand the case stated by the Consul General, two questions are involved, one of which is a judicial question and cannot therefore be determined by the executive branch of the Government, and the other of which is administrative and can be determined, in so far as a legal question is open to administrative determination at all, by the executive branch.

(1) As the power to naturalize aliens is vested in the courts, the only manner in which an authoritative decision can be secured on the question whether a person whose blood is partly white and partly Chinese is a “free white person” within the meaning of section 2169 of the Revised Statutes would be through the action of a court with respect to an application filed by such a person for naturalization. In this connection attention is directed to the fact that under section 14 of the Chinese exclusion act of 1882 no court can legally naturalize a Chinese person, this being a provision which is more specific in its terms than section 2169 R. S. The exclusion laws, on the one hand, relate to Chinese persons and persons of Chinese descent; while section 2169, on the other, relates to “free white persons.” It may be seriously doubted whether the first term was not intended, so far as naturalization is concerned at least, to include all persons with Chinese blood, and the second to exclude all persons not purely white, “white persons,” as the term has always been understood in this country, meaning those with no strain of colored blood in their veins.

(2) The administrative question, to wit, whether a woman having Chinese blood in her veins, but in whom the white blood predominates, shall be regarded as admissible to the United States under the Chinese exclusion laws, was carefully considered by the former Department of Commerce and Labor on several occasions, the holding uniformly having been that for purposes of administering the law persons should be regarded as other than of Chinese descent if the admixture of Chinese blood is less than one-half. Of course, this question, being in its final analysis one of law, could be decided in the courts, if anyone feeling aggrieved at the Department’s position saw fit to sue out a writ of habeas corpus; but so far all who have been affected by the Department’s holding seem to have been satisfied to abide by its decision.

Another proposition incident to this matter has heretofore operated in such a way as to avoid embarrassment to the administrative officers and at the same time has doubtless been partly responsible for these questions not going before the courts. This consists of the fact that even women of full Chinese blood who are married to American citizens are regarded as admissible to the United States, notwithstanding the provisions of the Chinese exclusion law, if admissible under the provisions of the general immigration act, upon the theory that the husband, an American citizen, has a right to have his wife with him in the country of his citizenship, whatever her race may be; and doubtless many women of the half or quarter blood have been admitted upon the same theory without raising any question regarding their legal status.

Of course, in this letter the question involved is treated upon the basis of acquirement of citizenship by a naturalization proceeding, upon the theory that an alien woman who cannot meet the conditions imposed with respect to naturalization—a direct method of acquiring citizenship—is not entitled to secure the status of a citizen by marriage—an indirect method (Low Wah Suey v. Backus, 225 U. S., 460, 473, 475).

Respectfully,

J. B. Densmore.

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

Opium laws and regulationsOpium laws and regulations

[5] [Untitled]

Department of State. Washington, March 11, 1914.

File No. 811.114/31a.

[Untitled] File No. 811.114/31a.

[Document 5]

[Untitled]

Department of State.
Washington, March 11, 1914.

To the Diplomatic Officers of the United States.

Gentlemen: Section 6 of the Act of Congress approved January 17, 1914, entitled “An Act to amend an Act entitled ‘An Act to prohibit the importation and use of opium for other than medicinal purposes,’ approved February ninth, nineteen hundred and nine,” provides as follows: Sec. 6. That hereafter it shall be unlawful for any person subject to the jurisdiction of the United States to export or cause to be exported from the United States, or from territory under its control or jurisdiction, or from countries in which the United States exercises extraterritorial jurisdiction, any opium or cocaine, or any salt, derivative, or preparation of opium or cocaine, to any other country: Provided, That opium or cocaine, and salts, derivatives, or preparations thereof, except smoking opium or opium prepared for smoking, the exportation of which is hereby absolutely prohibited, may be exported to countries regulating their entry under such regulations as are prescribed by such country for the importation thereof into such country, such regulations to be promulgated from time to time by the Secretary of State of the United States.

The Secretary of State shall request all foreign Governments to communicate through the diplomatic channels copies of laws and regulations promulgated in their respective countries which prohibit or regulate the importation of the aforesaid drugs, and when received advise The Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of Commerce thereof; whereupon the Secretary of State, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the Secretary of Commerce shall make and publish all proper regulations for carrying the provisions of this section into effect.

In conformity with the second paragraph of the section quoted you are instructed to request the Government to which you are respectively accredited to furnish you with three copies of its laws and regulations which prohibit or regulate the importation into its territory of any opium or cocaine, or any salt, derivative, or preparation of opium or cocaine.

The Department desires to receive these as early as possible.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
John E. Osborne.

Nineteenth International Congress of AmericanistsNineteenth International Congress of Americanists

[6] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, May 15, 1914.

[Untitled] [Document 6]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, May 15, 1914.

To the Diplomatic Officers of the United States.

Gentlemen: By joint resolution approved May 9, 1914, the President is authorized to extend invitations to foreign Governments to be represented by delegates at the Nineteenth International Congress of Americanists, to be held at the city of Washington in October of the year 1914.

You will accordingly extend to the Governments to which you are respectively accredited a cordial official invitation to be represented by delegates at the Congress mentioned; and in doing so you will add an expression of the pleasure with which the Government of the United States will learn of the acceptance of the invitation.

The enclosed preliminary program of the Congress is furnished for the information of the invited Government.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Admission and return of Chinese participating in the Panama-Pacific International Exposition and the Panama-California ExpositionAdmission and return of Chinese participating in the Panama-Pacific International Exposition and the Panama-California Exposition

[7] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, May 16, 1914.

File No. 811.607G/730a.

[Untitled] File No. 811.607G/730a.

[Document 7]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, May 16, 1914.

To the American Diplomatic and Consular Officers in China.

Sir: The Department is forwarding herewith for your information a copy of the Regulation3 governing the admission and return of Chinese participating in the Panama-Pacific International Exposition [and the Panama-California Exposition], also a copy of the Regulation of the Treasury Department providing for the free entry of materials for use in constructing, installing and maintaining foreign buildings and exhibits at the Exposition.4

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

3 Not printed. It is Department Circular No. 3, Bureau of Immigration, Department of Labor.

4 Not printed.

Admission and return of aliens, other than Chinese, participating in the Panama-Pacific and the Panama-California ExpositionsAdmission and return of aliens, other than Chinese, participating in the Panama-Pacific and the Panama-California Expositions

[8] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, May 27, 1914.

File No. 811.607G/738a.

[Untitled] File No. 811.607G/738a.

[Document 8]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, May 27, 1914.

To the American Diplomatic and Consular Officers.

Gentlemen: There is appended for your information circular No. 45 of the Department of Labor containing the regulations governing the admission and return of aliens participating in the Panama-Pacific International Exposition and the Panama-California Exposition, to be held in California in the year 1915.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

5 Not printed. It supplements No. 3, referred to in the preceding circular concerning Chinese participants.

Immigration lawsImmigration laws

[9] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, June 18, 1914.

File No. 150.01/85.

[Untitled] File No. 150.01/85.

[Document 9]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, June 18, 1914.

To the Diplomatic Officers of the United States.

Gentlemen: The Department is informed by the Secretary of Labor that the Bureau of Immigration of his Department has often encountered considerable difficulty in its efforts to enforce the immigration laws by reason of the proclivity of some aliens applying for admission to make false statements, and that this practice is due in part to the natural desire of aliens who are not satisfied of their own eligibility to enter the country and to a desire to make a good showing or to keep undisclosed facts of importance, but that to a considerable extent it is the result of coaching and other suggestions made to them by irresponsible agents, runners and others in the country whence they come, and possibly on board of vessels and even at our stations, by copassengers who have had experience with immigration officers.

Under section 24 of the Immigration Act, falsely testifying before an immigrant inspector is constituted perjury; while under section 2 of the said act, the immigration officials are required to exclude aliens who admit the commission of a crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, in which classification perjury has been included.

The Secretary of Labor also informs this Department that it occurs to his Department that a proper and fair enforcement of the law might be materially aided if due publicity could be given in foreign countries to the requirement of the Immigration Service of the United States that aliens shall testify truthfully when examined at our ports.

The Department desires that you bring this matter to the attention of the proper authorities of the Government to which you are accredited in order that their citizens and subjects may be advised of the requirements of the Immigration Laws of the United States and of the danger resulting from violation thereof involving not only the possibility of prosecution in the United States courts but exclusion generally.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Third International Peace ConferenceThird International Peace Conference

[10] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, June 22, 1914.

File No. 500.A3/122.

[Untitled] File No. 500.A3/122.

[Document 10]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, June 22, 1914.

To the Diplomatic Officers of the United States accredited to the Governments which took part in the Second International Peace Conference at The Hague.

Gentlemen: In the Department’s circular of January 31, 1914, you were instructed, with a view to facilitate the consideration and preparation of the program of the Third Hague Peace Conference, to propose to the Governments to which you are respectively accredited that the duties of the International Preparatory Committee recommended by the Second Hague Conference shall be committed to the Administrative Council or the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague, and that the meeting of the Third Conference be held in the year 1915.

The proposition which you made to the Governments under this instruction has generally met with favor. It has been accepted in its entirety by the Argentine Republic, Bolivia, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Denmark, Ecuador, Guatemala, Norway, Panama, Persia, Servia, Siam, Switzerland, Uruguay, and Venezuela, while other countries have accepted it in principle but consider it impossible to hold the conference next year.

The Government of the United States after a reconsideration of all the circumstances is inclined to the view that there is serious difficulty in the way of convoking the conference at an earlier date than the middle of 1916, especially in view of the fact that some of the Governments have announced their inability to carry through the inquiries and studies necessary to allow of their formulating definite views and propositions on the various subjects to be included in the program of the conference in time for a meeting of the conference in 1915. The Government of the United States is therefore willing, while regretting the postponement of the meeting of the conference, to withdraw that part of its proposition which contemplated the holding of the conference in 1915, and it now suggests that the conference be held in June of the year 1916.

With respect to the proposition that the duties of the International Preparatory Committee shall be committed to the Administrative Council of the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague, it has been pointed out by some of the Governments that the Administrative Council is too large and unwieldy a body to be charged with the preparatory work of the conference, and that it is essential, in order to cope satisfactorily with the work entrusted to it, that the members of the body should not be too numerous. It has been suggested by the Government of His Britannic Majesty that this may be obviated by the full Administrative Council electing from among its members a restricted number who would form the International Committee.

To its proposition that the duties of the Preparatory Committee shall be committed to the Administrative Council the Government of the United States desires to adhere as being a method by which both time and expense may be saved. It is immaterial to this Government, however, whether those duties be undertaken by the full council or by a restricted number of its members, as suggested by the British Government. But as there are thirty-six powers represented at The Hague, so that the committee would be composed of thirty-six representatives and the Netherlands Minister for Foreign Affairs, and as, in view of the technical nature of the subjects to be discussed, some Governments might desire to have their representatives assisted by technical delegates, the Government of the United States concedes that there is much merit in the British suggestion, and it is willing to amend its proposition so as to accept the suggestion.

Accordingly, the President desires you to propose to the Governments to which you are respectively accredited, as a substitute for the proposition which you made to them under the Department’s circular instruction of January 31, 1914, that the duties of the International Preparatory Committee shall be committed to a committee to be selected from among the members of the Administrative Council of the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague by the members of the Council and that the date for the meeting of the Third Peace Conference at The Hague be fixed for the month of June, 1916.

I am [etc.],

W. J. Bryan.

Second Pan American Scientific CongressSecond Pan American Scientific Congress

[11] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, July 7, 1914.

[Untitled] [Document 11]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, July 7, 1914.

To the Diplomatic Officers of the United States in Latin American Countries.

Gentlemen: The First Pan American Scientific Congress which held its sessions at Santiago, Chile, in 1908–9, designated the city of Washington as the place of meeting for the Second Congress. This unsolicited and voluntary action of the First Congress, evidencing, as it did, on the part of its members a desire to cultivate closer intellectual and cultural relations with the United States, gave to the Government of the United States intense gratification; and the scientific gentlemen who attended the First Congress as delegates of the Government of the United States, greatly impressed with the cordial reception and hospitable treatment that had been accorded to them at Santiago, were glad to interest themselves in arranging for the Second Congress. These gentlemen having determined that an appropriate time for the holding of this Congress would be in the month of October, 1915, the Congress of the United States, in the Diplomatic and Consular appropriation act, approved June 30, 1914, has been pleased to authorize the Secretary of State to invite the Governments of the American Republics to be represented thereat by delegates, and has made suitable provision for the expenses of the Congress and for the entertainment of the delegates.

You are accordingly instructed to extend to the Governments to which you are respectively accredited an official invitation to be represented by delegates in the Second Pan American Scientific Congress to meet at Washington in October, 1915.

In communicating the invitation you will express the pleasure with which the Government of the United States will learn of its acceptance by the invited Government and of the intention of that Government to appoint delegates to represent it in the deliberations of the Congress which it is confidently hoped will mark an important step in the development of closer intellectual ties between the United States and the Republics of Latin America.

In furtherance of this purpose I have appointed the following named gentlemen as an executive committee charged with the duty of formulating the program of the Congress and the perfecting of arrangements preparatory to the assembling of the Congress:

The Honorable William Phillips, Third Assistant Secretary of State;

The Honorable P. P. Claxton, Commissioner of Education; Brigadier General William C. Gorgas, Surgeon General, United States Army;

John Barrett, Esquire, Director General, Pan American Union;

Mr. William H. Holmes, Head Curator, Smithsonian Institution;

Mr. George M. Rommel, Chief, Division of Animal Industry, Department of Agriculture;

Professor L. S. Rowe, University of Pennsylvania;

Dr. James Brown Scott, Secretary, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

Opium laws and regulationsOpium laws and regulations

[12] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, July 8, 1914.

File No. 811.114/49.

[Untitled] File No. 811.114/49.

[Document 12]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, July 8, 1914.

To the Diplomatic Officers of the United States.

Gentlemen: Referring to the Department’s circular instruction of March 11, 1914, entitled “Opium Laws and Regulations,” you are now instructed to communicate to the Governments to which you are respectively accredited the conditions under which opium, cocaine, etc., may be imported into the United States, as follows:

Opium, other than smoking opium and cocaine, and salts, derivatives or preparations thereof, may be imported into the United States under the following conditions:

1st. That they shall conform to the United States pharmacopœian standard, or if produced in Scotland, England, France or Germany to the pharmacopœian standard of the country of production.

2d. That in the case of opium, it is not imported by any subject of the Emperor of China.

3d. That they conform to the Food and Drugs Act of June 30, 1906.

4th. That they are imported for medicinal purposes only.

You may add that the importation as well as the exportation of smoking opium or opium prepared for smoking is absolutely prohibited.

In communicating this information you will request to be advised of the conditions under which the Governments to which you are respectively accredited permit importation of opium and cocaine, and salts, derivatives or preparations thereof. I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
William Phillips.

Foreign naval rendezvous at Hampton Roads for participation in the celebration of the completion of the Panama Canal and the opening of the Panama-Pacific International ExpositionForeign naval rendezvous at Hampton Roads for participation in the celebration of the completion of the Panama Canal and the opening of the Panama-Pacific International Exposition

[13] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, July 13, 1914.

File No. 8111812/497.

[Untitled] File No. 8111812/497.

[Document 13]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, July 13, 1914.

To the Diplomatic Officers of the United States.

Gentlemen: Referring to the Department’s instructions of September 17 and November 25, 1913,6 with regard to the invitation extended by the President to foreign nations to send representatives and as many of their national war vessels as they may deem proper to Hampton Roads in 1915 for the purpose of participating in the celebration of the completion of the Panama Canal and the opening of the Panama-Pacific International Exposition, I enclose herewith, for communication to the Governments to which you are respectively accredited a memorandum of the ceremonies incident to the naval review. The memorandum is tentative and slight changes therein may be found advisable.

In bringing this program to the notice of the Government to which you are accredited you will inform that Government that the Navy Department contemplates supplying coal to such foreign vessels as may desire it before the departure of the international fleet for Panama. The coal will be supplied to foreign ships at the same price as that paid by the United States naval vessels. In order, however, that foreign ships may be enabled to take on coal before their departure from Hampton Roads it will be necessary, in view of a possibility of bad weather and the presence of ice in the harbor, that they arrive at Hampton Roads a longer time before their final departure than otherwise would be the case; consequently you will request that foreign ships arrive at Hampton Roads between the 10th and 15th of February next, and that this Government be furnished at the earliest convenient date with the following information: Number of ships to be sent;

The size of these ships;

The amount of coal carried by each; and

The steaming radius of each.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

Memorandum with respect to the participation of foreign war vessels in ceremonies incident to the Naval Review in celebration of the completion of the Panama Canal and the opening of the Panama-Pacific International Exposition.

1915

February 10 to 15. Foreign ships rendezvous at Hampton Roads.

February 20. Foreign naval representatives to be received by the President in Washington.

February 22. The President will proceed to Hampton Roads and there review the combined fleet, after which the fleet will proceed to the Isthmus of Panama.

March 5. The President, on a battleship, will depart for the Panama Canal.

March 10. The President arrives at Colon.

March 12. The President and fleet pass through canal.

March 13. Ceremonies at Balboa or Panama.

March 13. The President sails for San Francisco on battleship.

March 14. Fleet leaves Balboa, proceeding to San Francisco.

March 23. The President arrives at San Francisco.

6  For. Rel, 1913, pp. 13–14.

Panama-Pacific International ExpositionPanama-Pacific International Exposition

[14] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, July 16, 1914.

File No. 811.607G/829.

[Untitled] File No. 811.607G/829.

[Document 14]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, July 16, 1914.

To the Diplomatic and Consular Officers of the United States.

Gentlemen: It has been brought to the attention of the Department by the president of the Panama-Pacific International Exposition that the impression prevails in various quarters that the Government of the United States evinces no particular concern in the success of the exposition, and that if it were publicly announced that the Government takes an interest in the exposition as a national undertaking and as a part of the governmental celebration of the opening of the Panama Canal it would be of service and assistance in securing participation by foreign Governments in the exposition.

The Department is of the opinion that the invitation extended on behalf of the Government and people of the United States to the nations of the earth by the President’s proclamation and the representations made by the diplomatic officers of the United States to foreign Governments under the Department’s instruction of February 5, 1912, should leave nothing to be desired in the way of showing the interest taken by this Government in the exposition and its wish that all nations should participate therein.

This interest in the exposition by the Government of the United States has been further manifested by the various provisions made by the Congress of the United States, of which you have been informed from time to time.

The Department is of the opinion that it would not be becoming to the dignity of this Government to make further representations to foreign Governments in this regard. It desires, however, that, should it come to your knowledge that any impression prevails in any quarter that the Government of the United States is in any way lacking in interest and support of the exposition, you will endeavor to overcome such impression by stating that the Government of the United States is deeply interested in the success of the exposition, that it is extending and will continue to extend to that undertaking every possible assistance, and that it considers the exposition an enterprise in which the people of the United States feel a patriotic pride.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

Regulations for the operation and navigation of the Panama CanalRegulations for the operation and navigation of the Panama Canal

[15] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, July 25, 1914.

File No. 811f.812/589a.

[Untitled] File No. 811f.812/589a.

[Document 15]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, July 25, 1914.

To the American Consular Officers including Consular Agents.

Gentlemen: There is being forwarded to your office under separate cover a copy of the Executive order of July 9, 1914, prescribing the rules and regulations for the operation and navigation of the Panama Canal and approaches thereto including all waters under its jurisdiction.7

You should bring the provisions of this order to the attention of all interested persons in your consular jurisdiction.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

7 Not printed.

Citizenship of persons whose American fathers have never resided in the United StatesCitizenship of persons whose American fathers have never resided in the United States8

8 Compare the correspondence under Portugal in For. Rel. 1913, pp. 1290–1303.

[16] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, July 27, 1914.

File No. 130/508a.

[Untitled] File No. 130/508a.

[Document 16]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, July 27, 1914.

To the Diplomatic and Consular Officers of the United States in China and Turkey.

Gentlemen: The Department’s attention has been drawn of late, through applications for passports and registration in consulates, to the question of the citizenship of persons born in China and Turkey, whose fathers were also born therein and claimed American citizenship under the provision of Section 1993 of the Revised Statutes of the United States but had never resided in the United States.

Sections 1992 and 1993 of the Revised Statutes of the United States read as follows:

Sec. 1992. All persons born in the United States and not subject to any foreign power, excluding Indians not taxed, are declared to be citizens of the United States.

Sec. 1993. All children heretofore born or hereafter born out of the limits and jurisdiction of the United States, whose fathers were or may be at the time of their birth citizens thereof, are declared to be citizens of the United States; but the rights of citizenship shall not descend to children whose fathers never resided in the United States.

The provision of section 1992 is similar to the following provision of the fourteenth amendment to the Constitution, so far as it applies to native citizens: All persons born or naturalized in the United States and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside.

It is obvious that persons of the class mentioned can not claim American citizenship under the provision of section 1993 of the Revised Statutes, since their fathers had never resided in the United States when such persons were born. Moreover, the Department considers that these persons were not born citizens of the united States under the provision of section 1992 of the Revised Statutes or the provision of the fourteenth amendment to the Constitution just quoted, which, in the Department’s opinion, are applicable only to cases of persons actually born within the territory and jurisdiction of the United States. Consequently the Department holds that persons of the class mentioned are not citizens of the United States, even though their fathers may have resided in American communities and submitted themselves to the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the United States. Therefore, such persons are not entitled to the protection of this Government.

It is important to observe that this ruling is contrary to the ruling of the Department set forth in the instruction No. 22, of August 9, 1887, to the Consul at Smyrna, Turkey, (Foreign Relations of the United States for 1887, page 1125: Moore’s International Law Digest vol. 3, pp. 287–288), and to the similar ruling contained in the Department’s instruction No. 28, of January 6, 1888, to the Consul-General at Apia, Samoa, (Moore’s International Law Digest, vol. 3, pp. 288–289).

A copy of the opinion of the Solicitor, dated June 22, 1914, in the case of Ben Zion Lilienthal is appended hereto.9

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

9 Not printed.

Opening of the Panama CanalOpening of the Panama Canal

[17] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, July 31, 1914.

File No. 811f.812/589b.

[Untitled] File No. 811f.812/589b.

[Document 17]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, July 31, 1914.

To the Diplomatic Officers of the United States.

Gentlemen: You are instructed to communicate to the Governments to which you are respectively accredited the following information relative to the opening of the Panama Canal, which has been furnished by the Secretary of War: The Panama Canal will be opened for commerce to vessels not needing more than 30 feet of water, on and after August 15, 1914.

The official opening of the canal, as heretofore announced, will be in the month of March, 1915. An appropriate announcement will be made when a greater depth of water than 30 feet has been secured.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

International Dry-farming CongressInternational Dry-farming Congress

[18] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, August 3, 1914.

[Untitled] [Document 18]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, August 3, 1914.

To the Diplomatic Officers of the United States.

Gentlemen: In pursuance of a joint resolution of the Congress of the United States, approved July 17, 1914, a copy of which is hereto attached, you are instructed to extend an invitation to the Governments to which you are respectively accredited, to appoint delegates or representatives to the International Dry-Farming Congress to be held at Wichita, Kansas, October 7–17, 1914.

In doing so you will explain that the International Dry-Farming Congress has for its purpose the spread of knowledge concerning better farming methods, especially in regions having light or irregular rainfall, and primarily the teaching of conservation of moisture through scientific tillage methods; and you will express the hope that the invited Governments may deem it of advantage to be represented at the congress.

In connection with the Dry-Farming Congress there will be held the International Soil Products Exposition, participation in which by the nations of the world will be welcomed by the management of the Dry-Farming Congress.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Liability for military service in foreign countries of persons residing in the United StatesLiability for military service in foreign countries of persons residing in the United Statesa

a See also page 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], footnote.

[Circular notice to applicants for passports.]

[19] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington , August 14, 1914.

[Untitled] [Document 19]

[Untitled]

The Department of State has recently received numerous inquiries from foreign-born persons residing in this country as to whether they may be compelled to perform military service in their native lands and as to what penalties, by way of fines, confiscation of property, or imprisonment in case of return, they will incur if they fail to report to the authorities of their countries of origin for military service. Some of the inquiries refer to persons who have obtained naturalization as citizens of the United States, others to persons who have made declarations of intention to become American citizens, and still others to persons who have taken no steps toward acquiring American citizenship. Misconception and confusion concerning this matter appear to be current.

The United States is not a party to any treaties under which persons of foreign origin residing in this country may be compelled to return to their countries of origin for military service, nor is there any way in which persons may be forced into foreign armies against their will so long as they remain in the United States.

The Department can not undertake to give authentic, official information either, in general, as to the requirements of the military service laws of foreign countries and the penalties provided therein for evasion of military service, or, in particular, as to the status and present or future liabilities of individuals under such laws. Information of this kind must be obtained from officials of the foreign countries concerned.

The Department issues printed circulars concerning the status in their native lands of naturalized citizens of the United States, natives of certain European countries, and these will be furnished to interested persons upon request. It is specifically stated in these circulars that the information contained in them is not to be considered as official so far as it relates to the laws and regulations of foreign countries.

The United States has concluded treaties of naturalization with the following European countries: Austria-Hungary, Belgium, Denmark, the German States, Great Britain, Norway, Sweden, and Portugal. Copies of these treaties are to be found in “Treaties, Conventions, etc., between the United States of America and Other Powers” (Government Printing Office, 1910), and separate copies may be furnished by the Department upon request. Under these treaties the naturalization of persons concerned as citizens of the United States and the termination of their former allegiance are recognized, with the reservation, in most of them, that such persons remain liable to trial and punishment in their native lands for offenses committed prior to emigration therefrom, including offenses of evasion of military duty. The United States holds that no naturalized citizen of this country can rightfully be held to account for military liability to his native land accruing subsequent to emigration therefrom, but this principle may be contested by countries with which the United States has not entered into treaties of naturalization. The latter countries may hold that naturalization of their citizens or subjects as citizens of other countries has no effect upon their original military obligation, or may deny the right of their citizens or subjects to become naturalized as citizens of other countries, in the absence of express consent or without the fulfillment of military obligations. More specific information as to the Department’s understanding of the laws of these countries concerning nationality and military obligations may be found in the Department’s circulars mentioned above.

It is important to observe that an alien who declares his intention to become a citizen of the United States does not, at the time of making such declaration, renounce allegiance to his original sovereign, but merely declares that he intends to do so. Such person does not, by his declaration of intention, acquire the status of a citizen of the United States.

W. J. Bryan.
Department of State,
Washington , August 14, 1914.

Invitation to all Governments to cooperate with the United States in regard to immigration in war timeInvitation to all Governments to cooperate with the United States in regard to immigration in war time

[20] The Secretary of State to the Italian Chargé d’Affaires

Department of State, Washington, August 29, 1914.

File No. 150.07/24.

[21] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Penfield.

Department of State, Washington, August 29, 1914.

File No. 150.07/24.

The Secretary of State to the Italian Chargé d’Affaires File No. 150.07/24.

[Document 20]

The Secretary of State to the Italian Chargé d’Affaires 9

Department of State,
Washington, August 29, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Charge d’affaires: The Secretary of Labor, under whose direct supervision and control the Bureau of Immigration is administering the immigration laws of the United States, is endeavoring as best he can through the bureau mentioned to meet in a spirit of reasonable liberality and broad humanity the various problems arising in connection with immigration to this country by reason of the present war conditions in Europe and elsewhere. He has already called the attention of the various steamship companies, in justice to intending immigrants, to the necessity for strict observance of particular care in the selection and transportation of alien passengers. As the immigration laws of the United States must be observed and enforced, irrespective of the existence abroad of the said conditions, the bringing of aliens at this time to ports of the United States who are not clearly of the admissible classes must, therefore, result in even more than ordinary hardship and distress as well as expense because of the difficulty of deporting promptly and safely, either to the country of origin or that of embarkation, those whom it may be necessary under the said laws to reject. In cases of aliens from countries now at war proceeding to a seaport of a neutral nation and thence embarking for the United States, greater hardships may be suffered and more dangers encountered.

It is the desire of this Government in this emergency, by diligence and careful attention, to reduce to a minimum all unfavorable elements, and this Department joins the Department of Labor in inviting the cooperation of all governments and immigration authorities to work in unison for the attainment of this purpose by the exercise of care in permitting the transportation to the United States from foreign ports of such aliens only as are clearly of the admissible classes under the immigration laws of the United States.

The classes of aliens who are excluded from admission to the United States are set forth in section 2 of the act of February 20, 1907, as amended by the act of March 26, 1910.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

9 The same mutatis mutandis to all other members of the Diplomatic Corps at Washington.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Penfield. File No. 150.07/24.

[Document 21]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Penfield. 10

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 29, 1914.

The Secretary of Labor is endeavoring through the Bureau of Immigration to meet in a spirit of reasonable liberality and broad humanity, the various problems arising in connection with immigration to this country by reason of the war conditions in Europe and elsewhere. He has already called the attention of the various steamship companies, in justice to intending immigrants, to the necessity for the strict observance of particular care in the selection and transportation of alien passengers. As the immigration laws of the United States must be observed and enforced irrespective of the existence abroad of the said conditions, the bringing of aliens at this time to ports of the United States who are not clearly of the admissible classes must, therefore, result in even more than the ordinary hardship and distress as well as expense, because of the difficulty of deporting safely and promptly, either to the country of origin, or that of embarkation, those whom it may be necessary under the said laws to reject. In the cases of aliens from nations now at war proceeding to a seaport of a neutral nation and thence embarking for the United States, greater hardships may be suffered and more dangers encountered.

It is the desire of this Government in this emergency, by diligence and careful attention to reduce to a minimum all unfavorable elements, and this Department joins the Department of Labor in inviting the cooperation of all governments and immigration authorities to work in unison for the attainment of this purpose by the exercise of care in permitting the transportation to the United States from foreign ports of such aliens only as are clearly of the admissible classes under the immigration laws of the United States, section 2, act of February 20, 1907, as amended by act March 26, 1910, copy in your office.

The foregoing has been transmitted to the diplomatic representatives of foreign nations at this capital and you are requested to aid as far as you can consistently in carrying out the object of this communication and to bring the same to the attention of the Government to which you are accredited and to all interested parties.

Repeat to consuls.

Bryan.

10 The same mutatis mutandis to the American Embassies at Paris, Berlin, London, Rome, St. Petersburg, San Sebastian, and Constantinople and to the American Legations at Brussels, The Hague, Christiania, Copenhagen, Stockholm, Athens, Lisbon, Bucharest, and Berne.

Nineteenth International Congress of AmericanistsNineteenth International Congress of Americanists

[22] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, September 5, 1914.

[Untitled] [Document 22]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, September 5, 1914.

The Diplomatic Officers of the United States.

Gentlemen: Referring to the Department’s instruction of May 15th last extending to foreign governments an official invitation to be represented by delegates at the Nineteenth International Congress of Americanists to be held in the city of Washington in October, 1914, the Department advises you of the receipt of a letter from the secretary of the congress in which he announces the decision of the organizing committee to postpone the meeting of the congress indefinitely.

You will communicate this information to the Government to which you are accredited and inform that Government that you will not fail promptly to inform it when a date shall have been set for the meeting of the congress.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Argentina:Argentina:

Contents

Death of the President, Roque Saenz Peña, and succession of the Vice President, Victorino de la Plaza, to the Presidency (Documents 23-27)

Death of the President, Roque Saenz Peña, and succession of the Vice President, Victorino de la Plaza, to the PresidencyDeath of the President, Roque Saenz Peña, and succession of the Vice President, Victorino de la Plaza, to the Presidency

[23] Chargé Lorillard to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Buenos Aires, August 9, 1914.

File No. 835.001/38a.

[24] President Wilson to the Vice President of Argentina.

The White House, Washington, August 10, 1914.

File No. 835.001/35a.

[25] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of Argentina.

Department of State, Washington, August 10, 1914.

File No. 835.001/35a.

[26] Chargé Lorillard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Buenos Aires, August 14, 1914.

File No. 835.001/38.

[27] The Argentine Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Argentine Embassy, Washington, December 20, 1914.

File No. 835.001P69.

Chargé Lorillard to the Secretary of State. File No. 835.001/38a.

[Document 23]

Chargé Lorillard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Buenos Aires, August 9, 1914.

President of the Republic Saenz Pena died suddenly early this morning.

Lorillard.

President Wilson to the Vice President of Argentina. File No. 835.001/35a.

[Document 24]

President Wilson to the Vice President of Argentina.

[Telegram.]

The White House,
Washington, August 10, 1914.

It is with deep regret that I learn of the death of His Excellency President Saenz Pena and I hasten to express to the Government and people of Argentina the sincere sympathy of the Government and people of the United States of America and my own in this great loss sustained by your country.

Woodrow Wilson.

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of Argentina. File No. 835.001/35a.

[Document 25]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of Argentina.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 10, 1914.

I profoundly deplore the bereavement which afflicts the great nation of Argentina in the death of its illustrious President, Doctor Saenz Pena, whose loss will be mourned not only in the country over which he so worthily presided but throughout the civilized world.

W. J. Bryan.

Chargé Lorillard to the Secretary of State. File No. 835.001/38.

[Document 26]

Chargé Lorillard to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 332.] American Legation,
Buenos Aires, August 14, 1914.

Sir: Referring to my telegram of August 9, with respect to the death of President Roque Saenz Peña early that day, I have the honor to report that Doctor Victorino de la Plaza, the Vice President, who has been acting as chief executive for the past eleven months, has thereby become President of the Argentine Republic for the remainder of the present term, which ends in 1916. Sehor Benito Villanueva, the Vice President of the Senate, is next in succession to the Presidency. * * *

The members of the Legation attended the funeral with the rest of the diplomatic body. The text of the telegrams of condolence from the President and Secretary of State were given publicity.

I have [etc.]

George Lorillard.

The Argentine Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 835.001P69.

[Document 27]

The Argentine Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Argentine Embassy,
Washington, December 20, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: I have the honor of transmitting herewith a copy of the autograph letter of His Excellency the President of the Nation, Doctor Victorino de la Plaza, directed to His Excellency President Wilson, on the occasion of his assumption of the Executive Power upon the death of Doctor Roque Saenz Peña.

At the same time I transmit to you the said autograph letter and beg you to cause it to reach its high destination. Accept [etc.]

R. S. Naón.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

The President of Argentina to President Wilson.

Great and Good Friend: Doctor Roque Saenz Peña, President of the Nation, having died on the 9th instant, I have the honor to communicate to Your Excellency that in accordance with the constitutional provision I assumed, on the same date, the Executive Power of the Nation for the rest of the present presidential term, ending the 12th of October, 1916.

On fulfilling this duty it is very gratifying to me to say to Your Excellency that all the powers of my Government will be directed toward cultivating and making closer the frank and cordial relations that happily exist between the Argentine Republic and the Republic of the United States of America. … I avail myself of this occasion to express my sincere desire for the prosperity of the United States of America and for the personal happiness of Your Excellency.

Your Good and True Friend,

Victorino de la Plaza.

Austria-Hungary:Austria-Hungary:

Contents

Arbitration agreement between the United States and Austria-Hungary, extending the duration of the Convention of January 15, 1909Arbitration agreement between the United States and Austria-Hungary, extending the duration of the Convention of January 15, 19091

1 For the text of the convention of Jan. 15, 1909, see For. Rel. 1909, p. 33.

Signed at Washington, May 6, 1914; ratification advised by the Senate, May 20, 1914; ratified by the President, May 27, 1914; ratified by Austria-Hungary, May 13, 1914; ratifications exchanged at Washington, May 28, 1914; proclaimed, May 28, 1914.

[28] By the President of the United States of America.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this twenty-eighth day of May in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-eighth.

Treaty Series No. 592.]

By the President of the United States of America. Treaty Series No. 592.]

[Document 28]

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas an Agreement between the United States of America and Austria-Hungary extending, for a further period of five years, the arbitration convention concluded between them on January 15, 1909, was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Washington, on the sixth day of May, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, the original of which Agreement, being in the English, German, and Hungarian languages, is word for word as follows:

The President of the United States of America and His Majesty the Emperor of Austria, King of Bohemia, etc., and Apostolic King of Hungary, being desirous of extending the period of five years during which the Arbitration Convention concluded on January 15, 1909, is to remain in force, have resolved to conclude the following Convention and for that purpose have appointed their Plenipotentiaries:

The President of the United States of America, the Honorable William Jennings Bryan, Secretary of State of the United States; and

His Majesty the Emperor of Austria, King of Bohemia, etc., and Apostolic King of Hungary, Constantin Theodor Dumba, Grand Cross of the Order of Francis Joseph, 3rd Class Knight of the Order of the Iron Crown, His Majesty’s Privy Councillor, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary to the United States of America;

Who, after communicating to each other their respective full powers, found in good and due form, have agreed upon the following-Articles:

Article I.

The Convention of Arbitration of January 15, 1909, between the United States of America and Austria-Hungary, the duration of which by Article III thereof was fixed at a period of five years from the fifteenth day after the date of exchange of ratifications, which period will terminate on May 28, 1914, is hereby extended and continued in force for a further period of five years from May 28, 1914.

Article II.

The present Convention shall be ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by His Majesty the Emperor of Austria, King of Bohemia, etc., and Apostolic King of Hungary; and it shall become effective upon the date of the exchange of ratifications, which shall take place at Washington as soon as possible.

In testimony whereof the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed this Convention and have affixed thereto their seals.

Done in duplicate at Washington, this 6th day of May, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen.

[seal.] William Jennings Bryan

[seal.] Constantin Theodor Dumba

And whereas, the said Agreement has been duly ratified on both parts, and the ratifications of the two governments were exchanged in the City of Washington, on the twenty-eighth day of May, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Agreement to be made public, to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this twenty-eighth day of May in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-eighth.
Woodrow Wilson.

By the President:
W. J. Bryan
Secretary of State.

Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand and the Duchess of HohenbergAssassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand and the Duchess of Hohenberg

[29] Ambassador Penfield to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Vienna, June 28, 1914.

File No. 863.0011/9.

[30] The President to the Emperor.

The White House, Washington, June 29, 1914.

File No. 863.0011/9.

[31] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador of Austria-Hungary.

Department of State, Washington, June 30, 1914.

File No. 863.0011/9.

[32] The Emperor to the President.

Vienna, June 30, 1914.

File No. 863.0011/10.

[33] [Untitled]

Vienna , August 2, 1914.

File No. 863.0011/17.

[34] The President to the Emperor.

Washington , October 20, 1914.

File No. 863.0011/17.

Ambassador Penfield to the Secretary of State. File No. 863.0011/9.

[Document 29]

Ambassador Penfield to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Vienna, June 28, 1914.

I regret to report assassination today at Sarajevo, Bosnia, of Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir apparent to the thrones of Austria-Hungary, and his wife, the Duchess of Hohenberg, by pistol shots fired by a student. The Archduke and wife were attending an official function. The Austrian Emperor returns to Vienna Monday from Ischl.

Penfield.

The President to the Emperor. File No. 863.0011/9.

[Document 30]

The President to the Emperor.

[Telegram.]

The White House,
Washington, June 29, 1914.

Deeply shocked at the atrocious murder of His Imperial and Royal Highness the Archduke Francis Ferdinand and Consort at an assassin’s hands, I extend to Your Majesty, to the Imperial and Royal Family, and to the Government of Austria-Hungary the sincere condolences of the Government and people of the United States and an expression of my own profound sympathy.

Woodrow Wilson.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador of Austria-Hungary. File No. 863.0011/9.

[Document 31]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador of Austria-Hungary.

Department of State,
Washington, June 30, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: I am greatly shocked and grieved to learn of the terrible affliction which has befallen the people of Austria-Hungary through the assassination of the Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife, and I beg of you, my dear Dr. Dumba, to accept, personally, this expression of my profound sympathy.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Emperor to the President. File No. 863.0011/10.

[Document 32]

The Emperor to the President.

[Telegram.]

Vienna, June 30, 1914.

Deeply sensible of the condolence you have kindly transmitted to me in the name of the Government and people of the United States, I beg you to accept therefor and for the expression of your own sympathy my sincerest and cordial thanks.

Franz Joseph.

[Untitled] File No. 863.0011/17.

[Document 33]

[Untitled]

Great and Good Friend: Bowed down and with deeply afflicted heart, I inform you that my dearly beloved nephew, His Serene, Imperial and Royal Highness, Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria-Este, in the midst of the earnest performance of his duty, together with his nobleminded wife, Her Highness the Duchess of Hohenberg, who in the hour of danger remained faithfully by his side, on June 28 of this year at Sarajevo, fell as victims of a horrible crime.

With the friendly interest that you take in all the happenings concerning me and my House, I cherish the assured hope that you will also take a sympathetic interest in the above information and thereby lessen in some measure my grief over this loss, which has touched me so severely.

I take advantage of this sorrowful occasion for the renewed assurance of my highest esteem.

Franz Joseph.
Vienna , August 2, 1914.

The President to the Emperor. File No. 863.0011/17.

[Document 34]

The President to the Emperor.

Great and Good Friend: I have received Your Majesty’s letter of the 2d of August last, in which you conveyed to me the sad tidings of the deaths on the 28th of June, of Your Majesty’s dearly beloved nephew His Imperial and Royal Highness the Arch Duke Franz Ferdinand and Her Highness the Duchess of Hohenberg.

I learn with deep sorrow of the great affliction which has befallen Your Majesty and I offer to you my sincere and heartfelt condolences.

May God have Your Majesty and Your Majesty’s Family in His safe and holy keeping.

Your Good Friend,

Woodrow Wilson.
By the President:
Robert Lansing
Acting Secretary of State.
Washington , October 20, 1914.

Bolivia:Bolivia:

Contents

Boundary agreement between Bolivia and Paraguay; good offices of the United States (Documents 35-39)

Boundary agreement between Bolivia and Paraguay; good offices of the United StatesBoundary agreement between Bolivia and Paraguay; good offices of the United States

[35] Minister Greystad to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Montevideo, July 9, 1913.

File No. 724.3415/21.

[36] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Mooney.

Department of State, Washington, November 20, 1914.

File No. 724.3415/24.

[37] Minister Mooney to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Asuncion, November 28, 1914.

File No. 724.3415/25

[38] The Acting Secretary of State to the Bolivian Minister.

Department of State, Washington, November 30, 1914.

File No. 724.3415/26.

[39] The Bolivian Minister to the Acting Secretary of State.

Bolivian Legation, Washington, December 1, 1914.

File No. 724.3415/26.

Minister Greystad to the Secretary of State. File No. 724.3415/21.

[Document 35]

Minister Greystad to the Secretary of State.

No. 66.] American Legation,
Montevideo, July 9, 1913.

Sir: Referring to previous despatches1 concerning the Chaco boundary controversy between Paraguay and Bolivia, I have the honor to report that a temporary modus vivendi has been recently established by an agreement which, after prolonged negotiations, was reached between Doctor Eusebio Ayala, then Minister of Foreign Affairs of Paraguay, and Doctor Mujía, the Bolivian Minister in Paraguay.

The agreement, known as the Ayala-Mujía protocol, which is secret, provides that both countries are to maintain the status quo in the Chaco for two years, and that meanwhile the two Governments will negotiate a definite treaty for a final adjustment of the controversy, or a treaty providing for mediation or arbitration.

It would appear that the Ayala-Mujía protocol has not yet been accepted by Bolivia. At the Foreign Office here in Asuncion belief in its ratification is expressed, notwithstanding the uncompromising opposition voiced by such Bolivian newspapers as “El Norte” of La Paz, reported to be the personal organ of General Montes, President-elect of Bolivia.

This paper asserts that “Bolivia is owner and mistress of all territory west of the River Paraguay from Bahia Negra to the Pilcomayo River”, and rejects arbitration as a method of settlement that in the past has proven to be prejudicial to Bolivia.

I have [etc.]

Nicolay A. Greystad.

1 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Mooney. File No. 724.3415/24.

[Document 36]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Mooney.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 20, 1914.

The Bolivian Minister here states that by agreement between Bolivia and Paraguay made last year2 in regard to their disputed boundary they agreed to preserve the status quo for two years pending negotiations for settlement or for arbitration; that his Government informs him that military parties from Paraguay have entered the disputed territory; that his Government considers this action seriously menaces peace between the two countries; and that Bolivia is most anxious to avoid a conflict.

In these circumstances the Bolivian Minister, acting under instructions, expresses the hope that the United States will be willing to represent unofficially to the Paraguayan Government the importance of preserving peace with Bolivia and of strictly complying with its agreement in regard to the status quo; that the Bolivian Government is anxious to do all in its power to avoid any ground of complaint; and that it will seek in a conciliatory and friendly spirit a settlement of the dispute.

In view of the foregoing statement by the Bolivian Minister and the earnest desire of the President to aid so far as possible in preserving peace in this hemisphere, you are instructed to approach the Paraguayan Government unofficially on this subject, expressing the hope of the President that nothing will be done by either Bolivia or Paraguay which will endanger the peace between the two countries. You will make it clear that these representations are made with no intention to interfere in behalf of either Government but in a spirit of equal friendship and solicitude for both.

It is suggested that before calling this matter to the attention of the Paraguayan Government you confidentially consult the Minister of Bolivia at Asuncion in regard to the controversy in order that you may be fully advised as to the points in dispute and the reasons for believing that peace is threatened.

The President fully realizes the delicacy of exercising the influence of the United States in this matter but he relies on your discretion and tact not to cause irritation on the part of the Paraguayan Government and to bring the matter to a successful issue.

Lansing.

2 See supra.

Minister Mooney to the Secretary of State. File No. 724.3415/25

[Document 37]

Minister Mooney to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Asuncion, November 28, 1914.

The Paraguayan Government received an unofficial interview, authorized by Department’s telegram of November 20, most cordially and asked me to convey to the Department its most certain assurances that it has done and will do nothing warranting a rupture of its peace with Bolivia. Paraguay denies its army has occupied or otherwise violated disputed territory and claims with much positiveness an absolute observance of the status quo. Bolivia has long had a policy of territorial expansion to reach deep river navigation on the Paraguay. No material change in the situation has taken place other than that Bolivia has become more persistent in her policy. Relations between Paraguayan Government and the Bolivian Minister are friendly to date.

Mooney.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Bolivian Minister. File No. 724.3415/26.

[Document 38]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Bolivian Minister.

Department of State,
Washington, November 30, 1914.

My dear Mr. Minister: Referring to our conference on the 18th instant, in which you orally requested the good offices of the United States in connection with the situation which seemed to threaten the peace existing between Bolivia and Paraguay, I would advise you that as a result of instructions to the American Minister at Asuncion he now reports the substance of an unofficial interview with the Paraguayan Government. The Minister states that the Paraguayan Government asked him to convey to this Government its most certain assurances that it has done and will do nothing warranting a rupture of its peace with Bolivia. The Paraguayan Government further stated that its armed forces had not occupied or otherwise violated the disputed territory, and the Government also claimed with much positiveness that it had absolutely observed the status quo agreement.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

The Bolivian Minister to the Acting Secretary of State. File No. 724.3415/26.

[Document 39]

The Bolivian Minister to the Acting Secretary of State.

Bolivian Legation,
Washington, December 1, 1914.

Dear Mr. Lansing: I thank you very cordially for the kind interest you have taken regarding my request concerning Bolivia’s relations with Paraguay.

I intended calling on you to inform you that the troops that have appeared in the neighborhood or our forts in the vicinity of the Paraguay boundary turned out to be some filibusters armed by some land speculators.

The report of the American Minister at Asuncion is very gratifying, and it dispels any fear that might exist as to the pacific policy of our good neighbors of Paraguay. Please accept [etc.]

I. Calderon.

Brazil:Brazil:

Contents

Message of the President, Marshal Hermes R. da Fonseca, to the CongressMessage of the President, Marshal Hermes R. da Fonseca, to the Congress

[40] Ambassador Morgan to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Rio de Janeiro, May 19, 1914.

File No. 832.032/6.

Ambassador Morgan to the Secretary of State. File No. 832.032/6.

[Document 40]

Ambassador Morgan to the Secretary of State.

[Extract]

No. 377.] American Embassy,
Rio de Janeiro, May 19, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith duplicate copies of the annual message to the Congress of Brazil which the President sent to that body on the 3d of May.

I have [etc.]

Edwin V. Morgan.

Message of the President.

[Translation of passages containing references to the Government of the United States.]

In regard to the internal life of the peoples of our continent, I deeply regret to be unable to declare that complete peace reigns in them all, guaranteeing the normal development and prosperity of the nations; because, unhappily, civil war still persists in the United Mexican States, with consequent friction with their neighbor the United States of America. The relations between the two Governments, since the beginning of the revolutionary movements, have lost the cordial character which we all so greatly desire to maintain among the countries of this continent. This state of things was recently aggravated by the Tampico incident, which resulted in armed conflict between the two nations. It was on this occasion that, from a common impulse of friendship for the two countries and of zeal for continental peace and fraternity, Brazil, Argentina and Chile tendered their good offices; with pleasure to ourselves and with applause from other American nations and certainly from all the Powers, we saw those good offices cordially accepted by the two Republics. In this labor of friendship we engaged in the endeavor to avert a conflict which, in addition to its inherent evils, threatened to impair the policy of rapprochement now more and more accentuated among American countries without distinction of race or origin: a policy difficult, indeed, to execute but not impossible.

In the course of the past year and of the current one our country and this capital have been visited by several foreigners of eminent social position in their countries, illustrious and distinguished for various reasons.

Among these visits, we received that of Colonel Theodore Roosevelt, ex-President of the United States of America, who, coming to Brazil at the invitation of the Historical and Geographical Institute, in which invitation the Government and people of Brazil were with pleasure associated, distinguished with his presence this capital and the cities of Petropoiis, S. Paulo, Santos and Porto Alegre, and, after visiting the Republics of the Plata, returned to Brazil and made a long and profitable excursion from the south to the north through the territory of our States of Matto Grosso and Amazonas.

The Brazilian Government is deeply gratified with, and takes this opportunity officially and publicly to indicate to the people and Government of the United States of America its lively recognition of the brilliant and cordial manner in which Doctor Lauro Müller, our Minister for Foreign Affairs, was received, and of the expressions of appreciation and friendship that were shown him on his visit1 to that great country as an official representative of our Government and in return for the visit which Mr. Elihu Root, the then Secretary of State, made to Brazil in 1906.2

That nation and its Government having received the sincerest proofs of our consideration and friendship, has given us in turn the most positive and undoubted proofs of the reciprocity of those sentiments. This official visit has certainly contributed toward strengthening the bonds which unite the two nations, which the previous visit of the distinguished statesman, Mr. Elihu Root, had done so much to form.

All treaties and conventions of extradition participated in by Brazil were terminated upon the promulgation of Law 2416 of June 28, 1911, regulating the extradition of nationals and foreigners and the prosecution and judgment thereof when, being outside of this country, they perpetrate crimes contemplated by that law.3

During the period covered by the preceding Annual Message they were all denounced, as I then had occasion to state.4 Three of them were terminated in the said period, and all the others will have terminated during the present period.

Up to May 3, 1913, the following treaties of this nature had been terminated in pursuance of the denouncements of the Brazilian Government: [references to those with Chile, Paraguay, and Portugal].

In the period covered by the present Message the following treaties will have terminated in pursuance of the denouncements made by the Brazilian Government:

1. With the United States of America: Treaty of May 14, 1897, and annexed Protocols of May 28, 1898, and May 29, 1901.

Denounced on January 23, 1913, by a note from our Embassy at Washington,5 it ceased to operate six months thereafter, on July 23, 1913. The decree of denouncement, No. 10,355, was published on the same date.

2–9 [Particulars relating to treaties with other countries.]

Upon the denouncement of these extradition treaties, and in accordance with Article 12 of the recent law upon the subject, the text thereof was communicated to all the Governments with which Brazil maintains relations.

Several of those Governments having thereupon signified their desire immediately to conclude with our Government new treaties on the subject based on the provisions of the said law, the Brazilian Government acceded to those desires; because, although such new treaties were not indispensable to us, in view of the said law, they might be necessary to other countries in view of their own legislation. Brazil, therefore, caused a draft extradition treaty,6 drawn in accordance with the terms of the said law, to be distributed to all the said Governments, to serve as a model for those which Brazil could sign with each of them uniformly, with the intention of preventing criminal fugitives from crossing or finding asylum in the territory of any one of the contracting parties.

Entirely in accord with this draft, a treaty was signed in this city on August 12, 1913, with the Republic of Bolivia. [Particulars of this act.]

The law before mentioned will likewise control the matter of extradition in this country and in those that conclude treaties with us as well as in those with whom we have not negotiated such treaties, since in our case, as I have already said, the existence of these treaties is not indispensable, by virtue of Sec. 1 of Art. 1 of the law, which concedes the extradition of nationals when, by law or treaty, the demanding country assures to Brazil reciprocity of treatment.

1  For. Rel. 1913, pp. 67–74.

2  For. Rel. 1906, pp. 124–136.

3 The text of this law is printed in For. Rel. 1913, pp. 26–28.

4  For. Rel. 1913, pp. 25, 35.

5  Id. 28.

6  Id. 32–35.

Assistance to American refugees in Mexico by Brazilian diplomatic and consular officers.Assistance to American refugees in Mexico by Brazilian diplomatic and consular officers.

(See Mexico: Protection of American citizens, etc.)

Bulgaria:Bulgaria:

Contents

Reception of the first Minister of Bulgaria to the United States (Documents 41-50)

Reception of the first Minister of Bulgaria to the United StatesReception of the first Minister of Bulgaria to the United States

[41] Minister Vopicka to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bucharest, April 4, 1914.

File No. 701.7411/3.

[42] [Untitled]

American Legation, Bucharest, September 3, 1914.

File No. 701.7411/5.

[43] The Secretary of State to Minister Vopicka.

Department of State, Washington, September 10, 1914.

File No. 701.7411/5.

[44] Minister Vopicka to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bucharest, October 1, 1914.

File No. 701.7411/6.

[45] Consul General Rockhill to the Secretary of State.

Consulate General of Bulgaria, New York, December 1, 1914.

File No. 701.7411/8.

[46] The Secretary of State to Consul General Rockhill.

Department of State, Washington, December 3, 1914.

File No. 701.7411/8.

[47] The Appointed Bulgarian Minister to the Secretary of State.

1761 N Street, Washington, Dec. 15, 1914.

File No. 701.7411/11.

[48] The Secretary of State to the Appointed Bulgarian Minister.

Department of State, Washington, December 16, 1914.

File No. 701.7411/11.

[49] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, December 18, 1914.

File No. 701.7411/18a.

[50] Remarks made by the Bulgarian Minister on his reception by the President, December 22, 1914.

December 22, 1914

File No. 701.7411/12.

Minister Vopicka to the Secretary of State. File No. 701.7411/3.

[Document 41]

Minister Vopicka to the Secretary of State.

No. 65.] American Legation,
Bucharest, April 4, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to inform the Department that during my recent visit to Bulgaria I was informed by Mr. Radoslavoff, the President of the Council of Ministers and Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, that the Bulgarian Government was considering the establishment of a Bulgarian legation in Washington. The Minister told me that a bill would be presented at the present session of the Sobranje for the creation of such a legation and for the necessary appropriation.

I have [etc.]

Charles J. Vopicka.

[Untitled] File No. 701.7411/5.

[Document 42]

[Untitled]

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Bucharest, September 3, 1914.

Bulgarian Government has just notified me that Mr. S. Panaretoff has been chosen as first Bulgarian Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to the United States and asks if his appointment is agreeable to our Government. Mr. Panaretoff graduated from Roberts College, Constantinople, 1871, and has been professor of Bulgarian language and literature there for many years. He was sent in 1880 on special mission to England, and is married.

Vopicka.

The Secretary of State to Minister Vopicka. File No. 701.7411/5.

[Document 43]

The Secretary of State to Minister Vopicka.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 10, 1914.

This Government is gratified that Bulgaria has decided to appoint a Minister to this country, and S. Panaretoff is entirely acceptable in that capacity.

Bryan.

Minister Vopicka to the Secretary of State. File No. 701.7411/6.

[Document 44]

Minister Vopicka to the Secretary of State.

No. 128.] American Legation,
Bucharest, October 1, 1914.

Sir: Referring to your telegram informing me that Mr. S. Panaretoff was in every way acceptable as Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Bulgaria at Washington, I have the honor to report that I at once communicated this information to the Bulgarian Foreign Office.

The creation of a Bulgarian Legation at Washington and the appointment of a Minister so well qualified to represent the Bulgarian Government and people as is Mr. Panaretoff, has been received with much satisfaction in Bulgaria.

The newly appointed Minister has arrived at Sofia and has been received by the King. He expects to leave shortly to join his post and I have extended a cordial invitation to him to proceed to Washington by way of Bucharest in hope in this way to have the opportunity of meeting him as the pressure of work at the present time is too great to permit my leaving Bucharest.

I have [etc.]

Charles J. Vopicka.

Consul General Rockhill to the Secretary of State. File No. 701.7411/8.

[Document 45]

Consul General Rockhill to the Secretary of State.

Consulate General of Bulgaria,
New York, December 1, 1914.

Sir: I have the honour to inform you that Mr. Stephan Panaretoff, the newly appointed Minister from Bulgaria to Washington, is expected to arrive at New York on the steamship Kroonland, due the fourth instant.

Through the courtesy of the collector of the port of New York I have arranged to meet Mr. Panaretoff on arrival of the steamer at quarantine; should you desire me to convey any message to the Minister, kindly command me.

I am [etc.]

Clayton Rockhill.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Rockhill. File No. 701.7411/8.

[Document 46]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Rockhill.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 3, 1914.

Your letter of December 1. Thanks for your courtesy. We are glad to welcome Mr. Panaretoff to our shores. Welcome will be extended by the President at his official reception.

W. J. Bryan.

The Appointed Bulgarian Minister to the Secretary of State. File No. 701.7411/11.

[Document 47]

The Appointed Bulgarian Minister to the Secretary of State.

1761 N Street,
Washington, Dec. 15, 1914.

Sir: Having recently arrived to take possession of the post to which I have been appointed by His Majesty the King of the Bulgarians, I will be greatly obliged to you if you will kindly grant me an audience at a time most convenient to you.

I have [etc.]

Stephan Panaretoff.

The Secretary of State to the Appointed Bulgarian Minister. File No. 701.7411/11.

[Document 48]

The Secretary of State to the Appointed Bulgarian Minister.

Department of State,
Washington, December 16, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the fifteenth of December by which you convey to me the pleasing information that you have arrived in Washington as the accredited Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Bulgaria near the Government of the United States and request the designation of a time when you may call upon me to pay your respects.

In reply I beg to say that I shall be glad to see you at the Department of State on Thursday, December the seventeenth, at 11.30 o’clock a.m.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 701.7411/18a.

[Document 49]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, December 18, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to advise you that the President will receive you, in order that you may present your letters of credence as Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Bulgaria near this Government, on Tuesday next, the twenty-second of December, at two o’clock.

I will call for you shortly before the hour above named and will accompany you to the White House to present you to the President.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

Remarks made by the Bulgarian Minister on his reception by the President, December 22, 1914. File No. 701.7411/12.

[Document 50]

Remarks made by the Bulgarian Minister on his reception by the President, December 22, 1914.

December 22, 1914

Mr. President: In his great desire to maintain and draw closer the ties of friendship happily existing between the United States and Bulgaria, His Majesty the King of the Bulgarians has deigned to appoint me his representative near the Government of the United States. In the performance of the duties incumbent upon me for the carrying out of this desire of His Majesty, I shall endeavor to acquit myself of my mission in such a way as to win your confidence and merit His Majesty’s approbation. With this end in view, I shall highly prize the valuable aid and good will of Your Excellency and your Government, which will facilitate my task and help to make my mission a success.

In handing you, Mr. President, the credentials whereby His Majesty accredits me to you, I have been bidden to express on his behalf and in behalf of his Government the deep sorrow and sincere sympathy they feel for you in the sad bereavement that has lately befallen you, to assure you of the high esteem His Majesty entertains for your person and the ardent wishes he cherishes for the progress and prosperity of your great country, as well as for the wellbeing and happiness of its people.

Chile:Chile:

Contents

Message of the President, Ramón Barros Luco, to the Congress (Documents 51-51)

Message of the President, Ramón Barros Luco, to the CongressMessage of the President, Ramón Barros Luco, to the Congress

[51] Minister Fletcher to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santiago, June 8, 1914.

File No. 825.032/7.

Minister Fletcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 825.032/7.

[Document 51]

Minister Fletcher to the Secretary of State.

No. 490.] American Legation,
Santiago, June 8, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to report that the ordinary sessions of Congress were formally opened on June first. His Excellency President Barros Luco read extracts from his annual message, a copy of which I enclose herewith.

After congratulating the country upon the satisfactory condition of its international relations, His Excellency spoke of the mediation of the Argentine, Brazil and Chile as follows: The difficult situation produced between the United States and Mexico threatened to disturb the peace of America. Fortunately the unchangeable cordiality of our relations with Brazil and the Argentine Republic permitted the Governments of the three Republics to jointly offer their good offices, inspired by the high principles of humanity, in order to avoid the deplorable consequences of a war. The mediation, after being accepted by the nations interested, has received the universal sympathy of governments and peoples, who see in it a new and eloquent manifestation of the exalted spirit which governs the relations of the countries of the new continent.

The armistice agreed upon constitutes in itself a positive and beneficial result; and the noble attitude of the countries in conflict permits the predicting of a successful termination of the conferences which, at the present time, are being celebrated at Niagara Falls.

The following reference was made to the Tacna and Arica question: After the internal situation of Peru has been arranged, the Government hopes that the negotiations, which have been paralyzed, will be renewed for resolving definitely the question which for so long a time has separated the two countries.

Other extracts from the message which may be of interest to the Department are: The strengthening of the peace and cordiality of the relations of the peoples which form this continent, constitutes the most solid guaranty of its progressive development.

The International Conferences of the American Republics, which are held periodically, efficiently contribute to this purpose. The honor of being designated as the seat of the next Conference has been conferred upon our capital, and I am pleased to testify to our gratitude for this unanimous manifestation of the American Governments.

The Government of the United States has officially communicated to our Government the approval of the law which authorizes the elevation to the rank of Embassy of the Legation in Santiago. In a short time I hope to obtain your authorization to respond, by a similar diplomatic representation, to this demonstration of the cordial relations which bind us to the great American nation.

The commercial development which will be produced on our coasts on account of the near opening of the Panama Canal, and the increase of international traffic through the port of Arica, due to the railroad to La Paz, made it necessary to modify to a certain extent the attributes of the Sanitary Station of the North. By agreement with the Superior Board of Public Hygiene, and in conformity with the provisions of the International Sanitary Convention of Washington in 1905, the regulations of that sanitary station were completely reformed.

The National Congress having approved at the beginning of the present year the participation of Chile in the Exposition of San Francisco, California, the preparatory work for such participation has been renewed with great activity by means of a committee in which are represented the National Societies of Agriculture, Mining, Manufacturing Development, and Propaganda Association of Nitrate.

1 have [etc.]

Henry P. Fletcher.

China:China:

Contents

Political affairs: Texts of the Provisional Constitution, the Presidential Election Law, and the Goodnow draft of a constitution; suspension of the National Assembly; conversion of the Political Council (Administrative Conference) into a Constitutional Convention; promulgation of the Revised Provisional Constitution (Constitutional compact); synopsis and text thereof; project for reorganization of the National AssemblyPolitical affairs:1 Texts of the Provisional Constitution, the Presidential Election Law, and the Goodnow draft of a constitution; suspension of the National Assembly; conversion of the Political Council (Administrative Conference) into a Constitutional Convention; promulgation of the Revised Provisional Constitution (Constitutional compact); synopsis and text thereof; project for reorganization of the National Assembly

1 Continued from For. Rel. 1913, pp. 87-143.

[52] Minister Calhoun to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, March 20, 1912.

File No. 893.011.

[53] Chargé Williams to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, October 11, 1913.

File No. 893.001Y9/7.

[54] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, January 16, 1914.

File No. 893.03/9.

[55] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, May 5, 1914.

File No. 893.011/15.

[56] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, June 5, 1914.

File No. 893.011/16.

[57] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, June 24, 1914.

File No. 893.011/17.

[58] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, December 17, 1914.

File No. 893.03/10.

Minister Calhoun to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.011.

[Document 52]

Minister Calhoun to the Secretary of State.

No. 482.] American Legation,
Peking, March 20, 1912.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith copies in translation of the Provisional Constitution of the Republic of China.

I have [etc.]

W. J. Calhoun.

[Enclosure.]

The Provisional Constitution of the Republic of China.

Chapter I.—General Provisions.

Article 1. The Republic of China is composed of the Chinese people.

Article 2. The sovereignty of the Chinese Republic is vested in the people.

Article 3. The territory of the Chinese Republic consists of 22 provinces, Inner and Outer Mongolia, Tibet and Chinghai.

Article 4. The sovereignty of the Chinese Republic is exercised by the Advisory Council, the Provisional President, the Cabinet and the Judiciary.

Chapter II.—Citizens.

Article 5. Citizens of the Chinese Republic are all equal, and there shall be no racial, class or religious distinctions.

Article 6. Citizens shall enjoy the following rights: (1) The person of the citizens shall not be arrested, imprisoned, tried or punished except in accordance with law.

(2) The habitations of citizens shall not be entered or searched except in accordance with law.

(3) Citizens shall enjoy the right of the security of their property and the freedom of trade.

(4) Citizens shall have the freedom of speech, of composition, of publication, of assembly and of association.

(5) Citizens shall have the right of the secrecy of their letters.

(6) Citizens shall have the liberty of residence and removal.

(7) Citizens shall have the freedom of religion.

Article 7. Citizens shall have the right to petition the Parliament.

Article 8. Citizens shall have the right of petitioning the executive officials.

Article 9. Citizens shall have the right to institute proceedings before the Judiciary and to receive its trial and judgments.

Article 10. Citizens shall have the right of suing officials in the Administrative Courts for violation of law or against their rights.

Article 11. Citizens shall have the right of participating in civil examinations.

Article 12. Citizens shall have the right to vote and to be voted for.

Article 13. Citizens shall have the duty to pay taxes according to law.

Article 14. Citizens shall have the duty to enlist as soldiers according to law.

Article 15. The rights of citizens as provided in the present chapter shall be limited or modified by laws, provided such limitation or modification shall be deemed necessary for the promotion of public welfare, for the maintenance of public order or on account of extraordinary exigency.

Chapter III.—The Advisory Council.

Article 16. The legislative power of the Chinese Republic is exercised by the Advisory Council.

Article 17. The Advisory Council shall be composed of members elected by the several districts as provided in Article 18.

Article 18. The Provinces, Inner and Outer Mongolia, and Tibet shall each elect and depute five members to the Advisory Council, and Chinghai shall elect one member.

The election districts and methods of elections shall be decided by the localities concerned.

During the meeting of the Advisory Council each member shall have one vote.

Article 19. The Advisory Council shall have the following powers: (1) To pass all law bills.

(2) To pass the budgets of the Provisional Government.

(3) To pass laws of taxation, of currency and of weights and measures for the whole country.

(4) To pass measures for the calling of public loans and to conclude contracts affecting the National Treasury.

(5) To give consent to matters provided in Articles 34, 35 and 40.

(6) To reply to inquiries from the Provisional Government.

(7) To receive and consider petitions of citizens.

(8) To make suggestions to the Government on legal or other matters.

(9) To introduce interpellations to members of the Cabinet and to insist on their being present in the Council in making replies thereto.

(10) To insist on the Government investigating into any alleged bribery and infringement of laws by officials.

(11) To impeach the Provisional President for high treason by a majority vote of three-fourths of the quorum consisting of more than four-fifths of the total number of the members.

(12) To impeach members of the Cabinet for failure to perform their official duties or for violation of the law by majority votes of two-thirds of the quorum consisting of over three-fourths of the total number of the members.

Article 20. The Advisory Council shall itself convoke, open and adjourn its own meetings.

Article 21. The meetings of the Advisory Council shall be conducted publicly but secret meetings may be held at the instigation of members of the Cabinet or by the majority vote of its quorum.

Article 22. Matters passed by the Advisory Council shall be communicated to the Provisional President for promulgation and execution.

Article 23. If the Provisional President should veto matters passed by the Advisory Council he shall, within ten days after he received such resolutions, return the same with stated reasons to the Council for reconsideration. If the same matter should again be passed by a two-thirds vote of the quorum of the Council, it shall be dealt with in accordance with Article 22.

Article 24. The President of the Advisory Council shall be elected by ballots signed by the voting members and the one who receives more than one-half of the total number of the votes cast shall be elected.

Article 25. Members of the Advisory Council shall not, outside the Council hall, be responsible for their opinions expressed and votes cast in the Council.

Article 26. Members of the Council shall not be arrested without the permission of the President of the Council except for crimes committed at the time of arrest and for crimes pertaining to civil and international warfare.

Article 27. Procedures of the Advisory Council shall be decided by its own members.

Article 28. The Advisory Council shall be dissolved on the day of the convocation of the National Assembly and its powers shall be exercised by the latter.

Chapter IV.—The Provisional President and Vice President.

Article 29. The Provisional President and Vice President shall be elected by the Advisory Council and he who receives two-thirds of the total amount of votes cast by a sitting of the Council consisting of over three-fourths of the total number of members, shall be elected.

Article 30. The Provisional President represents the Provisional Government as the fountain of all executive powers and for promulgating all laws.

Article 31. The Provisional President may issue or cause to be issued orders for the execution of laws and of powers delegated to him by the laws.

Article 32. The Provisional President shall be commander-in-chief of the army and navy of the whole of China.

Article 33. The Provisional President shall ordain and establish the administrative system and official regulations, but he must first submit them to the Advisory Council for its approval.

Article 34. The Provisional President shall appoint and remove civil and military officials, but in the appointment of members of the Cabinet, ambassadors and ministers he must have the concurrence of the Advisory Council.

Article 35. The Provisional President shall have power, with the concurrence of the Advisory Council, to declare war and conclude treaties.

Article 36. The Provisional President may, in accordance with law, declare a state of siege.

Article 37. The Provisional President shall, representing the whole country, receive ambassadors and ministers of foreign countries.

Article 38. The Provisional President may introduce bills into the Advisory Council.

Article 39. The Provisional President may confer decorations and other insignia of honor.

Article 40. The Provisional President may declare general amnesty, grant special pardon, commute a punishment, and restore rights, but in the case of a general amnesty he must have the concurrence of the Advisory Council.

Article 41. In case the Provisional President is impeached by the Advisory Council, he shall be tried by a special court consisting of nine judges elected among the justices of the Supreme Court of the realm.

Article 42. In case the Provisional President vacates his office for various reasons, or is unable to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the Provisional Vice President shall take his place.

Chapter V.—Members or the Cabinet.

Article 43. The Premier and the Chiefs of the Government Departments shall be called Members of the Cabinet [literally, Secretaries of State Affairs].

Article 44. Members of the Cabinet shall assist the Provisional President in assuming responsibilities.

Article 45. Members of the Cabinet shall countersign all bills introduced by the Provisional President and all laws and orders issued by him.

Article 46. Members Of the Cabinet and their deputies may be present and speak in the Advisory Council.

Article 47. After members of the Cabinet have been impeached by the Advisory Council, the Provisional President may remove them from office, but such removal shall be subject to the reconsideration of the Advisory Council.

Chapter VI.—The Judiciary.

Article 48. The Judiciary shall be composed of those judges appointed by the Provisional President, and the Chief of the Department of Justice.

The organization of the courts and the qualifications of judges shall be determined by law.

Article 49. The Judiciary shall try civil and criminal cases, but cases involving administrative affairs or arising from other particular causes shall be dealt with according to special laws.

Article 50. The trial of cases in the law courts shall be conducted publicly, but those affecting public safety and order may be in camera.

Article 51. Judges shall be independent and shall not be subject to the interference of higher officials.

Article 52. Judges during their continuance in office shall not have their emoluments decreased and shall not be transferred to other offices, nor shall they be removed from office except when they are convicted of crimes, or of offenses punishable according to law by removal from office.

Regulations for the punishment of judges shall be determined by law.

Chapter VII.—Supplementary Articles.

Article 53. Within ten months after the promulgation of this Provisional Constitution the Provisional President shall convene a National Assembly, the organization of which and the laws for the election of whose members shall be decided by the Advisory Council.

Article 54. The Constitution of the Republic of China shall be adopted by the National Assembly, but before the promulgation of the Constitution the Provisional Constitution shall be as effective as the Constitution itself.

Article 55. The Provisional Constitution may be amended by the assent of two-thirds of the members of the Advisory Council or upon the application of the Provisional President and being passed by over three-fourths of the quorum of the Council consisting of over four-fifths of the total number of its members.

Article 56. The present Provisional Constitution shall take effect on the date of its promulgation and the fundamental articles for the organization of the Provisional Government shall cease to be effective on the same date.

Sealed by The Advisory Council.
March 10, 1st year of the Republic of China [1912].

Chargé Williams to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.001Y9/7.

[Document 53]

Chargé Williams to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 1048.] American Legation,
Peking, October 11, 1913.

Sir: * * * In my telegrams of July 26 and September 302 I informed the Department of the decision taken by the Assembly to adopt that part of the Constitution which is to deal with the Executive, and immediately thereafter to hold the election. Forty-five days were allowed the Constitutional Committee for this work. This was subsequently found to be too short a time and an additional ten days were granted. Still the Committee failed to come to agreement upon many points and the Assembly finally decided to pass an act providing a procedure for immediate election. This act, which contains seven articles and a supplementary article, passed its third reading of the two Houses in joint session on October 4. I enclose a copy of the same in translation.* * *

I have [etc.]

E. T. Williams.

[Inclosure.]

The Presidential Election Law, promulgated October 5, 1913.

[Translation from the Peking Daily News of October 6, 1913; corrected by the Assistant Chinese Secretary.]

The Parliament of the Chinese Republic hereby publishes the Election Law:

Article 1. A native of China over forty years of age, possessing citizen’s rights complete and unimpaired, who has lived in the country for upwards of ten years, is eligible to the Presidency of the Republic.

Article 2. The Electoral College for the election of the President shall be organized by the Parliament of the Republic. Secret ballots shall be used in the presidential election. That person who shall secure a three-fourth’s plurality of votes out of an attendance of two-thirds of the members of the Electoral College shall be elected. But if the required plurality cannot be obtained after two attempts, then a final vote shall be taken on the two names which have received the largest number of votes, and the person who receives more than one-half of the votes cast shall be elected President of the Republic.

Article 3. The presidential terms shall be five years. The President may submit himself for reelection, and be reelected for one consecutive term.

Three months prior to the expiration of the President’s term of office the members of Parliament shall meet on their own initiative and organize an Electoral College to elect the President for the following term.

Article 4. On assuming office the President shall take the following oath:

“I swear that I will honestly adhere to the Constitution and faithfully perform my duties as President of the Republic.”

Article 5. Should the post of President be vacated, the Vice President will succeed to it, and serve until the expiration of the regular term.

Should the President be unable to perform his duties, the Vice President will act for him.

Should the Vice President vacate his post (while acting for the President), the Cabinet will perform the President’s duties. Meanwhile, within three months thereafter, the members of Parliament will organize, on their own initiative, an Electoral College to elect the President for the following term.

Article 6. The President shall vacate his post on the expiration of his term. If at the expiration of the President’s term a new President shall not have been elected, or, if elected, shall not have been inaugurated, and the new Vice President shall also be unable to act for the new President, then the duties of the President shall be performed by the Cabinet.

Article 7. The election of the Vice President shall be held at the same time as the election of the President and in accordance with the same regulations.

Should the post of Vice President be vacated, the election of a new Vice President will be held.

Supplementary Article. Before the adoption of the Permanent Constitution, the provisions of the Provisional Constitution defining the powers of the President shall be in force.

2 Not printed.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.03/9.

[Document 54]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

No. 75.] American Legation,
Peking, January 16, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith for your information a clipping2 from the Peking Daily News of the 12th instant giving a translation of the mandate issued on January 10 by which the President ordered the temporary suspension of the National Assembly, together with the proclamation simultaneously issued on the same subject.

I also enclose a clipping2 from the Peking Daily News of January 13 giving a translation of the mandate of the 11th instant by which the President instructed the Administrative Conference to consider and decide upon the mode of organization of a constituent assembly to amend or replace the provisional constitution.

The dissolution of the Parliament does not come as a surprise. The remnant of the National Assembly which was left after the dissolution of the Kuo Min Tang [National Party] in November3 was not sufficient for a quorum, and the regular business could not, therefore, be conducted. The reconstitution of the National Assembly through new elections for the places vacated would not at all, it is believed, have brought a satisfactory result, on account of the fact that there would still be a lack of cooperation among the old members, the new members, and the Government. The dissolution of the Parliament was accompanied with declarations strongly favoring representative institutions and promising that steps for the reconstitution of a parliament upon a more adequate and sufficient basis would be taken.

While the Government is not very clear and definite in its purposes and policies connected with this matter, it seems that the present plan is to have the Administrative Conference work out a proposal for a constituent assembly in which the provinces as well as the Central Government are to be represented. This constituent assembly is to work out a project for a permanent constitution. It has not yet been announced whether this project is to be considered as adopted ipso facto by the action of the constituent assembly, or whether it is to be submitted for ratification to some other body or to a plebiscite. No matter what formal arrangements may be made, under the present conditions the judgment of the Government itself as to the form which the permanent constitution is to take would be decisive.

Among the various proposals for a permanent constitution, that prepared by Professor Goodnow, a copy of which is enclosed, has received a good deal of favorable attention. It is undoubtedly true that the presidential form of government is more adapted to political conditions in China than the cabinet form would be. A strong presidential power with a parliament of not much more than advisory functions would, however, undoubtedly be most in accord with the desires of the Chinese Government at the present time.

His Excellency President Yuan and the members of the Chinese Government continue to assert their firm belief that representative institutions are essential for China; yet many observers are impressed by signs of reaction towards a very authoritative form of government. Among those suggested, the worship of Heaven by the President is the principal one. I enclose an account from the Peking Gazette of January 134 of the proposals submitted by the Government with respect to the worship of Heaven and Confucius; also an account from the Peking Daily News of today’s date4 of a debate on this matter in the Administrative Conference. I would call especial attention to the remarks of Chairman Li, who underlines the specifically political character of the proposed sacrifices. That so much attention should be given to these matters of ceremony at a critical time like the present shows the importance which the President and his advisers attribute to these elements of belief among the masses of the people. In a conversation which I had with the Minister of the Interior on this matter he stated that should a failure of crops or some other great disaster occur in China the officials would surely be blamed by the people for having omitted the accustomed sacrifices to Heaven. He also stated that these ceremonials should be given such a form as not to imply a conflict with religious beliefs of any kind. But it is my opinion that while the worship of Heaven might be regarded as a ceremony of respect consistent with a common belief in an overruling divinity, the public worship of Confucius, especially if required of local officials, would certainly be regarded as incompatible with complete religious freedom.

I have [etc.]

Paul S. Beinsok.

[Inclosure.]

Doctor Goodnow’s Draft of a Constitution for China, reprinted from the Peking Gazette.

The following is a draft constitution prepared by Dr. F. J. Goodnow, the President’s Legal Adviser. It is accompanied by explanatory notes, and is of special interest as showing the views of an experienced constitutional expert upon the form of constitution best suited to China’s present needs.

We the people of the Republic of China do ordain and establish this Constitution for the Republic of China.

Article I.

Section 1. The legislative powers of the Republic of China are vested in a Parliament, which shall consist of a Senate and a House of Representatives.

The Parliament may, by law, delegate either to the President, to the Courts or to the Provinces the exercise of any of its powers; but any action taken by the President, the Courts or the Provinces as a result of the exercise of a power delegated by the Parliament, may be repealed by the Parliament.

Note.—This constitution has been drafted with the idea that the government of the Republic of China will not be a federal government like that of the United States but a centralized government like that of France. All the legislative powers of the Republic have therefore been granted to the Parliament of the Republic.

The section must, however, be read in connection with Article IV. Reference to this article will show that the intention of the draft is to grant all legislative powers to the National Parliament but at the same time to recognize that the Provinces possess, until Parliament shall fix the powers they are to exercise, the same powers of legislation as those of Parliament. The exercise of these powers of legislation by the Provinces is subjected, however, to the necessity of obtaining the approval of the President of the Republic. It is believed that, if the plan proposed is followed, each one of the Provinces will have powers of local government sufficient to permit it to attend efficiently to local matters, but that the central government will have a control over the actions of the Provinces strong enough to protect the unity of the Republic.

Provision has been made for the delegation of its powers by Parliament to the President of the Republic, to the Courts and to the Provinces in order to make it certain that Parliament possesses this power of delegation. Uncertainty in this respect has caused some confusion and trouble in the United States. The existence of such a power of delegation would seem, if we may judge by the experience of most European countries, to be an absolute necessity.

Section 2. The Senate shall be composed of such membership, with such qualifications and elected in such a manner, as shall be determined by law, and, until Parliament shall legislate thereon, all existing regulations for its organization and all existing laws governing the election of its members not inconsistent with this Constitution shall continue to be operative. Note.—This and the following section have been drawn with the idea of continuing in force the present law as to the composition of the houses of the legislature until that law is changed by the ordinary method of legislation.

Section 3. The House of Representatives shall be composed of such membership, with such qualifications, and elected in such manner, as shall be determined by law; and until Parliament shall legislate thereon, all existing regulations for its organization, and all existing laws governing the election of its members not inconsistent with this Constitution shall continue to be operative.

Section 4. The time, place and manner of holding elections for Senators and Representatives, and the qualifications to all voters shall be prescribed by law and until Parliament shall legislate thereon, all existing laws and regulations not inconsistent with this Constitution shall continue to be operative.

The Parliament shall assemble at least once every year, and such meeting shall be on the — day of —, unless they shall by law appoint a different day. But the President may, at any time, call a special session of the Parliament, and it shall be his duty to call a special session if he is requested so to do by a majority of the members of each house. Failure upon the part of the President to call such special session when so requested shall be ground for impeachment.

Note.—This section has been framed on the theory, that special sessions may be called by both the President of the Republic, and by a majority of the members of each house of the legislature. It is based on the French Constitution. The clause making the President’s failure to call a special session, a ground of impeachment would seem to be necessary in view of the wide power of ordinance and regulation given to him by article II, section 7. For if the President is to have such powers, it would seem to be necessary, in order to prevent their exercise against the will of Parliament, when that body is not in session, to give to Parliament the power to reassemble at any time in order to repeal some presidential regulation of which it does not approve.

Section 5. The Senate shall have the sole power to try all impeachments, and the House of Representatives shall have the sole power of impeachment.

The President and all other civil officers of the Republic may be impeached for any cause provided for in this Constitution or by law. An impeachment may be brought against the President only upon a two-thirds vote of all the members of the House of Representatives.

No person shall be convicted on impeachment without the concurrence of two-thirds of all the members of the Senate.

Judgment in cases of conviction on impeachment shall not extend further than removal from office and disqualification to hold any office under the Republic, but the party convicted shall nevertheless be liable to trial and punishment in accordance with the provisions of the criminal law.

Note.—This section is a based upon a section in the Constitution of the United States. It has however been provided that the causes for impeachment are to be stated in the Constitution, or to be fixed by law. Causes, in the Constitution, for impeachment, are stated in Article I section 4, Article II section 11 and section 13.

It has seemed desirable to provide a method by which the causes for impeachment may be fixed with reasonable definiteness, in order to avoid the uncertainties in the law of impeachment, which have arisen in the United States.

The section has also adopted the provisions of the present Provisional Constitution of China, which makes necessary a two-thirds vote by the House of Representatives in order that impeachment proceedings may be brought.

Section 6. Each House shall be the judge of the election, returns, and qualifications of its members. A majority of the members of each house shall constitute a quorum to do business, unless otherwise provided by law.

Each House may determine the rules of its proceedings, punish its members for disorderly behaviour, and with the concurrence of two-thirds of the members expel a member.

Each House shall keep a journal of its proceedings, and from time to time publish the same, excepting such parts as may in their judgment require secrecy, and the yeas and nays shall, at the desire of one fifth of those present be entered on the journal.

Neither House, during the session of Parliament, shall without the consent of the other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other place than that in which the two houses shall be sitting.

Note.—This section is found in substance in almost all written constitutions. Great Britain is almost the only important country, which does not give to its Houses of Parliament the right to judge of the elections and qualifications of its members. In that country controversies with regard to parliamentary elections are tried by the ordinary courts. Such a solution of the question would seem to be unwise since it subjects the courts to political influences from which they should be as free as possible if the administration of justice is to be good.

Section 7. The Senators and Representatives shall receive a compensation for their services to be determined by law, and paid out of the National Treasury.

They shall in all cases except treason be privileged from arrest during their attendance at the session of their respective houses, and in going to, and returning from, the same: and for any speech or debate in either house they shall not be responsible in any other place.

Note.—The clause in this section with regard to the privilege of members of Parliament from arrest is modeled upon that in the Constitution of the United States. The privilege granted, however, is much wider. The existence of such a privilege seems necessary in order to preserve the independence of members, and protect them from threats of prosecution by the government.

Section 8. Every bill which shall have passed the Senate and the House of Representatives, shall before it becomes a law be presented to the President of the Republic; if he approve he shall sign it, but if not, he shall return it, with his objections, to that house in which it shall have originated, who shall enter the objections at large on their journal and proceed to reconsider it. If, after such reconsideration, two-thirds of all the members of that house shall agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent together with the objections to the other house by which it shall likewise be reconsidered and if approved by two-thirds of all the members of that house it shall become a law. But in all such cases the votes of both houses shall be determined by the yeas and nays, and the names of the persons voting for and against the bill shall be entered on the journal of each house respectively. If any bill shall not be returned by the President within ten days after it shall have been presented to him, the same shall be a law, in like manner as if he had signed it unless the Parliament by their adjournment prevent its return, in which case it shall not be a law.

Every order, resolution, or vote, which has received the concurrence of the Senate and House of Representatives (except on a question of adjournment, and except as otherwise provided in this Constitution) shall be presented to the President of the Republic, and before the same shall take effect, shall be approved by him, or being disapproved by him, shall be repassed by two-thirds of the Senate and House of Representatives according to the rules and limitations prescribed in the case of a bill. But resolutions proposing to amend the Constitution, must receive the approval of the President of the Republic.

Note.—It may be stated here that the office of President that is provided for in this draft, is modelled upon both that of the President of the French Republic and upon that of the President of the United States. It is modelled on the office of the French President in that it provides that the President of the Republic of China shall be elected for a reasonably long term by the National Assembly, consisting of a joint session of both houses of Parliament (see Article I Section 11). The draft resembles the French Constitution further in that it accords to the President of the Republic of China, the right to initiate legislation and to designate in writing persons to express the views of the government with regard to bills or projects of law which have been introduced and are being discussed in Parliament.

The draft however proposes the adoption of the American idea as to an independent President with a reasonably permanent term. The reason for the adoption of this idea, is that the experience of the one hundred and twenty years during which the Constitution of the United States has been in force shows that greater stability in the government and a more permanent and continuous policy, are to be expected under this general plan than under the plan adopted in Great Britain and France. While it may be true that the British and French systems are more quickly responsive to public opinion, experience has shown that they are accompanied by so many Cabinet changes that stability in government and permanence in policy are difficult to secure.

In order that the office of President may have the requisite strength and independence, it is necessary that the President have a power of veto similar to that possessed by the President of the United States. It is only in so far as he has such a power that he is able to protect his office against the hostile legislation of an unfriendly parliament.

It would seem that what China needs most of all, at the present time, is a stable and permanent government. For the next few years must, if the Republic is to secure the greatest possible measure of success, see a complete reorganization of the finances, as well as a great amount of constructive legislation, both with regard to the administrative organization and many of the branches of law governing the private relations of individuals. Work along these lines can be effective only upon the condition that the policy to be pursued is reasonably permanent.

After this work has been done it may be that China can with advantage adopt more fully the French system of government. If this should be desirable the change may be made by amendment of the Constitution. It has been with this idea in mind that a process of amendment has been proposed which may be both quick in its action and easy of application. Reference to Article V of the draft will show that amendment to the Constitution may be made by a two-thirds vote of both Houses of Parliament with the approval of the President. The necessity of obtaining the approval of the President will naturally make it impossible formally to amend the constitution during the first term of the first Permanent President without his consent. This will however merely make possible the postponement of the change for six years, the term of office provided for the President by the draft. But if there is a strong demand for a change, this change may be made one of the conditions of the re-election of the first Permanent President at the expiration of his first term of office, or of the election of his successor.

Further attention should be called to the fact that, the adoption of the draft would not make impossible the gradual development of the French system through, the united action of the President and the Parliament, without any amendment of the Constitution. The draft provides that the President may introduce bills into Parliament, and may designate in writing persons in the government to discuss proposed legislation in the Parliament, and makes it possible for members of parliament to hold positions in the President’s Cabinet and in the government generally. The Parliament is, on the other hand, recognized as possessing wide powers of control over the President. Certain provisions of the draft oblige the President of the Republic, under danger of impeachment, to call special sessions of Parliament on the demand of a majority of the members of each house (Article I Section 4), and to render to Parliament a statement of the receipts and expenditures of each fiscal year (Article II Section 10). Others oblige each head of department under like penalty to appear before either House of Parliament at its request, and to answer questions put to him with regard to the conduct of his department (Article II Section 8); another provision permits Parliament to add by law to the causes of impeachment set forth in the constitution (Article I Section 5).

Under these conditions it is by no means improbable that a strong Parliament would make it impossible for the President to carry on the government effectively except his Cabinet had the confidence of parliament.

If the draft is approved the attempt will not thus be made to adopt either the American, or the French idea, as a whole. A compromise of the two principles will have been made which will permit China within the next ten or fifteen years guided by her own experience to work out the type of government which seems most nearly suited to her needs.

Section 9. It shall not be lawful for the Senate or the House of Representatives to adopt or pass any vote, resolution or bill, for the appropriation of any part of the public revenue, or of any tax, to any purpose that has not been first recommended to that house by message of the President in the session in which such vote, resolution or bill is proposed; nor shall it be lawful for either the Senate or the House of Representatives to increase the amount recommended to that house by the President to be appropriated for any purpose.

Note.—This provision is modelled upon a provision to be found in the Constitution of the Dominion of Canada and is in accord with British practice. It is recommended also in view of the experience of the United States. In the United States the power which each member of either house has to propose an appropriation not recommended by the President has been the cause of great extravagance. The United States has been able to permit such a power to be exercised by Congress only because its annual financial operations have usually resulted in a surplus rather than a deficit.

At the present time the conditions of China’s finances are such that the strictest possible economy is absolutely necessary. It is therefore imperative that resort should be had to all the devices which experience has shown tend to secure economy.

Section 10. No money shall be drawn from the Treasury nor shall any loan be made, nor any tax be levied, except in consequence of law. Note.—The application of the principles set forth in this section would seem to be necessary in every system of constitutional government. The section therefore needs no comment.

Section 11. One month at least before the expiration of the term of office of the President of the Republic the Senate and the House of Representatives shall meet in joint assembly for the purpose of electing a new President.

In case the office of President becomes vacant for any cause other than the expiration of the term of office of the President, the Senate and the House of Representatives shall in like manner meet at once in joint assembly.

Such joint assembly shall be known as the National Assembly. The President of the Senate shall preside over the meetings of the National Assembly; the National Assembly may determine the rules of its proceedings.

The person who shall receive the votes of a majority of all the members of the National Assembly, shall at once be declared, by the President of the National Assembly, to be the President of the Republic. The President of the Republic shall be eligible for reelection.

The term of any President thus elected shall be for six years unless such President shall sooner be removed from office as the result of conviction on impeachment proceedings.

In case the office of President becomes vacant for any cause, the executive power shall be exercised by the heads of executive departments, acting as a council of ministers, until a new President shall be elected.

Note.—This provision is based upon the French constitution. Under the conditions which now exist in China, the French method of electing the President would seem to be the only one available. The only other methods of election possible of adoption are popular election, and election by some third body. Election by a third body, the members of which were to be elected directly or indirectly by the people, was the method adopted by the framers of the Constitution of the United States. The method thus originally provided, has, however, been so modified in practice, that the actual method of electing the President in the United States is quite different from the method set forth in the Constitution. It may not be said that the actual method of electing the President in the United States, is a successful one, for it has brought the United States on one or two occasions to the verge of civil war which was prevented only because of the good sense and long political experience of the people.

Direct popular election of the executive has been adopted only in the separate states of the American Union, and in some of the South and Central American Republics, Apart from Brazil it is not the method employed in republics of great size such as China.

The French method is not only the most suitable to present conditions in China, it also has the great advantage of subjecting the President to a reasonably effective parliamentary control. The existence of such a control is desirable in view of the large powers which are given to the President in this draft.

Article II.

Section 1. The executive power shall be vested in the President of the Republic. He shall be elected by the National Assembly, in such manner, and for such period as are provided in Article I Section 11.

Section 2. No person except a native born citizen, or a citizen of the Republic of China at the time of the adoption of this Constitution shall be eligible to the office of the President of the Republic. Nor shall any person be eligible to the office of President of the Republic, who shall not at the time of his election, have attained the age of 35 years, and who shall not have been 10 years a resident within the Republic of China.

Section 3. The President of the Republic shall at stated times receive for his services, a compensation to be fixed by law, which shall neither be increased nor diminished during the term for which he shall have been elected, and he shall not receive within that period any other emolument.

Section 4. The President of the Republic shall during his term of office be exempted from the process of all courts except the court of impeachment. After the expiration of his term of office, he shall be subject to the process of the courts for any illegal acts which he may have committed while President in such manner and to such extent as may be provided by law. Note.—While the Constitution of the United States does not expressly provide that the President shall be free from judicial control, the courts of the United States have announced this to be the rule of law. They have reached this decision both because the principle of the separation of powers seemed to make it necessary, and because they believed that freedom from all suits before the courts was a condition of effective work by the President.

Section 5. The President shall be the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the Republic of China: he shall have power to appoint all officers of the Republic including the Governors of Provinces, but Parliament may by law vest the appointment of inferior officers in the heads of executive departments, in the Governors of Provinces, and in the courts of law, and may by law prescribe the qualifications which officers, not heads of executive departments, must possess in order to be eligible to appointment. The President may remove or suspend all officers not judges, whom he has appointed, but judges may be removed from office only by impeachment or in the manner hereinafter provided, and the Parliament may by law prescribe that all officers of the Republic except the heads of executive departments, shall, before they may be removed from office, be given a copy of any charges which may be made against them, and be given an opportunity to be heard in their own defence.

The President shall have the power to grant reprieves and pardons for offences against the Republic, except in cases of impeachment; and to make treaties with foreign nations, but all treaties of peace, of commerce, and those which impose a charge upon the treasury of the Republic, or of any one of the provinces, shall to be valid, be approved by both houses of Parliament.

Note.—Little comment upon this section is necessary. It is based upon a section of the Constitution of the United States. That portion with regard to the making of treaties has however been modelled upon the French Constitution. Special mention has been made of the power of Parliament to prescribe by law the qualifications of officers, and of the power of the President to remove all officers whom he appoints, not judges, in order to remove doubts which have arisen in connection with the exercise of similar powers in the United States. It should be noted that the grant in this section to the President, of the power to appoint and remove Governors of provinces, is in application of the idea to which attention has already been directed, that the government of the Republic of China will be a centralized and not a federal government. The mention of the office of Governor of a province, finally, is an exception to the general plan which has been followed in this draft, of leaving the organization of the provincial system to be prescribed by the ordinary process of legislation. Every province, if this draft is adopted, must however have a Governor who must be appointed, and may be removed, by the President of the Republic.

It would seem to be necessary in order to obtain a well qualified and permanent civil service, to give to the Parliament the right, in case the requisite action is not taken by the President of the Republic, to prescribe qualifications for office, and a method of removal from office which will prevent purely arbitrary removals for merely political reasons.

Section 6. It shall be the duty of the President to see that the Constitution and laws are faithfully executed. To this end he may prescribe ordinances and regulations not inconsistent with law, which shall have the force of law. All such ordinances and regulations must be laid before Parliament within ten days after their issue in case Parliament is in session: in case Parliament is not in session when such ordinances or regulations are issued, such ordinances and regulations must be laid before Parliament within ten days after Parliament next assembles. Parliament may at any time repeal such ordinances and regulations by a majority vote of each house, and such repeal shall be valid without the approval of the President.

Failure on the part of the President to lay before Parliament, in accordance with the provisions of this section, any ordinance or regulation which he may prescribe by authority of this section, shall be ground for impeachment.

Note.—One of the characteristics of almost all modern nations, is the increase in the power of ordinance or regulation possessed by the executive. Many of the important parts of the law are regulated in Great Britain by Orders in Council issued by the Crown, or by Provisional or Statutory Orders made by some executive department and submitted to Parliament for its approval. The same may be said of France where it is now recognized that the President has the constitutional right to issue decrees not inconsistent with law, while in both Germany and the United States various laws passed by the legislature have delegated to the executive the right to issue ordinances and regulations not inconsistent with law.

The suggestion has therefore been made in this draft that similar powers be granted in the constitution to the President. The grant of such power would seem to be particularly necessary in the conditions now existing in China. As has already been pointed out, the adoption of the permanent Constitution will unquestionably be followed by the necessity for the passage of a vast amount of constructive legislation. It is doubtful whether any Parliament which can be expected to assemble in the immediate future will, with all the other duties which will devolve upon it, be equal to this task. It is therefore desirable, on the one hand, to call the Executive to the aid of Parliament, by recognizing in the Constitution that he possesses a wide power of ordinance and regulation, and on the other hand, to provide some safeguard, which will leave the absolute and effective control of the exercise of that power, in Parliament itself.

It is believed that such a safeguard has been provided in this draft in the requirements that a special session of Parliament must be called by the executive on request by a majority of both houses, and that the executive must speedily lay before Parliament any regulation or ordinance issued by him; both the duty to call such special session, and the duty to lay the ordinance before Parliament, being enforceable by Parliament through impeachment proceedings. These provisions, it is believed, amply assure that Parliament will have almost immediately after their issue, the opportunity to repeal, by a mere majority vote, any ordinance or regulation in the issue of which the Parliament may believe that the President has acted unwisely.

Section 7. The President of the Republic may, by proclamation, declare any province, or part of a province, to be in a state of siege. In case of the issue of such a proclamation, the district to which such proclamation applies, shall be under martial law until such time as the President by proclamation shall declare such district to be no longer in a state of siege.

Note.—The power to declare a part of the country in a state of siege, is recognized by French and German rather than by English and American law. Provision has been made for it in this draft mainly because such a power is mentioned in the provisional Constitution. However the great size of the Chinese Empire will necessarily leave many isolated groups of people separated by great distances from the seat of government control; should this distance and isolation tend to make seditious practices, or rebellion against the government more easy, the right to declare martial law will also render more easy and speedy their suppression. Furthermore the physical position of China as a nation surrounded by other Powers differentiates her position from that of America and England and likens it to that of Germany and France which are also in proximity to other great Powers: martial law might prove to be an effective weapon in the protection of China’s borders from outside disturbances and influences. The actual effects of the declaration of a state of siege would have to be determined as a result of a consideration of the general law upon the subject which Parliament would be authorized to adopt as a result of the exercise of its general legislative powers.

Section 8. The President shall from time to time, give to the Parliament information of the state of the Republic, and shall recommend to their consideration such measures, in the form of bills or otherwise, as he shall deem expedient.

Such officers of the government as may be designated in writing by the President for the purpose, shall have the right to introduce bills into either house of Parliament, and to participate in the debates thereon, but it shall not be lawful for them to vote thereon, unless they are members of such house.

Either house of Parliament may by resolution request the presence of any of the heads of executive departments, and may question them with regard to any matters within their competence. Failure on the part of such heads of departments to appear when so requested, or to answer questions put to them with regard to their departments shall be cause for impeachment.

Note.—This section has been drafted with the purpose of removing one of the most serious objections to the form of government which accords to the President great independence of the legislature. Where the President, and his appointees the heads of executive departments, must deal with Parliament indirectly, misunderstandings are liable to arise which unnecessarily increase the difficulty of conducting the government. It is therefore desirable to make it possible for the President to submit to Parliament for its consideration well considered measures in the form of projects of law or bills, and to express to Parliament the views of the administration thereupon through the medium of persons, either the heads of departments or persons in the department specially qualified, designated for the purpose by the President. On the other hand it is desirable that Parliament shall have the power to oblige the heads of departments whose conduct of their departments is the subject of criticism to come before it and answer questions which may be put to them.

Section 9. The President of the Republic shall each year, not later than … submit to the Parliament estimates of the expenses necessary for carrying on the government of the Republic for the ensuing fiscal year, classified in such manner as may be provided by law, and hereafter called the budget. But in case of emergency the President of the Republic may thereafter present to the Parliament supplementary estimates for its action.

In case the Parliament, before the expiration of the current fiscal year, votes the budget as submitted by the President of the Republic, the said President is authorized, during the ensuing fiscal year, to draw money from the Treasury for the purposes and in the amounts provided for in said budget. In case the Parliament fails to vote, before the expiration of the current fiscal year, the budget as submitted by the President of the Republic, the appropriations for the current fiscal year as last voted by the Parliament at a preceding session, shall thereupon be the appropriations for the ensuing fiscal year; or in case the Parliament fails to vote any item in the budget as submitted by the President of the Republic, or makes a reduction in any such item which is not accepted and approved by the President of the Republic before the expiration of the current fiscal year, the provision for such item in the appropriations of the current fiscal year as last voted by the Parliament at a preceding session, shall be the provision for such item in the appropriations for the ensuing fiscal year, and in either case the President is authorized, during the ensuing fiscal year to draw money from the Treasury of the Republic, for the purposes and in the amounts provided for in the said appropriations for the current fiscal year as last voted by Parliament at a preceding session.

The drawing of money from the Treasury by the President of the Republic when not authorized by law or by this Constitution shall be ground for impeachment.

Note.—The control of the government of a country, is centered in the control of the appropriation of its moneys. Any plan of government which is based upon the theory of a reasonably permanent and independent executive, must bear this fact in mind. Therefore such a plan of government should not permit the Parliament to make use of its powers over the appropriations, in order to overthrow a government by refusing to grant money for the current work. It is for this reason that provision has been made, in accordance with which the government’s actual necessities, as determined by the appropriations of the preceding year, will be provided for, even if Parliament shall fail to vote the budget, or particular items therein. On the other hand the Parliament should, in the interest of popular government, have the power to refuse to permit any further extension of the activities of the Government. Its refusal to entrust the Government with the power to expend larger sums of money than were provided for the current year, will not, however, have the effect of bringing the current operations of the Government to an end, and will not therefore subject the Government to a greater parliamentary control than is provided for in this Constitution.

Section 10. The President of the Republic shall annually within days after the opening of the annual session of the Parliament, submit to the Parliament a detailed statement, of the receipts and expenditures of the last completed fiscal year. Such statement shall be classified in such manner as may be provided by law.

The failure of the President of the Republic to submit such statement, at the time provided herein, and in the manner provided by law, shall be ground for impeachment.

Note.—One of the most important, if not an absolutely essential means of securing economy in government expenditure, and the exercise of an effective legislative control over executive action, is knowledge in a comprehensive and intelligible form, of the way in which government moneys have been expended. In other words, a detailed statement of receipts and expenditures is a necessary condition of good government. What the character of that statement should be, must be determined by the character of receipts and expenditures. The detailed form of such a statement cannot therefore be provided in a constitution, but must be prescribed by law.

So important is the making of such a statement at the time, and in the form, provided by law, that it is proposed that failure on the part of the President to comply with the law in this respect shall be ground for impeachment.

Article III.

Section 1. The judicial power of the Republic shall be vested in such courts as Parliament may from time to time ordain and establish. Note.—The attempt has not been made in the draft, in the article devoted to the judicial power, to prescribe the system of courts to be established, but it is recognized that this system should be regulated by legislation. If for example it may seem desirable to establish administrative courts after the French model, this plan may be carried out under this section.

Section 2. The judges both of the supreme and inferior courts shall hold their offices during good behaviour, and shall, at stated times, receive for their services a compensation which shall be prescribed by law, and which shall not be diminished during their continuance in office.

The Parliament may provide for the removal of judges in the case of misbehaviour, and may define misbehaviour on the part of judges, and may provide a method by which it may be determined whether a judge has been guilty of misbehaviour, but such method shall among other things provide, that every judge against whom removal proceedings are instituted, shall be given a copy of any charges made against him, and an opportunity to be heard in his defence.

Note.—The only details with regard to the judicial system which are covered by this draft, are those with regard to the tenure and independence of the judges. There would appear to be at the present time, an almost universal recognition of the necessity of judicial independence during good behaviour. But it would seem to be necessary that some method of determining the presence of misbehaviour should be provided which is more easy of application than impeachment. It has therefore been proposed to give to Parliament the right to prescribe a method by which judges may be removed for misbehaviour, the sole limitation upon its discretion being, that a judge shall not be removed except after a hearing in the nature of a trial.

Section 3. The jurisdiction of the courts of the Republic, whether original or appellate, shall be determined by law.

Article IV.

Section 1. Parliament shall have power to fix by law the number and boundaries of the Provinces of the Republic, but until such laws shall be passed, the number and boundaries of said provinces shall remain as they are at the time of the adoption of this constitution.

Section 2. Parliament may, by law, fix the powers and duties of the Provinces, and determine their organization.

Section 3. Until Parliament shall have prescribed by law the powers of Provinces, each Province shall have powers of legislation concurrent with those of the Parliament, to pass laws which shall be operative within such province; but all laws adopted by a Province in the exercise of such concurrent powers of legislation shall before they are operative receive the approval of the President of the Republic, and may at any time be repealed by the Parliament.

Section 4. Until Parliament shall have passed laws fixing the organization and duties of the Provinces, the organization in force and the duties owed by the Provinces at the time of the adoption of this Constitution shall continue in force. But until its organization shall be fixed by act of Parliament, each Province may, subject to the approval of the President of the Republic, change its organization as it deems expedient.

Article V.

This Constitution may be amended by a resolution adopted by a two-thirds vote of both Houses of Parliament, and approved by the President.

Article VI.

All laws and regulations in force at the time of the adoption of this Constitution shall continue in force until amended or repealed by authority of law.

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

3  For. Rel. 1913, p. 139.

4 Not printed.

4 Not printed.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.011/15.

[Document 55]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

No. 211.] American Legation,
Peking, May 5, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith a memorandum by the Chinese Secretary of this Legation on the Revised Provisional Constitution, promulgated by the President of the Republic of China on May 1, 1914.

From the synopsis of this document, contained in Mr. Peck’s memorandum, it will be evident that the powers now centralized in the hands of the President are extraordinarily great. While this is justly regarded as a pause in the progress towards the development of a representative form of government for this nation, I am inclined to believe that it ought not to be interpreted as a definitive reaction against democracy, but rather as an assumption of those powers necessary to enable the Central Government to bring about the only conditions under which constitutional development can be safely and profitably fostered, namely, conditions of national cohesion and internal tranquility. I am confident that in such measure as the people of China demand progressively democratic forms of government, such will be evolved; and it is not the least of the commendable points of the present constitution that it leaves wide scope for the evolution of such forms.

I have [etc.]

Paul S. Reinsch.

[Inclosure.]

Review of constitutional evolution in China, January 10, 1912, to May 1, 1914; and a synopsis of the Revised Provisional Constitution of China, promulgated May 1, 1914.

American Legation,
Peking, May 5, 1914.

memorandum.

On May 1, 1914, the President of the Republic of China issued the following Presidential Mandate, which was signed by the members of the Cabinet: The Provisional Constitutional Conference having passed the Provisional Constitution of the Republic of China, it is hereby specially promulgated.

The revised Provisional Constitution thus promulgated occupies the following place in the sequence of events in the constitutional evolution of this Republic: January 10, 1912. The President issued a mandate convoking a National Assembly. March 10, 1912. The Advisory Council of the Republic proclaimed a Provisional Constitution.5

April 8, 1913. The first session of the National Assembly, provided for in Article 53 of the Provisional Constitution, was convened and its organization completed by the election of the two presiding officers on April 30, 1913.6

October 6, 1913. Yuan Shih K’ai was elected Permanent President of the Republic.7 He was elected in compliance with an Act passed by the National Assembly on October 4, 1913, adopting that portion of the Permanent Constitution dealing with the election of the President. Term, five years, subject to reelection once only.

October 10, 1913. Yuan Shih K’ai was inaugurated Permanent President of the Republic.8

October 22, 1913. The committee composed of members of the National Assembly appointed to draft the Permanent Constitution refused to receive the representatives of the President bearing his suggestions as to the amendments of the draft, submitted in accordance with Article 55 of the Provisional Constitution.

November 4, 1913. The President issued a mandate expelling the Kuo Min Ting, or Nationalist, members of the National Assembly.9 Owing to the lack of a quorum in that body, the draft constitution could no longer be discussed.

November 13, 1913. A notification from the presiding officers of the National Assembly was published in the Government Gazette announcing the fact that the agenda of the Assembly would no longer be published.

November 26, 1913. The President issued a mandate announcing the convocation of a Political Council (also translated Administrative Conference) composed of two members from each Province and certain appointive members, the duty of the Council being to give advice to the President on governmental affairs.10

December 18, 1913. There was published in the Government Gazette a telegram signed by every prominent official in the Republic calling for the temporary dispersion of the members of the National Assembly and the conversion of the Administrative Conference [Political Council] into a Constitutional Convention.10

January 10, 1914. The President issued a mandate adopting the report of the Administrative Conference [Political Council] and dissolving the National Assembly, since it had no quorum. He promised to convene the Assembly again in due course of time, in accordance with the Provisional Constitution.11

January 11, 1914. The President issued a mandate, quoting the precedents of France and the United States and approving the recommendation of the Administrative Conference, whereby he directed the creation of a “law-making organ” composed of men of great learning and ripe experience, to amend the Provisional Constitution.11

January 26, 1914. The President issued a mandate directing the formation of the “Provisional Constitutional Conference” and settling the method by which its members would be elected. The electors and the members were to be possessed of educational or property-holding qualifications.

February 4, 1914. The President issued a mandate dissolving the local self-government bodies.

March 2, 1914. The President issued a mandate dissolving the Provincial Assemblies.

March 14, 1914. The President issued a mandate directing that the Provisional Constitutional Conference should meet on the 18th of the month.

March 18, 1914. The Conference convened, with a nominal membership of sixty.

May 1, 1914. The President promulgated the revised Provisional Constitution.

May 1, 1914. The President issued a mandate appointing Hsu Shih Ch’ang Secretary of State (Kuo Wu Ch’ing) in place of the Premier.

May 2, 1914. The President issued a mandate abolishing the Cabinet, now replaced by the President and the Secretary of State. All communications hitherto addressed to the Cabinet are henceforth to be addressed to the President direct.

The following is a synopsis of the new revised Provisional Constitution:

executive powers.

The President is the head of the nation and the supreme authority in the government. He may convoke, adjourn and terminate the sessions of the Legislature. He may issue any orders not contrary to law. He may, when the Legislature is not in session, issue, with the approval of the Advisory Council, orders that have the force of law; but these orders may be annulled by the Legislature at its next session.

The President shall fix the official system and appoint and dismiss all civil and military officials. He may declare war or conclude peace. He is commander in chief of the Army and Navy. He may conclude treaties, subject to certain restrictions. He shall promulgate all acts of the Legislature.

With the approval of the Advisory Council, he may impose a final veto on any act of the Legislature.

legislative powers.

The laws of the nation shall be enacted by the Legislature, whose members shall be elected by the people.

The Legislature may impeach the President for treason, before the Supreme Court.

financial powers.

All financial legislation shall be enacted by the Legislature, either on its own initiative or that of the President.

Neither the budget as fixed by law, nor national obligations, may be altered except by permission of the President.

The President may take extraordinary financial measures, with the consent of the Advisory Council, which measures must be sanctioned by the Legislature.

administrative powers.

The President shall be the chief of the Administrative Department of the Government.

A Secretary of State shall be provided to assist the President. There shall be nine Ministries, whose chiefs shall perform their duties in accordance with the laws and the presidential mandates.

judicial powers.

All judicial officers shall be appointed by the President. They shall administer the laws passed by the Legislature.

miscellaneous.

Further points of interest in the Constitution are:

The provision that previous to the convocation of the Legislature the Advisory Council (Ts’an Cheng Yuan) shall exercise its functions.

The organization of the Advisory Council is left to the Provisional Constitutional Conference.

The Articles published on February 12, 1912,12 regarding the favorable treatment of the Ta Ch’ing Emperor, the Imperial Clan, and the Manchu, Mongol, Turki and Tibetan peoples, are continued in force forever.

Finally, it is provided that the permanent Constitution of the Republic shall be drafted by a committee appointed by, or rather elected by and from, the members of the Advisory Council. The bill introducing this draft shall be prepared by the Advisory Council and shall be submitted by the President to a national convention of citizens for adoption, the organization of this convention being left to the Provisional Constitutional Conference. The convention shall be convoked by and dissolved by the President.

The Constitution, when adopted, shall be promulgated by the President.

5 For the text, see first paper in this chapter; see also For. Rel. 1913, pp. 94, 96, 103–104.

6  For. Rel. 1913, pp. 111–113, 116.

7  Id. 131, 133.

8  Id. 135–138.

9  Id. 139.

10  Id. 141–143.

10  Id. 141–143.

11 See the despatch of January 16, ante.

11 See the despatch of January 16, ante.

12  For. Rel. 1912, p. 65.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.011/16.

[Document 56]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

[Extract]

No. 255.] American Legation,
Peking, June 5, 1914.

Sir: In continuation of my despatch No. 211 of May 5, with which I enclosed a memorandum by the Chinese Secretary on the Revised Provisional Constitution, I have the honor to transmit two memoranda: one by the Chinese Secretary, relative to the development of government organization; and one13 by the Assistant Chinese Secretary on the personnel of the Advisory Council (Ts’an Cheng Yuan), together with translations of the public documents treated of as published in the local foreign press.* * *

I have [etc.]

Paul S. Reinsch.

[Inclosure 1—Extract.]

Memorandum by the Chinese Secretary.

American Legation,
Peking, May 30, 1914.

development of government organization.

On May 5, 1914, the Chinese Secretary had the honor to submit a short memorandum with reference to the Constitutional Compact (formerly called the Revised Provisional Constitution) which was promulgated on May 1, 1914, including therein a synopsis of the principal events in the way of governmental development from the outbreak of the Revolution in 1911 up to May 2, 1914, when the President by mandate dissolved the Cabinet.

There is attached to this memorandum a translation of the Constitutional Compact, prepared by Mr. Sao-ke Alfred Sze, Master of Ceremonies in the President’s office; Mr. T. Y. Lo (Lo Chung-i), in the same department; Dr. F. J. Goodnow; and Dr. N. Ariga, the two latter both Legal Advisers to the President. It may be considered, therefore, as the official and authoritative translation.

The following list indicates the more important governmental developments that have taken place since May 2, 1914: On May 3, 1914, a Presidential mandate promulgated the organization of the Administrative Council (Chéng Shih T’ang).

On May 8, 1914, a Presidential mandate promulgated the organization of the Military Council.

On May 15, 1914, the organization of the Salt Gabelle was promulgated.

On May 20, 1914, the organization of a Local Constabulary was promulgated.

On May 23, 1914, the official system for the Provinces was promulgated. On May 24, 1914, the organization of the Advisory Chamber (Ts’an Cheng Yuan) was promulgated.

comment.

The Administrative Council (Chêng Shih Tang).

This body, at the head of which is the Secretary of State (Kuo Wu Ch’ing) with a Senior and Junior Secretary of State to assist him (Tse Ch’êng, Yu Ch’êng), is the office through which the President exercises his powers as Chief Executive. There are in it five bureaus and one department, as follows:

Bureau of Legislation; Bureau of Confidential Affairs; Bureau of Civil Service; Bureau of Accounting; Bureau of Printing and Foundry; Department of General Affairs.

The Military Council (Lu Hai Chun Ta Yuan Shuai Tung Shuai Pan Shih Ch’u; literally, “Office of the Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Navy”).

This Council is composed of the Minister of War, the Chief of the General Staff, the Minister of Marine, an officer or officers of high rank appointed by the Commander-in-chief, i. e. the President, and the Chief of the General Bureau of the Council. It is the organ through which the President exercises his powers as Commander-in-chief of the military and naval forces of the Republic (see Article 23 of the Constitutional Compact).

The Salt Cabelle (Yen Wu Shu).

The Minister for Finance is ex officio the Director General of the Salt Gabelle Department. But the actual departmental chief is nominated by the President. The duties of the Salt Gabelle Department are performed by one department and two bureaus, i. e. the General Affairs Department and the Salt Production Bureau and Salt Conveyance and Consumption Bureau. The functions of the General Affairs Department are supervisory in their nature and those of the two Departments [Bureaus?] are indicated by their names. Article 15 of the Regulations provides for the employment of foreigners in the Gabelle, in the following words: “The Salt Gabelle Department may, for the purpose of transcribing documents and dealing with other matters, employ assistants or hired persons.”

Local Constabulary (Pao Wei T’uan).

This organization, which is composed of citizens, corresponds almost exactly with the militia organization in the United States. It is trained and in time of necessity may be called into requisition. It is recruited and supported locally. It is designed to supplement the provincial police, but may possibly be the beginning of a national conscription system.

Official system for the Provinces (Shêng Kuan Chih).

In this system the commonly accepted Chinese principle of making the superior responsible for everything under his jurisdiction is carried out to its fullest extent. The executive, or territorial, officials created by the system are of three grades: a Provincial Governor (Hsun An Shih), and Intendent of Circuit (Tao Yin) and a District Magistrate (Hsien Chih Shih).

The Governor nominates all the Magistrates in his province and may remove the Tao-yin by impeachment. He may be specially instructed by the Central Government to assume the direction of the finances and legal machinery of the province and be invested with the requisite powers thereto. He has control of all military forces in the province except the regular army and the navy.

The Tao-yin has powers in his circuit almost corresponding to those of the Governor in his, subject, of course, to review.

The Magistrate, again, has similarly wide powers in his district.

The Provincial Bureau of Finance (Ts’ai Chêng T’ing) and the provincial law courts have yet to be established.

The system now inaugurated would seem to a European to leave the way open for a recrudescence, or continuance, of the faults of the provincial administration existing under the Manchu rule, but it is undoubtedly framed on the basic principles to which the Chinese have always been accustomed and under which the Empire attained a prosperity and strength that at present it lacks. The system may, therefore, serve as an efficient transitional expedient until the time when, the country having been reduced to order, trade and industry having been fostered and the revenues of the country having been restored to at least their former amounts, an organized civil service may be created that shall leave less power to the higher ranks of officialdom in the matter of appointing their subordinates; in other words, that shall present less opportunity for a “spoils system”. It is, perhaps, superfluous to call attention to the resemblance between the present system and that obtaining under the monarchical regime.

The Advisory Chamber (Ts’an Chêng Yuan).

This Chamber is composed of between fifty and seventy members, all appointed by the President. From the qualifications as set forth in Article 7 of the Regulations of the Ts’an Cheng Yuan it would appear that the intention is not only to provide the Chief Executive with a body of men capable of giving him expert advice on various matters of public policy, but to enable him to secure in support of his actions the strength of public opinion as represented and influenced by the prestige of men of national reputation. This view is supported by the functions of the Chamber as defined in the Constitutional Compact, in which it is noticeable that the approval of the Chamber is necessary especially in those instances where the President will be called upon to act either in opposition to the will of the Legislature (Li Fa Yuan) or without its expressed consent. For instance, in Article 17, “The President, with the concurrence of the Ts’an Chêng Yuan, may dissolve the Legislature”; in article 20, “... at a time of urgent necessity when the Legislature cannot be convoked, the President, with the concurrence of the Ts’an Chêng Yuan, may issue emergency ordinances having the force of law”; in Article 34 it is stated that the President may, “with the concurrence of the Ts’an Chêng Yuan, withhold promulgation of any bill passed by the Legislature.” Article 2 of the Ts’an Chêng Yuan give it powers in the interpretation of the Constitutional Compact and laws passed in connection therewith, evidently a most important function and designed to strengthen the hands of the President.

Thus in routine matters the Ts’an Chêng Yuan has no part in legislation or government, except that previous to the convocation of the Legislature it fulfills that body’s functions.

One of the most significant duties of the Advisory Chamber is to be the preparation of a draft of the Permanent Constitution for submission to a National Convention, a duty enjoined upon it by Articles 59 and 60 of the Constitutional Compact.

The name “Ts’an Chêng Yuan” has also been translated “Council of State”.

[Subinclosure.]

The Constitutional Compact of the Chung-Hua-Min-Kuo. Translated by Sao-ke Alfred Sze and T. Y. Lo; Translation revised by Prof. Frank J. Goodnow and Dr. N. Ariga.

Peking Daily News, May 20, 1914.]

Chapter I.—The Nation.

Article 1. The Chung Hua Min Kuo is composed of the people of Chung Hua.

Article 2. The sovereignty of the Chung Hua Min Kuo originates from the whole body of the people.

Article 3. The territory of the Chung Hua Min Kuo continues the same as that of the former Empire.

Chapter II.—The Citizens.

Article 4. Citizens of the Chung Hua Min Kuo shall be equal before the law, irrespective of race, rank or religion.

Article 5. Citizens shall enjoy the following rights: (a) No citizens shall be arrested, imprisoned, tried or punished, except in accordance with statute.

(b) The habitation of any citizen shall not be forcibly entered into or searched, except in accordance with statute.

(c) Within the limits of the statutes, citizens shall have the right to own and enjoy property and to trade freely.

(d) Within the limits of the statutes, citizens shall have the rights of freedom of speech, of writing and publication, and of assembly and association.

(e) Within the limits of the statutes, citizens shall have the right of secrecy of correspondence.

(f) Within the limits of the statutes, citizens shall have the right of abode and of changing the same.

(g) Within the limits of the statutes, citizens shall have the right of religious belief.

Article 6. In accordance with the provisions of the statutes, citizens shall have the right of petitioning the Legislature.

Article 7. In accordance with the provisions of the statutes, citizens shall have the right to institute proceedings in the Courts of Law.

Article 8. In accordance with the provisions of the statutes, citizens shall have the right of petitioning administrative officers and of lodging complaints with the Court of Censors and Administrative Justice.

Article 9. In accordance with the provisions of law and ordinance, citizens shall have the right to attend the examinations for the appointment of officers and to enter the public service.

Article 10. In accordance with the provisions of the statutes, citizens shall have the right to elect and be elected.

Article 11. In accordance with the provisions of the statutes, citizens are subject to the duty of paying taxes.

Article 12. In accordance with the provisions of the statutes, citizens are subject to the duty of performing military service.

Article 13. The provisions made in this Chapter that are not in conflict with the law, ordinances and discipline of the Army and Navy, shall be applicable to persons belonging to said services.

Chapter III.—The President.

Article 14. The President is the head of the Nation and combines in himself all the powers of government.

Article 15. The President shall represent the Chung Hua Min Kuo.

Article 16. The President shall be responsible to the whole Nation.

Article 17. The President shall convoke the Legislature and open, prorogue and close its sessions. The President, with the concurrence of the Council of State, may dissolve the Legislature; in the case of dissolution, new members must be elected and the Legislature convoked within six months from the date of dissolution.

Article 18. The President may initiate legislation and shall lay the estimates before the Legislature.

Article 19. For the promotion of public welfare, for the execution of the statutes, or in pursuance of authority granted by statute, the President may issue or cause to be issued ordinances; but no ordinance shall alter any statute.

Article 20. In order to maintain peace and order, or to avert extraordinary calamities, at a time of urgent necessity when the Legislature cannot be convoked, the President, with the concurrence of the Council of State, may issue emergency ordinances having the force of law; but such ordinances shall be submitted to the Legislature for ratification at the beginning of its next session.

Should the said emergency ordinances be rejected by the Legislature, they shall thereafter be null and void.

Article 21. The President shall prescribe and determine the organization of all offices and shall issue the regulations fixing the duties of officials.

The President shall appoint and dismiss civil and military officers.

Article 22. The President shall declare war [and] conclude peace.

Article 23. The President is the Commander-in-chief of the Army and Navy, and leads the land and sea forces of the Nation.

The President shall determine the organization and the strength of the Army and Navy.

Article 24. The President shall receive foreign ambassadors and ministers.

Article 25. The President makes treaties; but should articles therein provide for any change of territory, or increase the burdens of the citizens, the concurrence of the Legislature shall be required.

Article 26. The President may, in accordance with the provisions of the statute, declare a state of siege.

Article 27. The President may confer titles of nobility, rank, orders and other marks of honor.

Article 28. The President may grant general amnesty, special pardon, commutation of punishment and restoration of rights. In the case of general amnesty the concurrence of the Legislature shall be required.

Article 29. When the President, for any cause, vacates his office or is unable to exercise the powers and functions connected therewith, the Vice President shall act in his stead.

Chapter IV.—Legislature.

Article 30. Statutes shall be enacted by the Legislature composed of members elected by the people.

The organization of the Legislature and the method of the election of its members shall be prescribed and determined by the Constitutional Compact Conference.

Article 31. The competence of the Legislature shall be as follows: (a) To discuss and pass bills.

(b) To discuss and pass the estimates.

(c) To discuss and pass or approve measures relating to the assumption of public debts, and to the contracting of other liabilities to the charge of the National Treasury.

(d) To reply to inquiries addressed to it by the President.

(e) To receive petitions from the people.

f) To initiate legislation.

(g) To submit to the President suggestions and opinions relating to legislation and other matters.

(h) To raise questions in regard to administration over which doubts have arisen and to request the President to reply thereon. But the President may refuse to reply should he deem it necessary for the matter to be kept in secret.

(i) Should the President make an attempt against the State, the Legislature may institute against him impeachment proceedings in the Supreme Court of Justice, if approved by a majority of three-fourths or over of a quorum of four-fifths or over of the total number of members of the Legislature.

The exercise of the powers mentioned in clauses 1–8 of this article, and articles 20, 25, 28, 55 and 57 shall require the concurrence of a majority of the members present in the Legislature.

Article 32. The annual session of the Legislature shall not exceed four months in duration, but may be prolonged should the President consider it necessary. The President may call an extraordinary session during the recess.

Article 33. The deliberations of the Legislature shall be public, but the members may sit behind closed doors at the request of the President, or as a result of the decision of a majority of the members present.

Article 34. Bills which have passed the Legislature shall be promulgated and enforced by the President.

But if the President shall disapprove a bill duly passed in the Legislature, he may return the bill to the Legislature for reconsideration, with a statement of the reasons of his disapproval. Even in case that the former decision of the Legislature be adhered to by a majority of two-thirds or over of the members present, if the President still maintain that the bill would greatly endanger or harm either the internal administration of the State or its foreign relations, or that there are great and important obstacles in the way of its execution, in such a case the President may, with the concurrence of the Council of State, withhold promulgation.

Article 35. The Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislature shall be elected from and among the members by a majority of the votes cast.

Article 36. Members of the Legislature shall not be held responsible, outside of the House, for their speeches, debates or for votes cast in the House.

Article 37. Except when discovered in the commission of a crime, or when involved in crimes connected with internal or external troubles, no member of the Legislature shall be arrested during the session without the permission of the House.

Article 38. The Legislature shall prescribe its own rules and procedure.

Chapter V.—The Administration.

Article 39. The President is the chief of the Administration and shall be assisted by one Secretary of State.

Article 40. The affairs of the Administration shall be separately conducted by the Departments of Foreign Affairs, Interior, Finance, War, the Navy, Justice, Education, Agriculture and Commerce, and of Communications.

Article 41. The Heads of the Departments shall manage the Administration of their respective Departments in accordance with laws and ordinances.

Article 42. The Secretary of State, the Heads of the Departments, and Special Delegates representing the President, shall be entitled to sit and speak in the Legislature.

Article 43. The Secretary of State and the Heads of the Departments may be impeached by the Censors and judged by the Court of Administrative Justice, should they violate the law.

Chapter VI.—The Courts of Law.

Article 44. The Courts of Law shall be composed of the law officers appointed by the President.

The organization of the Courts of Law and the qualification of the law officers shall be determined by statute.

Article 45. The Courts of Law, in accordance with the provisions of the statute, shall try and judge all civil and criminal cases. But administrative law proceedings shall be tried and judged according to the law governing the same.

Article 46. The procedure of impeachment cases in the Supreme Court of Justice, as provided for under clause 9 of Article 31, shall be determined separately by statute.

Article 47. In the Courts of Law, trials shall be conducted and judgment shall be rendered publicly. When, however, it is considered that publicity may be prejudicial to peace and order, or to the maintenance of public morality, secrecy may be observed.

Article 48. During his term of office, no officer shall be reduced in salary, nor transferred to another office, nor shall he be deprived of his office except as a consequence of punishment according to statute, or of disciplinary measures entailing dismissal.

Chapter VII.—The Council or State.

Article 49. The Council of State, when consulted by the President, shall deliberate upon important matters of state.

The organization of the Council of State shall be determined by the Constitutional Compact Conference.

Chapter VIII.—Finance.

Article 50. The imposition of new taxes and the modification of the rates of the existing taxes shall be made by statute. The taxes levied at present shall, unless changed by statute, be collected as in the past.

Article 51. The annual receipts and expenditures of the State shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the estimates passed by the Legislature.

Article 52. In order to meet special requirements, there may be included in the estimates appropriations to continue for a certain number of years as a Continuing Expenditure Fund.

Article 53. In order to supply deficiencies in the estimates, or to meet requirements unprovided for in the same, a Reserve Fund shall not be provided for in the estimates.

Article 54. Estimates for the objects of expenditure specified below shall not be rejected or reduced except with the concurrence of the President: (1) Those appertaining to the legal obligations of the Government.

(2) Such necessary expenditures as may have arisen as the effects of statutes.

(3) Expenditures necessary to carry out treaties.

(4) Expenditures necessary for the organization of the Army and Navy.

Article 55. In case of international warfare or internal disturbance, or under extraordinary circumstances, when the Legislature cannot be convoked, the President, with the concurrence of the Council of State, may make urgent financial appropriations. But he shall request the Legislature for ratification at the beginning of its next session.

Article 56. If the new estimates have not been acted upon, the appropriations of the previous year shall continue in force. The same procedure shall be observed should the adoption of the estimates be delayed after the fiscal year has already begun.

Article 57. The final accounts of the receipts and expenditures of the State shall be audited every year by the Board of Audit, and shall be reported by the President to the Legislature for approval.

Article 58. The organization of the Board of Audit shall be determined by the Constitutional Compact Conference.

Chapter IX.—The Procedure for Drafting the Constitution.

Article 59. The Constitution of the Chung Hua Min Kuo shall be drafted by a Committee established for this purpose.

Members of this Committee shall be composed of ten persons elected by the Council of State.

Article 60. The Draft of the Constitution of the Chung Hua Min Kuo shall be examined and passed by the Council of State.

Article 61. After the Constitution of the Chung Hua Min Kuo has been examined and passed by the Council of State, it shall be submitted by the President to the National Convention for final adoption.

The organization of the National Convention shall be determined by the Constitutional Compact Conference.

Article 62. The National Convention shall be convoked and dissolved by the President.

Article 63. The Constitution of the Chung Hua Min Kuo shall be promulgated by the President.

Chapter X.—Supplementary Articles.

Article 64. Laws and ordinances in force before the enforcement of the Constitutional Compact, so far as they do not come into conflict with the same, shall continue to be valid.

Article 65. The Articles proclaimed on the twelfth clay of the second month of the first year of the Min Kuo, regarding the favorable treatment of the Ta Ching Emperor after his abdication of the Throne, and the special treatment of the Ching Imperial Clan, as well as the special treatment of the Manchus, Mongols, Mohammedans, and Tibetans, shall never be modified. The statute on the treatment of the Mongols, which is correlated with the foregoing Articles, shall continue to be effective unless changed by statute.

Article 66. On the proposal of a majority of two-thirds or over of the members of the Legislature, or on the proposal of the President, in either case if approved by a majority of three-fourths or over of a quorum of four-fifths or over of the total number of members of the Legislature, the President shall convoke the Constitutional Compact Conference to amend the Constitutional Compact.

Article 67. Before the Legislature shall have been convoked, its powers and functions shall be assumed and discharged by the Council of State.

Article 68. The Constitutional Compact of the Chung Hua Min Kuo shall take effect as from the date of promulgation, on which day the Provisional Constitution, proclaimed on the eleventh day of the third month of the first year of the Min Kuo, shall become null and void.

13 Not printed.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.011/17.

[Document 57]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

No. 281] American Legation,
Peking, June 24, 1914.

Sir: In continuation of my despatch No. 255 of June 5,1 have the honor to enclose herewith a memorandum by the Chinese Secretary on the subject of governmental developments between May 26, 1914, and June 20.

It is a significant fact that the process of creating a government for the Chinese nation out-of-hand is going on apparently without arousing any strong public interest, either by way of commendation or adverse criticism. It is, however, a debatable point how far the enforcement of the Press Regulations, promulgated April 2, 1914, has served to discourage newspaper comment that would have otherwise made its appearance.

I have [etc.]

Paul S. Reinsch.

[Inclosure—Extract.]

Memorandum by the Chinese Secretary, continuing the Memorandum of May 30, 1914.

American Legation,
Peking, June 23, 1914.

The following table records the principal Presidential Mandates, legislative and otherwise, from May 26, 1914, to June 22, 1914: On May 26, 1914, a mandate abolishing the Administrative Council (Cheng Chih Hui I).

The same mandate appoints Vice President Li Yuan-hung President and Wang Ta-hsieh Vice President of the Advisory Chamber (Ts’an Cheng Yuan).

On May 28, 1914, a mandate authorizing the connecting of the Peking-Kalgan and Peking-Mukden Railways by a line around Peking.

On June 2, 1914, a mandate defining the Tao, or Circuits, in the Provinces.

On June 5, 1914, a mandate fixing the scale of punishments for venal offenses among officials.

On June 8, 1914, a mandate relating to the procedure of the Administrative Court (p’ing Cheng Yuan).

On June 11, 1914, a mandate prescribing the duties and powers of the Provincial Bureaus of Finance.

On June 11, 1914, a mandate fixing the powers and duties of the Higher Provincial Courts (Kao Teng Shen p’an T’ing).

On June 13, 1914, a mandate directing the Ministry of the Interior and the Revenue Council to draft laws prohibiting the export of antiquities.

On June 15, 1914, a mandate specially appointing the Governors of the Provinces to supervise the financial affairs of their Provinces.

On June 16, 1914, a mandate promulgating the regulations of the Auditor General’s Office.

On June 18, 1914, a mandate directing the Ministry of the Interior to draft laws relating to local self-government.

[Here follows comment on the foregoing subjects.]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.03/10.

[Document 58]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

No. 471.] American Legation,
Peking, December 17, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith a translation,13 as published in the Peking Gazette of October 26, 27, 28 and 29, 1914, of the draft of the law on the organization of the Li Fa Yuan—National Assembly of the Chinese Republic. The first election of members to this body will take place during the year 1915.

I have [etc.]

Paul S. Reinsch.

13 Not printed.

Loan negotiations: Failure of the supplementary-reorganization-loan negotiations with the five-power banking group; currency-loan negotiations with the United States proposed by ChinaLoan negotiations:14 Failure of the supplementary-reorganization-loan negotiations with the five-power banking group; currency-loan negotiations with the United States proposed by China

14 Continued from For. Rel 1913, pp. 143-202.

[59] The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

Department of State, Washington, December 2, 1913.

File No. 893.51/1477.

[60] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, February 6, 1914.

File No. 893.51/1504.

[61] Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, July 18, 1914.

File No. 893.51/1527.

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch. File No. 893.51/1477.

[Document 59]

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

No. 7.] Department of State,
Washington, December 2, 1913.

Sir: The Department acknowledges the receipt of the Legation’s No. 1067 of October 21, 1913,15 on the subject of a loan by American capitalists to the Chinese Central Government, and the request of the Premier and Minister of Finance that this Government use its good offices with a view to induce American financiers to resume the lending of money to China. The course pursued by Mr. Williams in this matter and his statement to the Premier are approved.

In regard to the Premier’s statement that the American bankers had withdrawn from participation in the Currency Loan,16 the Department assumes that the Currency Loan has been merged with the Reorganization Loan. The Legation will recall that this was a subject of discussion before the completion of the Reorganization Loan agreement in April last.17 The Department would be glad to have definite information as to the mutual intentions of the Chinese Government and the bankers in this respect.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
J. B. Moore.

15  Id. 189.

16  Id. 197, 192–198.

17  Id. 177–179.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.51/1504.

[Document 60]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

No. 105.] American Legation,
Peking, February 6, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the instruction, No. 7, of December 2 last, in which the Department stated that it assumed the Currency Loan had been merged with the Reorganization Loan, and asked for definite information as to the mutual intentions of the Chinese Government and the bankers.

In reply I beg to state that the loan for the purpose of currency reform was not merged with or included in the Reorganization Loan issued in April last by the banking groups of Great Britain, France, Germany, Russia and Japan.17 For some time after the issuance of that loan the British, French and German groups, to whom the option for the Currency Loan remained after the withdrawal of the American group in March last,18 questioned the right of the Russian and Japanese groups to a share in such a loan under the terms of the inter-bank agreement. The European offices of the several banks, to which this question was referred, are understood to have been intentionally dilatory in reaching a decision in view of the tightness of the European money market during the past summer, which would have rendered difficult the successful flotation of such a loan. In this connection I am able to state that of the recent £5,000,000 supplementary loan by the British and Chinese Corporation and the Deutsch-Asiatische Bank for the Tientsin-Pukow Railway, approximately £1,800,000 of the bonds remain undisposed of. The decision was finally reached to include the Russian and Japanese banks for the purpose of any currency loan which might be issued.

The Legation is now advised, on the authority of Dr. Chen Chin-tao, Special Financial Representative of the Chinese Government Abroad, that the negotiations now in progress between the Chinese Government and the banking groups of the five powers for a supplementary reorganization loan contemplate the inclusion in that loan of a sum for the purpose of currency reform.

I may add that the five-power banking group has already advanced to the Chinese Government £750,000 to be repaid from the supplementary reorganization loan now under negotiation. But the whole matter of the nature of this supplementary loan—what it is to include and what securities are to be given—is still entirely uncertain, and the Chinese Government has not committed itself to any definite course of action.

I have been assured that the Chinese Government would still welcome the resumption of the currency-loan negotiations with the United States, and that, whether the matter was to be handled entirely as an American loan or the United States was to join with Great Britain, Germany and France in a four-power currency loan, the participation of American bankers would be exceedingly welcome to the Chinese Government.

I have already informed you that in the negotiations between the Standard Oil Company and the Chinese Government the latter asked to arrange for a loan of G$15,000,000 for the purpose of improving the capital of the Bank of China and beginning in that way the reorganization of the national currency. The Standard Oil Company decided that it could not make this loan a part of its arrangements with the Chinese Government, but it is now giving assurances that it will tacitly support a loan of this nature. I am also informed by Professor J. W. Jenks of New York that he believes a Chinese currency loan could be arranged for in that city.

To summarize, therefore: the field is still open for a resumption of the American interest in Chinese currency reform and in a currency loan. The officials of the Chinese Government are urging participation on our part or, preferably, the arrangement of the entire loan through American institutions.

I have [etc.]

Paul S. Reinsch.

17  Id. 177–179.

18  Id. 170–173.

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.51/1527.

[Document 61]

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Peking, July 18, 1914.

The loan negotiations with the five-power group have reached deadlock, Minister for Foreign Affairs having last night definitely informed the representatives of banks’ interests that the Government will not give option for the currency loan, which they demand as a condition to their granting the loan of £8,000,000 which the Chinese Government requires for the purpose of discharging short-term obligations.

MacMurray.

Currency reform: Promulgation of a currency lawCurrency reform:19 Promulgation of a currency law

19 Continued from For. Rel. 1913, pp. 192-198.

[62] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, January 26, 1914.

File No. 893.515/9.

[63] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, February 12, 1914.

File No. 893.515/11.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.515/9.

[Document 62]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 89.] American Legation,
Peking, January 26, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit, for the information of the Department, the Currency Law which has been approved by the President of the Republic of China.20 It will be seen that the law adopts as the unit of value a silver coin approximately of the size and standard of the Mexican dollar. Other important points in the law are the provision for the free coinage of silver at a slight minting fee, and the provision made with respect to the fractional currency, which is to be considerably inferior in fineness to the yuan or dollar.

If, by means of this measure when it shall be actually carried out, an unified standard could be introduced in Chinese currency the greatest possible service would be rendered to commerce and industry in this country. There would, however, still remain the question of how to escape from the disastrous results of the depreciated paper currency issued by the provinces. * * * In a thorough reform of the currency system of China, the present law will form only a starting point and, unless the credit of the Government is strong enough to support measures for redeeming and abolishing the provincial currency, complete relief cannot be afforded. * * *

It is natural that, as a large currency loan had in 1912 been nearly concluded between the United States and China, the Chinese Government should still be anxious and desirous of securing money from the United States for the purpose of supporting this most important reform. If money could be obtained for the strengthening of the credit of the National Bank of China, the Chinese Government would experience greater relief than would result from any other loan, because, with the currency system placed on a sounder basis and the consequent general improvement of the national credit, the Chinese Government would have its hands free to undertake improvements in other directions. There also could be no greater guaranty of the independence of China against possible inroads connected with financial pressure from without.

Of late these matters have been laid before me repeatedly by Cabinet Ministers, who have inquired whether it would not be possible for the Government of the United States or American bankers to assist them in this most important work of reconstituting the Government of China upon an efficient basis. * * * I would request to be informed telegraphically as to the attitude you wish me to take should I be further approached by the Chinese Government with a desire to secure American assistance in this most central of administrative problems of China.

I have [etc.]

Paul S. Reinsch.

20 Not printed.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.515/11.

[Document 63]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

No. 113.] American Legation,
Peking, February 12, 1914.

Sir: Referring to my despatch No. 89 of January 26th, with which I transmitted, for the information of the Department, a translation of the Currency Law then understood to have received the approval of the President, I have the honor to send you herewith the translation of the National Currency Law, together with the accompanying detailed regulations for its enforcement, in the form in which it was promulgated on February 7th. It will be observed that in its final form the Law (Article 5) established for the subsidiary silver coins different weights from those prescribed in the earlier draft. I have [etc.]

Paul S. Reinsch.

[Inclosure.]

[Untitled]

Peking Daily News, February 9, 1914.

The National Currency Law was promulgated by a Presidential Order dated Feb. 7th. It was accompanied by the regulations for the enforcement of the National Currency Law. The following is a translation of the National Currency Law and the detailed regulations.

National Currency Law.

Art. 1. The right of minting and issuance of national currency shall solely belong to the Government.

Art. 2. The unit of the national coins shall be called yuan, and the yuan shall contain six mace, four candareens and eight li (kuping weight) or 23.97795048 grammes of pure silver.

Art. 3. The different kinds of national coins are as follows: A. —Four kinds of silver coins: (1) 1 yuan.

(2) ½ yuan.

(3) 20-cent piece.

(4) 10-cent piece.

B. —One kind of nickel coin: (1) 5-cent piece.

C. —Five kinds of copper coins: (1) 2-cent copper piece.

(2) 1-cent copper piece.

(3) 5-li piece.

(4) 2-li piece.

(5) 1-li piece.

Art. 4. The value of the national coin shall be in decimal progression. One-tenth of a yuan shall make a chio or a 10-cent piece. One-hundredth of a yuan shall make 1 fen or cent, and one-thousandth of a yuan shall make one li.

Art. 5. The weight and fineness of the coins shall be as follows: 1. One yuan, gross weight 72 candareens with 90 per cent silver and 10 per cent copper.

2. 50-cent piece, gross weight 38 candareens with 70 per cent silver and 30 per cent copper. [14.4]

3. 20-cent piece, gross weight 1.44 [14.4] candareens, with 70 per cent silver and 30 per cent copper.

4. 10-cent piece, 7.2 candareens with 70 per cent silver and 30 per cent copper.

5. 5-cent nickel piece, gross weight 7 candareens with 25 per cent nickel and 75 per cent copper.

6. 2-cent copper piece, gross weight 28 candareens with 95 per cent copper, 4 per cent pewter and 1 per cent lead.

7. 1-cent copper piece, gross weight 18 candareens, with its fineness same as 2-cent copper piece.

8. 5-li copper piece, gross weight 9 candareens with its fineness same as above.

9. 2-li copper piece, gross weight 4.5 candareens with its fineness same as above.

10. 1-li copper piece, gross weight 2.5 candareens with its fineness same as above.

Art. 6. No restrictions shall be placed upon the use of 1-yuan piece. The amount of 50-cent pieces involved in one transaction shall not exceed twenty dollars. The amount of 20-cent and 10-cent pieces involved in one transaction shall not exceed five dollars. The amount of nickel or copper pieces involved in one transaction shall not exceed one dollar. This restriction shall not be applied to the collection of taxes and the exchanges in the national banks.

Art. 7. The designs of the national coins shall be promulgated by a Provisional Order.

Art. 8. The ratio of the difference between the weight of each silver coin and that of the legal tender shall not exceed 3/1000.

The ratio of the difference between the total weight of per 1000 pieces of the silver coins and the legal weight of that amount of coins shall not exceed 3/10,000.

Art. 9. The ratio of the difference between the fineness of any piece of silver coin and the legal fineness shall not exceed 3/1000.

Art. 10. When on account of wear and tear, the 1-yuan silver piece loses 1 per cent of its weight, it may be exchanged at the government banks for a new dollar. When, on account of wear and tear, the 50-cent silver piece and other kinds of coins lose 5 per cent of the legal weight, they may be exchanged at the government banks for new coins.

Art. 11. When a coin is found to be mutilated purposely, no one shall be compelled to accept it.

Art. 12. The Government consents to coin 1-yuan silver pieces for those who give to it silver bullion, and 6 li per yuan shall be charged as minting fee.

Art. 13. This law shall be in force on the day of its promulgation.

Regulations.

Art. 1. The national coins must be used as a medium in the transaction of any financial dealing in the country. Special regulations in the Currency Regulations must also be observed.

Art. 2. The Government shall exchange the silver dollars coined by the old mints with the national coins and remint the dollars. Within a certain period, the old dollar shall possess the same value as the yuan, but as to the length of that period a provisional order shall be issued to fix it.

Art. 3. The Government shall recall all the old silver pieces of the different denominations, old copper pieces and remint them, but within a certain fixed period the old coins shall be allowed to be circulated at the market prices.

Art. 4. If the old coins are used to pay taxes, every month all the public offices shall issue notices fixing the current rate of the coins at which the offices shall receive the old coins. The offices shall take as the current rate an average of the exchange rates of the previous month. The period for the circulation of the old coins shall be fixed by a provisional order.

Art. 5. If taxes are remitted with silver bullion or if any person wants the Government to mint silver coins for him, in the calculation one dollar shall contain 65.4 candareens. The bullion of other fineness and weight shall be converted according to a table to be attached.

Art. 6. In the public offices where the receipts and expenditures are calculated in taels, the amount should be converted into the term of yuan in accordance with Art. 4. At places where the receipts and disbursements consist of copper coins and cash, the public office shall report to the Ministry of Finance the actual sum of receipts and disbursements with request for permission to convert the coins into the term of yuan.

Art. 7. In the collection of various revenues and taxes, Articles 5, 6 and 7 shall be observed. In the calculation, the li shall be the smallest of denominations. All the decimal fractions of the li shall be treated thus: when the figure is 4, [it] shall be discarded, and when it is 5, it shall be considered as one, to be added to the other integers.

Art. 8. When debts among the people are to be calculated in the term of taels, they should be converted into the term of the national coin. Where the old subsidiary coins are involved, Article 6 shall be observed in the conversion into the national coins. If the sums in the deeds, contracts and promissory notes are not converted into the term of yuan and if any lawsuit arises, the exchange rate on the day of promulgation of these regulations shall be considered as a standard.

Art. 9. Within the domain of China, no one shall object to the use of the national coins.

Art. 10. If anybody disregards Article 4 of the Law for the National Currency and Article 9 of the Regulations for the Enforcement of the Law for the National Currency, the party concerned may bring a lawsuit against him, and when convicted a fine from 10 dollars to 1,000 dollars shall be imposed on the offender. Any official or any member connected with the Government enterprises who commits the same offense, is liable to pay a fine of from 50 to 3,000 dollars after the same procedure has been observed.

Art. 11. The area and the date for the enforcement of these Regulations shall be fixed by a provisional order.

Declaration of a moratoriumDeclaration of a moratorium

[64] Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, August 8, 1914.

File No. 893.51/1539.

[65] The Secretary of State to Chargé MacMurray.

Department of State, Washington, August 10, 1914.

File No. 893.51/1539.

[66] Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, August 17, 1914.

File No. 893.51/1536.

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.51/1539.

[Document 64]

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Peking, August 8, 1914.

The Foreign Office tonight circularizes Legations that because of the failure of contemplated loans and the stoppage of banking operations, debts of the Chinese Government due to banks, foreign firms, companies and shipyards, whether calling for payment at fixed times or by arrangement, can not be met until conditions are somewhat settled and banking operations have recommenced, after which measures will be taken to meet all obligations in good faith.

From a reliable source I learn that the Japanese, British and Russian Legations were previously advised and gave informal assurances that they would not insist on payment for the present.

Existing conditions, in fact, leave to the Chinese Government no alternative and, with a view to minimizing the importance of its default as a pretext for aggressions, I venture to suggest that the Legation be authorized to state that the American Government recognizes the necessity and accepts it, subject only to the reservation of American rights involved.

MacMurray.

The Secretary of State to Chargé MacMurray. File No. 893.51/1539.

[Document 65]

The Secretary of State to Chargé MacMurray.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 10, 1914.

Your August 8. The American Government recognizes the difficulty in which China is placed and, while reserving all its rights, suggests that China follow the example of certain other neutral powers and declare a moratorium, say for six months.

Bryan.

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.51/1536.

[Document 66]

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

No. 338.] American Legation,
Peking, August 17, 1914.

Sir: Supplementing my telegrams of August 8 and August 12,21 I have the honor to enclose herewith the translation of a note No. 202 from the Foreign Office proclaiming a moratorium on the part of the Chinese Government on certain of its debts; the translation of a second note, No. 203, from the same source explaining that the moratorium referred only to its short-term foreign obligations; and a copy of my reply to the foregoing, as instructed by the Department. The Department’s suggestion that the moratorium be specified as for a fixed period (of, say, six months) has been orally communicated to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

I have [etc.]

J. V. A. MacMurray.

[Inclosure 1—Translation.]

The Board of Foreign Affairs to the American Legation.

No. 202.] Foreign Office,
Peking, August 8, 1914.

Sir: We are in receipt of the following communication from the Board of Finance: The short-term loans of the Central Government are very numerous, and the loans contemplated [to meet them] have not been carried through. The war in Europe has stopped all exchange transactions and banking operations have come to a stop. Therefore all debts due to banks, foreign firms, companies and shipyards, whether calling for payment at fixed times or by arrangement, cannot be met at this time of financial stringency. You are requested to explain to the Ministers resident at Peking the unavoidable cause of this. All those concerned in the debt must wait temporarily until conditions are somewhat settled and banking operations have recommenced, after which measures will certainly be taken to meet all obligations in good faith.

We would observe in regard to all the foreign obligations of the Chinese Government that owing to the war in Europe the banks are tied up so that it is impossible to make payments. The Chinese Government has no intention of breaking faith, but unexpected events have made it impossible for it to act otherwise. Therefore we now send this despatch to you, the Honorable Chargé d’Affaires, for your consideration and sincerely hope that you will explain China’s difficulties to all those concerned in the debts due from China.

A necessary despatch [etc.]

[Inclosure 2—Translation.]

The Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs to Chargé MacMurray.

No. 203.] Foreign Office,
Peking, August 10, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to refer you to the Ministry’s note of the 8th instant in reference to the postponement of the repayment of the short-term foreign loans. I have the honor to note that the foreign loans mentioned in the said communication referred only to the short-term foreign loans. Fearing that there might be some misunderstanding, I am sending you this note for your information.

With compliments.

Ts’ao Ju-lin.

[Inclosure 3.]

Chargé MacMurray to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

American Legation,
Peking, August 11, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s note dated August 9 [8] in which you propose the temporary postponement of payment of the short-term foreign debts and obligations of your excellency’s Government; and I also have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the explanatory note dated August 10. I have communicated with my Government regarding this matter, and I am now in receipt of a reply to the general effect that my Government recognizes the difficulty of the Chinese Government at this time and, while reserving all rights belonging to the American Government or to American citizens under existing agreements, will offer no objection to the course now proposed by the Chinese Government.

I avail [etc.]

J. V. A. MacMurray.

21 Not printed.

Boxer indemnity payments: Status of the account for 1913; return to China of the remitted portion of the indemnity and of the unused portion of the claims fund; application thereof by China to educational purposesBoxer indemnity payments:23 Status of the account for 1913; return to China of the remitted portion of the indemnity and of the unused portion of the claims fund; application thereof by China to educational purposes

23 Continued from For. Rel. 1913, pp. 202–204.

[67] The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

Department of State, Washington, January 13, 1914.

File No. 493.11/465.

[68] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chinese Chargé d’Affaires.

Department of State, Washington, January 16, 1914.

File No. 493.11/465.

[69] The Chinese Legation to the Department of State.

Chinese Legation, Washington , January 20, 1914.

File No. 493.11/471.

[70] The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

Department of State, Washington, January 20, 1914.

File No. 493.11/471.

[71] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury.

Department of State, Washington, January 22, 1914.

File No. 493.11/471.

[72] The Acting Secretary of the Treasury to the Secretary of State.

Treasury Department, Washington, January 30, 1914.

File No. 493.11/473.

[73] The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

Department of State, Washington, March 16, 1914.

File No. 493.11/490.

[74] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, March 30, 1914.

File No. 493.11/491.

[75] The Secretary of State to the Charge d’Affaires of China.

Department of State, Washington, April 11, 1914.

File No. 493.11/494.

[76] Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, August 19, 1914.

File No. 493.11/513.

[77] The Secretary of State to Chargé MacMurray.

Department of State, Washington, August 20, 1914.

File No. 493.11/513.

[78] Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, September 3, 1914.

File No. 493.11/528.

[79] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

Department of State, Washington, October 31, 1914.

File No. 493.11/528.

[80] The Chinese Minister to the Acting Secretary of State.

Chinese Legation, Washington, November 3, 1914.

File No. 493.11/538.

[81] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury.

Department of State, Washington, November 10, 1914.

File No. 493.11/521.

[82] The Chinese Charge d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

Chinese Legation, Washington, November 30, 1914.

File No. 493.11/542.

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch. File No. 493.11/465.

[Document 67]

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 13, 1914.

On August 6 last, indemnity was settled to December 31, 1912. Treasury Department reports that between August 30, 1913, and January 7, 1914, the Chinese Government paid $1,082,805.69 on account of the 1913 quota of the indemnity. The amount to be retained by the United States for the calendar year 1913 being $539,588.76, there remains in the Treasury, after making interest adjustment, $543,007.63 to the credit of the Chinese Government. Detailed statement has been handed to the Chinese Legation here.

You will inquire of the Foreign Office whether this Government is to pay the amount last named to the Chinese Legation here, as was done on August 6 last, for the support of indemnity students in the United States and of the Chinghua College.24

Bryan.

24  For. Rel. 1913, pp. 198–200.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chinese Chargé d’Affaires. File No. 493.11/465.

[Document 68]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chinese Chargé d’Affaires.

Department of State,
Washington, January 16, 1914.

Dear Mr. Charge d’Affaires: I beg to enclose herewith copy of a letter from the Treasury Department, together with an itemized statement relating to payments made by your Government on account of the 1913 quota of the Indemnity.

The Department has inquired of your Government, through the American Legation at Peking, whether this Government is to pay to the Chinese Legation here, for the support of indemnity students in the United States and of the Chinghua College, the amount refundable to China.

I am [etc.]

J. B. Moore.

[Inclosure.]

The Secretary of the Treasury to the Secretary of State.

Treasury Department,
Washington, January 10, 1914.

Sir: The Chinese Government, through the International Banking Corporation, deposited with the Assistant Treasurer of the United States at New York, between August 30, 1913, and January 7, 1914, certain sums of money aggregating $1,082,805.69 as applicable to the half-yearly installments of the Chinese indemnity which China was required to pay for the calendar year 1913 on the basis of the original amount of $24,440,778.81 as fixed in the Bond of Indemnity given by China to the United States.

An examination of the status of the account for the calendar year 1913 has been made and you are advised that the amount of said deposits required to discharge the portion of the indemnity to December 31, 1913, and the amount thereof refundable to China is as follows: Total deposits $1,082,805.69

Amount required to pay June and December, 1913, installments 539,798.06

Amount of the deposits refundable to China 543,007.63

Statements are enclosed herewith as follows:

Statement “A” showing deposits by China as applicable to the amount of indemnity due for the calendar year 1913; the amount thereof retained as due the United States on the unremitted portion of the indemnity; and the amount refundable to China as representing the portion remitted under the provisions of the Joint Resolution of May 25, 1908 (35 Stat, 577).

Statement “B” showing the amount of the indemnity due for each half of the calendar year 1913; the payments thereon by China; the amount of interest charged on the deferred payment of the June, 1913, installment; and interest allowed China for prepayments of the December, 1913, installment.

Statement “C” showing the deposits applied and interest charges and credits made in the account for the June and December, 1918, installments of the unremitted portion of the indemnity.

Your attention is respectfully invited to the fact that moneys heretofore deposited by China with the Assistant Treasurer at New York have not been accompanied by any statement of the credit to be given therefor, other than that they were to be applied to the amount of the indemnity due for a particular month, and in this the statements were not always accurate.

The monthly sum of approximately $45,000 is sufficient to pay the amount of the indemnity due the United States on the basis of the unremitted portion of the indemnity. Monthly deposits of $90,065.63 were made by China without any expression of her desires in respect to the part thereof refundable as representing the remitted portion of the indemnity, causing the deposits to accumulate, the Treasury Department being without proper information to permit of a separation of the moneys in order that the portion due the United States might be covered into the Treasury by warrant.

I therefore have the honor to request that suitable instructions be given by your Department for the transmission with each deposit made in the future for account of the Chinese indemnity of a distinct and definite statement of how the same is to be applied and if in excess of the monthly sum of $45,000 that request be made for the disposition of such excess currently, instead of allowing ii to remain in the Treasury undisposed of until the close of the yearly or half-yearly installment periods.

Respectfully,

W. G. McAdoo.

[Subinclosure.]

STATEMENT A.

Deposits made by China as applicable to the Chinese indemnity due for each half of the calendar year 1913; the amount thereof retained by the United States to discharge the debt for said calendar year on the basis of the unremitted portion of the indemnity, as per Table of Amortization; and the amount of said deposits refundable to China as representing the portion of the debt for the same calendar year remitted by the Joint Resolution of May 25, 1908.

Date of deposit. Applied to June 30, 1913, installment. Applied to December 31, 1913, installment. Total amount of deposits. Excess of deposits over requirements for the year 1913.

1913.

Aug. 30 $90,065.63 $90,065.63

Sept. 2 $90,065.63 90,65.63

Sept 5 1,048.21 1,048.21

Sept. 11 90,065.63

Oct 1 503.22 $89,562.41 90,065.63

Oct 10 90,065.63 90,065.63

Oct. 18 623.73 623.73

Oct. 28 87,797.97 90,65.63 2,267.66

Nov. 1 796.98 796.98

Nov. 10 90,065.63 90,065.63

Nov. 19 90,065.63 90,065.63

Nov. 22 866.29 866.29

Nov. 29 1,022.22 1,022.22

Dec. 1 90,065.63 90,065.63

Dec. 10 90,065.63 90,065.63

Dec. 24 90,065.63 90,065.63

1914.

Jan. 7 87,726.33 87,726.33

Total 271,748.32 268,049.74 1,082,805.69 543,007.63

recapitulation.

June 30, 1913, installment. Dec. 31, 1913, installment.

Amount of installment $269,794.38 $269,794.38

Interest charged on deferred payment 1,953.94

Interest allowed on repayments 1,744.64

Payments by china for each half year 271,748.32 268,049.74

Total amount deposited $1,082,805.69

Deposits applied to June 30,1913, installment $271,748.32

Deposits applied to Dec 31,1913, installment 268,049.74

539,798.06

Balance of deposits refundable to China 543,007.63

statement b.

Indemnity due for each half of the calendar year 1913; the payments thereon by China during the year, as credited at the United States Treasury; the amount of interest charged on the deferred payment of the June installment; and the interest allowed China for prepayments of the December installment.

1913 June 30. Semiannual installment of indemnity $269,794.38

Interest to Aug. 30—61 days 1,803.55

271,597.93

Aug 30. Payment by warrent 90,065.63

181,532.30

Interest to Sept. 2–3 days 59.69

181,591.99

Sept. 2. Payment of warrant $90,065.63

91,526.36

Interest to Sept. 5—3 days 30.09

91,556.45

Sept. 5. Payment by warrant 1,048.21

90,508.24

Interest to Sept. 11—6 days 59.51

90,567.75

Sept. 11. Payment by warrant 90,065.63

502.12

Interest Sept. 11 to Oct. 1 1.10

503.22

Oct. 1. Payment by warrant 90,065.63

Credit balance, being in excess of amount due to June 30, 1913 89,562.41

Half-yearly installment $269,794.38

Total interest as above charged on deferred payment 1,953.94

Due for June 30, 1913, installment 271,748 32

Dec. 31. Semiannual installment of indemnity $269,794.38

Credit.

Interest due China to Dec. 31—91 days—on balance of payment of Oct. 1 in excess of June 30, 1913, dept $893.17

Monthly installments (1/12 of yearly) $44,965.73

Three months, Aug. 1, Sept. 1, Oct. 1 134,897.19

Payment Oct. 1 (excess) 89,562.41

Paid Oct. 10 * 45,334.78

Interest on $45,334.78 Oct. 10 to Dec. 31—82 days 407.98

Interest Nov. 1 to Dec. 31 on Nov. 1 installment of $44.965.73 295.66

Interest Dec. 1 to Dec. 81 on Dec. 1 installment 147.83

Total interest allowed 1,744.64

Credit balance on 1/2 yearly installment of June 30, 1913, paid Oct. 1, and applied to installment due Dec. 31, 1913 89,562.41

Oct. 10. paid by China 90,065.63

Oct. 18, paid by China 623.73

181,996.41

Oct. 28 China paid $90,065.63 of which there is to be applied for the half year ended Dec. 31, 1913 87,797.97

269,794.38

Note.—No interest can be allowed except in accordance with the bond of indemnity which authorized interest on the monthly advance payments made within the half-year Period. The monthly installments of August 1, September 1 and October 1 were paid October 1 and 10; hence interest is allowed on the amount of said installments from date of payment to the end of the year. The other payments in October are treated as payments of the monthly installments of November 1 and December 1; hence interest is allowed from November 1 and December 1, respectively: the dates the monthly installments earn interest under the terms of the bond.

statement c.

Amount of the indemnity due and paid to the United States for the calendar year 1913, on the basis of the indemnity as limited by the Joint Resolution of Congress approved May 25, 1908(35 Stat., 577).

Amount of original bond of indemnity $24,440,778.81

Remitted by joint resolution of May 25, 1908 10,785,286.12

Amount of indemnity retained by the United States under joint resolution of May 25, 1908 13,655,492.69

Under table of amortization, amount of indemnity payable by China each year is as follows:

Due June 30 $269,794.38

Due December 31 269,794.38

539,588.76

Date of deposit. Unremitted portion of indemnity.

Installment due June 30, 1913. installment due Dec. 31, 1913.

Aug. 30. 1913 $90,065.63

Sept. 2, 1913 90,065.63

Sept. 5, 1913 1,048.21

Sept. 11. 1913 90,065.63

Oct. 1, 1913 503.22 $89,562.41

Oct. 10, 1913 90,065.63

Oct. 18, 1913 623.73

Oct. 18, 1913 87,797.97

Interest allowed, by united, states and credited to China on account 01 pre payments made within the half-year ended Dec. 31, 1913 (Statement “B”) 1,744.64

Totals 271,748.32 269,794.38

recapitulation

Half year installment 8269.794.38 $269.794.38

Interest charged China on deferred payment installment due for half year 1,953.94

Interest allowed by the United States to China on account of prepayments on installment for half-year ended Dec. 31, 1913 (Statement “B”) 1,744.64

Payments made by China applied to installment due for each half year ($269,794.38 plus $1,953.94 interest charged, installment of June 30, 1913; installment of Dec. 31, 1913) 271,748.32 268,049.74

* Included in Oct. 1, 1913, payment of $90,065.63.

The Chinese Legation to the Department of State. File No. 493.11/471.

[Document 69]

The Chinese Legation to the Department of State.

memorandum.

In reply to a telegram from the Legation asking what disposition is to be made of the balance of deposits refundable to China upon the remitted portion of the indemnity, the Foreign Office cabled instruction to the Legation to receive such balance in the same manner as it did last August.

Chinese Legation,
Washington , January 20, 1914.

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch. File No. 493.11/471.

[Document 70]

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 20, 1914.

No reply received to our January 13, but Department this morning has memorandum from Chinese Legation saying the Foreign Office has cabled instructions for the Legation to receive the balance due in same manner as in August. Department accordingly will remit check for balance to Chinese Legation tomorrow. Please advise Foreign Office immediately.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury. File No. 493.11/471.

[Document 71]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury.

Department of State,
Washington, January 22, 1914.

Sir: Referring to your Department’s letter of January 10, 1914. relative to payments made by the Chinese Government on account of the Boxer Indemnity for 1913, I have the honor to request that the portion mentioned therein as due the United States, $539,798.06, be retained by your Department, and the amount refundable to China, $543,007.63, be remitted by check, through this Department, to the Charge d’Affaires of China, Washington, D. C.

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
J. B. Moore.

The Acting Secretary of the Treasury to the Secretary of State. File No. 493.11/473.

[Document 72]

The Acting Secretary of the Treasury to the Secretary of State.

Treasury Department,
Washington, January 30, 1914.

Sir: Referring to the communication dated the 22d instant received from the Department of State, relative to payments made by the Chinese Government on account of Chinese indemnity due for the calendar year 1913, I have the honor to enclose herewith, for delivery, as requested by your Department, check No. 6900, of the Treasurer of the United States in the sum of $543,007.63, payable to the Charge d’Affaires of China, which sum represents the amount of such payments refundable to China as the portion of the indemnity for the calendar year 1913 remitted under the joint resolution of May 25, 1908 (35 Stat., 577).

Respectfully,

John Skelton Williams.

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch. File No. 493.11/490.

[Document 73]

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 16, 1914.

Treasury Department reports that Chinese Government paid in January last in round numbers $90,000 on account of the January 1914 quota of the Boxer Indemnity, which payment was made before reverting to the 1909 method of effecting payments and remissions at Shanghai. The amount to be retained by the United States being about $45,000, there remains about an equal sum to be refunded to China.

You will inquire of the Foreign Office whether this Government is to pay the remitted portion to the Chinese Legation here, as was done on January 31 last, for the support of indemnity students in the United States.

Bryan.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 493.11/491.

[Document 74]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Peking, March 30, 1914.

The Chinese Government desires the remitted portion of January installment paid to its Legation in Washington, which has been authorized to receive it.

I have impressed upon the Foreign Office the desirability of the Legation’s retaining the remitted sum for the support of the indemnity students in the United States.

Reinsch.

The Secretary of State to the Charge d’Affaires of China. File No. 493.11/494.

[Document 75]

The Secretary of State to the Charge d’Affaires of China.

Department of State,
Washington, April 11, 1914.

Sir: I beg to enclose herewith check for $45,147.97, drawn on the Treasury of the United States and payable to your order as Charge d’Affaires of China. The amount named represents the portion of the January 1914 indemnity payment refundable to China, as shown by the Treasury Department’s letter25 on the subject, copy of which is enclosed herewith.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

25 Not printed.

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State. File No. 493.11/513.

[Document 76]

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Peking, August 19, 1914.

The Foreign Office states that the customs receipts will not suffice to meet in full the Boxer indemnity payments in addition to prior charges, and asks consent to China’s awaiting conclusion of the war to make up deficiencies.

MacMurray.

The Secretary of State to Chargé MacMurray. File No. 493.11/513.

[Document 77]

The Secretary of State to Chargé MacMurray.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 20, 1914.

This Department does not appear to have authority affirmatively to sanction the postponement of indemnity payments or the alteration of the schedule, but if the postponement of the payment of deficiencies is unavoidable, and a majority of the powers interested agree to wait until the end of the war, it is extremely unlikely that any demand for immediate payment would be made by this Government under present circumstances, and this Government is willing to use its good offices to that end with other powers if requested. The Department trusts that the deficit will not be so large as to interfere with the support of the Chinghua College.

Bryan.

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State. File No. 493.11/528.

[Document 78]

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 352.] American Legation,
Peking, September 3, 1914.

Sir: Supplementing the Legation’s despatch No. 338 of the 17th ultimo26 on the subject of the anticipated deficiencies in payment of installments of the Boxer Indemnity, I have the honor to transmit herewith translations of notes from the Foreign Office, dated August 18 and 21, on this subject, and a copy of the Legation’s reply of August 22 in pursuance of the Department’s telegraphic instruction of August 20.* * * I have, in conversation with the Minister of Finance (Mr. Chou Tzu-ch’i) and with the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr. Ts’ao Ju-lin), supplemented it by explanations of the Department’s inability to alter the agreed schedule of payments, as also of its disposition to avoid under present circumstances any demand for immediate payment, and, if need be, to undertake good offices with a view to averting such a demand on the part of other powers. Both Mr. Chou and Mr. Ts’ao, in expressing their appreciation of the attitude of our Government in this matter, stated to me that the Government is at present hopeful that the customs revenues may prove adequate to meet the various charges upon them with only a small shortage. * * * In reply to an expression of solicitude as to the ability of the Chinese Government to carry out its present program of education, the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs assured me that neither the maintenance of the Tsing Hua College nor the support of indemnity students in the United States would in any case be allowed to suffer from the present financial difficulties of the Government.

Mr. Ts’ao also raised the question as to the method which would be followed by the United States, in the event of a shortage in the indemnity payments, in refunding a portion of the indemnity—whether the United States would retain, out of any deficient installment, the whole of the amount scheduled to be retained under the agreement of 1908, or whether it would retain only an amount thereof proportionate to the total sum offered by the Chinese Government in payment of the installment due. I replied that I should have to refer this inquiry to the Department for decision should the case arise.

I have [etc.]

J. V. A. MacMurray.

[Inclosure 1.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Chargé MacMurray.

Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Peking, August 18, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that I have received the following communication from the Ministry of Finance: Since the close of the year 1911 the receipts of each office of the Maritime Customs have been deposited by the Commissioner of Customs in the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, the Deutsch-Asiatische Bank, and the Russo-Chinese Bank of Shanghai to meet the old debts due the different countries by China, and the remainder together with the receipts of the Native Customs under the control of the Inspector General of Customs has been allocated to the payment of the 1900 indemnity. Now as a result of the European war trade is at a standstill, China is gravely affected, and the customs receipts will unquestionably show a deficit. Moreover the price of gold has unexpectedly risen so that we estimate that the receipts of the customs will fail to meet the indemnity payments.

We propose to act according to the arrangement agreed upon in the year 1911, but with certain temporary modifications. The customs receipts of every month will be used as before to meet the old obligations and the balance, if any, will be deposited in the several banks. If the amount is insufficient to meet the indemnity payments they must remain temporarily unpaid. After the conclusion of the European war, measures will be taken to settle the account. You are requested to communicate with the Ministers of the different countries, asking that this favor may be extended in view of the difficulties of China.

I would observe that the monthly payments due from the Central Government have been provided for out of the customs receipts. Now that trade is at a standstill because of the European war there will be a deficit in the customs receipts and China will greatly suffer from the consequences in the coming year. The proposition of the Ministry of Finance to act according to the arrangement made in 1911 in making payments but to wait the conclusion of the European war to make up deficiencies in the amount seems an unavoidable necessity. I hope that the Governments of the different countries will be lenient and friendly and be willing to assist in this emergency of China. I ask you, the American Charge d’Affaires, to telegraph to your Government asking its assent to our proposal. For this we shall be deeply grateful. With compliments.

[Seal of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.]

[Inclosure 2.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Chargé MacMurray.

Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Peking, August 21, 1914.

Sir: On the. 18th instant this Ministry had the honor to address a note to the Legation in reference to the postponement of the payment of the balance of the Indemnity. Ever since the revolution, Chinese finances have shown a deficit. Great efforts have been made of late to reduce them to order and some measure of success was being attained when, unfortunately, the European war suddenly commenced, and Chinese finances were the first to suffer from its effects. The Ministry of Finance therefore proposed that the payment of the balance of the indemnity be temporarily postponed. This is an unavoidable necessity, which it is expected your Government will approve.

The Chinese Government, however, regards the matter as one of most pressing importance to the finances of the country and as requiring immediate decision in order that serious difficulties may be avoided. If it is necessary to wait until the American Legation has received instructions from its Government it is greatly to be feared that much time will be lost. I therefore have the honor to express the hope that, having regard for considerations of international friendship and for the difficult situation in which China is placed, the American Legation will grant its consent to the measure proposed. With compliments.

[Seal of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.]

[Inclosure 3.]

Chargé MacMurray to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

American Legation,
Peking, August 22, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s two notes of the 18th and 21st instant with reference to the postponement of the payments of the installments soon falling due on the 1900 indemnities. On receipt of the note of the 18th instant I telegraphed to my Government asking for instructions, and have now received a reply to the following effect:

The American Government has no present intention of insisting on the immediate payment in full of the installments of the 1900 indemnity as they fall due. It expresses the hope, however, that the temporary difficulties of the Chinese Government may not be so great as to interfere with the carrying out of the educational program contemplated by the arrangement under which the returned indemnity funds were to be used to prepare students and send them to the United States for education.

I avail [etc.]

J. V. A. MacMurray.

26 Printed ante, under Declaration of a Moratorium.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch. File No. 493.11/528.

[Document 79]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

No. 189.] Department of State,
Washington, October 31, 1914.

Sir: Receipt is acknowledged of the Legation’s No. 352 of September 3, 1914, on the subject of anticipated deficiencies in the payment of installments of the Boxer indemnity.

With respect to the inquiry of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, whether the United States would retain out of any deficient installment the whole of the amount scheduled to be retained under the agreement of 1908, or whether it would retain only an amount thereof proportionate to the total sum offered by the Chinese Government in payment of the installment due, you are instructed that this question was raised by the Legation in its telegram of July 19, 1912, and was referred by the Department to the Treasury Department, which replied, under date of July 27, 1912, saying: “Under the provision of the joint resolution of May 25, 1908, the amount and payment of the Chinese indemnity appears to be provided for, and it would seem this Department is not empowered to authorize the remission or postponement of the payment made thereunder.” This decision was communicated to the Legation in the telegraphic instruction of August 1, 1912. You are informed, however, that while the American Government can not under the law retain less than the portion stipulated in the schedules attached to the Executive order of December 28, 1908, the Department holds to the credit of the Chinese Government a balance of $1,175,835.64, remaining of the $2,000,000 retained temporarily, as provided in the joint resolution cited above, for the settlement of claims of American citizens against the Boxer indemnity fund. The Government of the Republic of China having been notified of the existence of this balance which, under the terms of the joint resolution, is also to be returned to China, has informed the Department that this sum also will be used in support of the Tsing Hua College and the Chinese Government students in the United States.

This would seem to remove all cause for anxiety as to the support of this, educational movement in the immediate future.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

The Chinese Minister to the Acting Secretary of State. File No. 493.11/538.

[Document 80]

The Chinese Minister to the Acting Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

Chinese Legation,
Washington, November 3, 1914.

My dear Mr. Lansing: You may be interested to know that the contemplated action of the American Government in returning to China the unused portion of the indemnity payments for the maintenance of the student movement between China and the United States has called forth expressions of gratitude from all quarters in Peking. I need hardly assure you that China will never forget this generous act of the American Government. The provisions thus made for the support of the Chinese students in this country are amply sufficient for the next two years.

With assurance [etc.]

Kai Fu Shah.

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury. File No. 493.11/521.

[Document 81]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury.

Department of State,
Washington, November 10, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to invite your attention to joint resolution No. 29, approved May 25, 1908 (35 Stat. L. 577), which reads as follows: Provided, That within one year from the passage of this resolution any person whose claim upon the Chinese indemnity, nineteen hundred, was presented to the United States commissioners or to the Department of State and disallowed in whole or in part may present the same by petition to the Court of Claims, which court is hereby invested with jurisdiction to hear and adjudicate such claim, without appeal, and to render such judgments de novo, or in addition to any allowance or allowances heretofore made, as, in each case, shall be fully and substantially compensatory for actual losses and expenses of the claimant caused by the antiforeign disturbances in China during the year nineteen hundred, excluding merely speculative claims or elements of damage: And provided also, That the sum of two million dollars be reserved from the Chinese indemnity, nineteen hundred, for the payment of such judgments, the same to be paid by the Treasurer of the United States as and when they shall be certified to the Secretary of the Treasury by the said court, and any balance remaining after all such claims have been adjudicated and paid shall be returned to the Chinese Government in such manner as the Secretary of State shall decide, and the Secretary of the Treasury is hereby authorized and directed to so return the same. * * *

In this connection, I am informed by the Attorney General that under certificate of the Clerk of the Court of Claims, attested by the Chief Justice, dated October 1, 1914, it appears that all claims filed in that court under and by authority of said joint resolution have been finally adjudicated and disposed of, and that the aggregate amount of said judgments was $810,188.21.

In addition to this amount it is understood that a payment of $13,976.15 was made to Fearon, Daniel and Company from the $2,000,000, under authority of private resolution No. 1, approved April 22. 1910, which leaves an unexpended balance of the $2,000,000 fund of $1,175,835.64.

In view of the foregoing, it would appear that all obligations imposed by the joint resolution above quoted in respect to claims of American citizens have been fulfilled, and that it now becomes the duty of this Department to initiate instructions looking to the return of the balance to the Government of China as directed by the said joint resolution.

I therefore have the honor to request that steps be taken by your Department for the payment of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) on account of the unexpended balance to the Government of China, by means of a warrant on the Treasurer of the United States, drawn payable to the order of Kai Fu Shah, Minister of China to the United States.

I have [etc]

W. J. Bryan.

The Chinese Charge d’Affaires to the Secretary of State. File No. 493.11/542.

[Document 82]

The Chinese Charge d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

Chinese Legation,
Washington, November 30, 1914.

My dear Mr. Secretary: I beg to inform you that I have just received from the Treasurer of the United States a check for two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000), drawn in my favor as Counselor in charge of the Chinese Legation, for part payment of the balance of the Chinese Indemnity of 1900, returnable to the Chinese Government.

I am [etc.]

Yung Kwai.

Claims of American citizens against China growing out of the Revolution of 1911–12 and the Revolt of 1913; undertakings of the Chinese Government and formation of the Chinese Claims Commission; £2,000,000 claims fund set aside from the Reorganization Loan; settlement of Revolution claimsClaims of American citizens against China growing out of the Revolution of 1911–12 and the Revolt of 1913;27 undertakings of the Chinese Government and formation of the Chinese Claims Commission; £2,000,000 claims fund set aside from the Reorganization Loan; settlement of Revolution claims

27 Continued from For. Rel. 1912, pp. 171–173, and 1913, pp. 204–215.

[83] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, January 2, 1914.

File No. 493.00/1.

[84] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, January 15, 1914.

File No. 498.00/2.

[85] The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

Department of State, Washington, February 4, 1914.

File No. 493.00/1.

[86] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, March 18, 1914.

File No. 493.11/496.

[87] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, March 24, 1914.

File No. 493.11/497.

[88] The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

Department of State, Washington, April 23, 1914.

File No. 493.11/497.

[89] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, June 18, 1914.

File No. 493.11/507.

[90] Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, July 8, 1914.

File No. 493.11/512.

[91] The Secretary of State to Chargé MacMurray.

Department of State, Washington, August 11, 1914.

File No. 493.11/512.

[92] Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, September 12, 1914.

File No. 493.11/529.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 493.00/1.

[Document 83]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

No. 57.] American Legation,
Peking, January 2, 1914.

Sir: In compliance with the request contained therein, I have the honor to transmit herewith a copy of a despatch (No. 456) under date of the 6th ultimo, in which Consul General Greene of Hankow discusses certain aspects of the claims presented by the several nations against the Chinese Government for losses incurred by their respective nationals in consequence of the Revolution of 1911. I also enclose a copy of my reply to the Consul General under date of December 31st, embodying my views upon the points discussed in his despatch. It will be seen that while not concurring with his views that the Chinese Government can be charged with no liability for the damages to foreign interests resulting from that revolution, I have found suggestive and helpful the Consul General’s criticisms of certain recommendations of the Claims Commission which contemplate indemnification for some categories of losses that were only indirectly and remotely consequent upon it.

I have [etc.]

Paul S. Reinsch.

[Inclosure 1.]

Consul General Greene to Minister Reinsch.

No. 456.] American Consulate General,
Hankow, December 6, 1913.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your instructions No. 16 of November 21, 1913, enclosing a copy of the report28 of the claims commission appointed by the Diplomatic Body, in which are formulated the principles agreed upon for the collection of indemnity from the Chinese Government for losses incurred by foreign firms and individuals during the recent revolution.

From this report it would appear that it has been decided to demand from the Chinese Government indemnity for losses caused to foreigners in the course of, or as a direct result of, warlike operations, irrespective of whether or not the injury is alleged to be due to a willful and unnecessary act or to gross negligence on the part of the Chinese authorities. This is a matter which directly concerns this office, as the bulk of the claims which have been filed here would come under this head, most of the claims being for losses due to the burning of Hankow by the imperial forces during the fighting, and the claim of the Standard Oil Company which originated in this district, being for property destroyed by shell fire in the course of an engagement between hostile forces, one of which occupied a position near the company’s tanks.

While for some reasons it would appear desirable that those persons who, being near the scene of operations, bear the greater part of the loss in times of such national calamities as wars or the disorders attendant upon political revolutions, should be compensated for their losses, and the burden thus distributed among the whole community, two questions arise in my mind: first, whether any such principle has already gained sufficient support in the practice of the nations of the world to be regarded as an accepted principle of international law, and one that would guide the Congress of the United States in considering an appropriation for the payment of a similar claim against our Government; and secondly, if that principle has not been very generally accepted, whether it can justly be enforced upon the Chinese Government.

The use of the expression “warlike operations” in paragraph 3 of class A of the report, would seem to imply a recognition that a state of war did practically exist in certain parts of China during the revolution. There would certainly seem to have been a state of war in and around Hankow during October and November, 1911, when most of the losses for which indemnity is claimed were incurred. There were organized military forces on both sides, which conducted relations with neutral parties, and finally entered into negotiations with each other. Both sides endeavored in general to protect non-combatants and their property, and the Red Cross Society worked on both sides to alleviate the sufferings of the wounded.

Paragraph 1032 of Moore’s Digest of International Law begins with the statement “Claims not usually allowed on account of operations of war.” A claim on behalf of an American citizen for loss of property destroyed by the burning of Moscow in 1812, was peremptorily refused. This case resembles very closely the cases of claims arising out of the burning of Hankow by the Imperial troops at the end of October, 1911. The burning of Hankow would seem to have been necessary as a military measure, in view of the use of the city by the rebels as a base from which to attack the Imperial forces. For several days at the close of October, 1911, there was severe fighting on the outskirts of the city.

The United States refused to compensate the Austrian Government for tobacco belonging to it which was destroyed through the burning of Richmond by the Confederates. (Moore’s International Law Digest, Vol. VI, p. 885, S. 1032.) This case differs slightly from the Hankow claims, in that it was a case of indemnity being demanded from the Government for damage done by insurgents, afterwards suppressed, while at Hankow the damage was done in some cases by the de jure Government of the time, and in others by insurgents who have since become themselves the de jure Government; but in refusing to pay the claim, the United States Government took the broad ground that “It is believed that it is a received principle of public law that the subjects of foreign powers domiciled in a country in a state of war, are not entitled to greater privileges or immunities than the other inhabitants of the insurrectionary district.” Again, on page 886, Count Nesselrode is quoted as writing on behalf of the Russian Government, a propos of a British demand on the Grand Duke of Tuscany for indemnity for the losses of British subjects during the capture of Leghorn, that “according to the rules of public law as they are understood by Russian policy, it can not be admitted that a sovereign, forced to repossess himself of a town occupied by insurgents, is bound to indemnify foreign subjects who may have suffered damage from the assault on such town.” This was almost precisely the situation at Hankow, where most of the damage was done through the attempt of the Imperial Government to reestablish its authority over Hankow and Hanyang. In my despatches sent during the course of the revolution I described in some detail the course of events, and from them I think it will be seen that the contending forces did all that they could have been expected to do to protect foreign property, and that the section of the city where the bulk of the foreign interests were located escaped with almost no injury, the losses being incurred mainly outside the concessions where foreigners have acquired property among the Chinese somewhat against the will of the Chinese Government. On more than one occasion the foreign powers demanded of the Chinese commanders that their operations should be modified in one way or another to lessen the danger to the foreign concessions, and in general these demands were complied with.

From such study as I have been able to make of the practice of the United States heretofore in the case of similar claims, I have received the impression that the United States Government has studiously avoided any admission of liability on its part for similar losses incurred in the United States. Mr. Seward, in addressing the Prussian Minister in 1866, concerning losses suffered by Prussian subjects during our Civil War, stated that “law-abiding neutrals, whether domiciled in the country which becomes a theater of civil war, or residing abroad, have under the law of nations, when not modified by treaty, exactly the same claims for indemnity against the government concerned as citizens of that country have, and no other or greater rights to indemnity” (Moore’s Digest, Vol. VI, p. 958.)

The Russian Government has recently refused to indemnify foreigners for losses caused by mutinous troops and mobs in the disorders attendant upon the political changes of 1905. Very considerable losses were incurred by Americans and other foreigners at Vladivostok, but so far as I am aware no satisfaction whatever has been received, except in the case of the Chinese colony for which a small solatium, utterly out of proportion to their actual losses, was granted in view of the fact that their quarter was specially singled out for attack, whereas the Americans and other foreigners simply suffered with the Russians among whom they were living. As I was in Vladivostok at the time I have personal knowledge of these cases.

I will not multiply quotations on a subject which is doubtless much more familiar to you than to myself. I believe, however, that many of the principles apparently established in the report of the Peking Commission would not be accepted by any of the great nations of the world as binding in international law between themselves. The very secrecy with which they are endeavoring to guard this statement of the cases in which indemnity is to be demanded from the helpless Chinese Government, seems a confession that the policy which it embodies is unjustifiable in international law.

Not only is there no declaration that some fault of the Chinese Government must be shown, but under the heading of “Claims the responsibility for which the Chinese Government cannot disclaim” are included such unusual classes of claims as those for Chinese killed or injured in the performance of their duty to their foreign employers and claims for loss in industrial enterprises such as damage to and deterioration of machinery and materials resulting from suspension or delay in working owing to local revolutionary disturbances. Under “Claims legitimate in principle but not in every case attributable to the revolution” are included expenses in protecting foreign property; loss of personal effects of Chinese employees of foreigners; loss from non-fulfillment or delay in executing contracts of foreign firms and individuals with other private individuals or firms whether foreign or Chinese; travelling expenses of foreigners, not officially employed, to adjacent places of safety; losses of debts and professional fees unrecoverable owing to the death, flight or insolvency of the debtors; losses on account of salaries of foreign employees of foreign firms whose services could not be utilized on account of the revolution; and diminution as a result of pillage in the security given by compradores in foreign firms (without any requirement of proof that such diminution has actually caused loss to the foreign firms). I find myself quite unable to believe that the American Government, or the Russian, German, French or British Governments, would for a moment consider paying claims for such losses incurred within their respective territories; and I am firmly of the opinion that we should not ask China to indemnify our citizens for losses under circumstances which if reproduced in the United States could not reasonably be expected to lead, first, the executive to recommend an indemnity, and, secondly, the Congress to make the necessary appropriation.

There seems something pitifully small in the great nations of the world demanding of China in her present impoverished state that she give out of her poverty what we would never dream of giving out of our easy wealth. But there will be nothing small about the indemnity claims for which such broad principles as those contained in the report of the Peking Commission will open the door.

I believe that it may be said that we can help China more by avoiding such an open break with the other powers as would be caused by refusal to countenance their demands, than by abstaining ourselves from a share in what seems to me extortion. In the first place I do not believe that this is a sound principle. We should do what we consider right and let the others take the responsibility for the course they see fit to adopt for themselves. If we took this attitude in a matter-of-fact manner, without criticism of those powers which differ with us on the ground that we feared to create precedents that might later prove embarrassing to ourselves, I believe our example would carry some weight and might lessen the sum total of unjustifiable claims on the part of other nationalties, though it would hardly induce them under the most favorable circumstances to abandon the stand they have already taken. It is difficult to see how our solidarity with the other powers has served to place any limit upon their demands; for besides the exceedingly liberal basis they have agreed upon for indemnifying firms and individuals and municipal organizations, the several powers have reserved freedom of action on the matter of indemnities to the governments themselves for military and naval expenses. This opens the way for large claims at Hankow as well as in and around Peking. Since January, 1912, the Japanese have maintained at Hankow a military force of some 700 men, who were sent here very shortly after the Japanese admiral had formally and in writing assured the consular body that he and the other foreign naval officers considered that the concessions were already adequately protected. Great Britain and Russia also sent detachments to Hankow, of which the Russian detachment of over 200 men still remains.

Our cooperation with the other powers did not serve to restrain Russia and Great Britain from taking independent action in Mongolia and Thibet, and that action, by depriving China of a large part of her outlying territories available for colonization, brings so much the nearer the day when China will have to go abroad and demand equal treatment in order to secure an outlet for her surplus population and for her adventurous spirits. It is certainly not to our advantage to have the coming of that clay hastened.

I therefore earnestly request that the Legation recommend a reconsideration by the Department of the principles to govern the collection of indemnity from the Chinese Government, and that I be furnished with such a statement of the principles to be followed as can be freely shown to all possible claimants, for it would appear that American citizens are entitled to know what kind of claims their Government considers justifiable when the Government itself has actually reached a definite conclusion on the subject. If I were to inform all American citizens who suffered loss on account of the revolution of the conclusions reached by the commission of the Diplomatic Body, it is highly improbable that the substance of the report could be kept secret from the Chinese Government.

If the claims thus far filed by American citizens in this district are disallowed for reasons allied to those submitted in this report, I have the honor to request that I be authorized to refund to the claimants the official fees charged for the authentication of their claims.

I would refer in this connection to my despatches No. 88 of April 20, 1912, No. 166 of October 11, 1912, and No. 200 of January 6, 1913, to the Legation, on this same subject.

I have further the honor to request that the duplicate copy of this despatch be forwarded to the Department of State with such comment and recommendations as you may see fit to add, and that I be informed of the Department’s decision in the matter.

I have [etc.]

Roger S. Greene.

[Inclosure 2.]

Minister Reinsch to Consul General Greene.

No. 89.] American Legation,
Peking, December 31, 1913.

Sir: Your despatch No. 456 of December 6th on the subject of claims for losses during the Revolution of 1911 has been the subject of careful and sympathetic consideration on the part of the Legation. I should point out to you, however, that the purely legal principles upon which you base your argument against the enforcement of claims for damages consequent upon the recent revolution can scarcely be considered apart from the undertakings of responsibility voluntarily assumed by the Chinese Government. That Government has seen fit, with a view to the adjustment of the international complications resulting from the Revolution, to adopt and make applicable to such cases an exceedingly broad and liberal principle of governmental liability. For your information in this regard, I enclose herewith certain extracts from the correspondence of the Legation, recording a number of instances in which such a principle of liability was avowed on behalf of the Government of China, with respect to both the Revolution of 1911–1912 and that of 1913.

It was in an endeavor to construe this general undertaking, and to define its precise applicability, that a commission representing the Diplomatic Body was constituted, and formulated the more detailed principles embodied in the report which is criticized in your dispatch of December 6th. It is perhaps needless to comment that the recommendations of a report so drawn up are not wholly of a judicial character but partake of the character of a presentation of the cases to be urged by the several commissioners in advocacy of the claims presented by their respective nationals; and it is believed that it was rather as a working basis, involving a compromise among the divergent views of the various nations, that the recommendations of this report have received the general approval of the interested Governments. Those recommendations are, however, even yet subject to revision and are in fact to be re-examined at a meeting of the Diplomatic Body to be held in the near future. I may add for your information that there is reason to believe that the tendency of that further consideration of the subject will be towards restricting the grounds upon which claims are to be urged against the Chinese Government. It is hoped that in any case the basis of common action as definitely formulated by the interested powers will not prove to be an inequitable or unduly exigent construction of the commitments made by that Government.

Under such circumstances, it would seem neither fair to our own nationals nor advisable as a matter of policy for the American Government to dissociate itself from the action which is being concerted by the interested Powers with a view to the prosecution of claims which, although perhaps not warranted either by any universally accepted principle of international law or by the practice of our own country, are not in themselves inequitable, especially in view of the acceptance by the Chinese Government of the general principle upon which they are founded.

But while differing from your view as to the applicability of these cases of the general principles of governmental liability for the results of hostilities or other consequences of revolution, the Legation concurs in your opinion that many of the grounds for indemnification specified in the report of the Claims Commission are of such a remote and indirect character as not to come within a fair and equitable construction of the commitments of the Chinese Government. I have therefore telegraphed to the Department of State, suggesting that I be authorized to urge upon the Diplomatic Body the propriety and advisability of giving priority to such claims as are based on the direct and proximate consequences of the Revolution of 1911; and I have received from the Department telegraphic authorization to do so, subject to the proviso that the Legation’s efforts to this end should not commit our Government to the prejudice of such freedom of action as it might deem necessary in the event that other governments should support claims for actual but indirect losses.29

I shall of course notify you of any such changes as may be made in the basis of action hitherto adopted. It is hoped that in the meanwhile you will be able to make known to American claimants the principles that may be expected to be applied to the examination and presentation of their several grounds of complaint, without the necessity of communicating to them the full formulation of principles adopted by the interested Powers as basis of common action in the presentation of the claims arising out of the Revolution of 1911.

In conclusion, I beg to express to you my very hearty appreciation of your conscientious examination and presentation of your views of this matter. It will give me much pleasure to forward your despatch to the Department in accordance with your request, together with a copy of the present communication in comment upon it.

I am [etc.]

Paul S. Reinsch.

[Inclosure 3.]

Undertakings of the Chinese Government with respect to the payment of revolutionary claims of foreigners. 30

revolution of 1911–1912.

Foreign Office to American Minister, February 1, 1913. [Extract—translated from Chinese]: “* ** The Chinese Government agrees to grant just and equitable indemnities for the loss and damage suffered by foreigners during the recent revolution.”

Diplomatic Circular No. 78, April 12th, 1913. Minutes of an interview between the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the British, Italian, German and French Ministers on April 10th, 1913. [Extract]: “* * * Mr. Lu (the Minister for Foreign Affairs) said that the Chinese Government accepted the principle of liability for losses arising out of the Revolution. * * *”

Diplomatic Circular No. 86, April 21st, 1913. Collective note of the Diplomatic Body to the Foreign Office, sent in French. [Extract—translation]: “* * * The Diplomatic Body, in taking this step, acts upon the declaration made by the Wai Chiao Pu to the Ministers named, on April 10th, in which the Chinese Government recognizes its obligation to make indemnification for losses sustained by foreigners as a result of the Revolution. * * *”

Diplomatic Circular No. 122, June 12th, 1913. Foreign Office to the Dean, June 5th, 1913. [Extract—translated from Chinese]: “* * * On the 10th of April last, when H. E. Sir John Jordan called at the Foreign Office and talked over this subject, the Minister for Foreign Affairs declared that the Republican Government having expressed their consent to the principle of compensation for the losses in question* * *” [“losses sustained by foreigners in connection with the Revolution of last year”].

Dean to the Foreign Office, June 27th, 1913. [Extract]: “Par sa note . . . . le Wai Chiao Pu en confirmant les declarations faites par S. E. Mons. Lou Tseng Tsiang, aux Ministres de Grande Bretagne . . . . . . , recomiaissant l’obligation du Gouvernement Chinois de rembourser les pertes subies par les Strangers du fait de la Revolution de 1911–1912 …”

Minutes of the First Session, International Claims Commission. [Extract]: “The Chairman made an address, in which he expressed the willingness of the Chinese Government to indemnify foreigners for losses sustained during the Revolution. * * *”

revolution of 1913.

Presidential Order of July 21st, 1913. [Extract—translated from Chinese]: “2. The Government assumes full responsibility for all damage hereafter sustained by the lives and property of foreigners in such regions, provided that the said damage arises directly from the measures taken by the Government to put down the rebellion. * * *”

Foreign Office to the American Minister (No. 419), dated August 6th, 1913. [Extract—translation from Chinese]: “* * * Chinese Government assumed full responsibility for all damages* * * sustained by* * * foreigners in those regions affected* * * provided said damages arise directly from the measures taken by the Government to put down the revolt. * * *”

Foreign Office to the American Minister (No. 21), dated November 25th, 1913. [Extract—translation from the Chinese]: “* * * As for limitations within which losses will be indemnified, I have the honor to confirm the statement* * * that all losses sustained by foreigners directly arising from the operations of any part of either force will be indemnified. * * *”

28  For. Rel. 1913, p. 206.

29  For. Rel. 1913, pp. 214–215.

30 See also For. Rel. 1913, p. 205.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State File No. 498.00/2.

[Document 84]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State 31

No. 73.] American Legation,
Peking, January 15, 1914.

Sir: In view of the slight confusion which has apparently arisen respecting the treatment of American claims now pending against the Chinese Government, I have the honor to submit a brief resume of the character and functions of the several bodies which have had to do with these claims during the past two years, together with a statement of the procedure followed in the presentation of the claims of several sorts. While this may appear supererogatory, yet, in view of the fact that certain claims have been authorized by the Department for presentation to the Chinese Government amongst the 1911–1912 revolutionary claims which do not appear to fall within that category, it is believed that a clear statement of the facts and circumstances relating to the several classes of claims may be of assistance to the Department in reaching a decision as to the class in which any particular claim should be included.

Early in 1913 the Chinese Government made formal announcement of its acceptance of the principle of liability for the losses and damages sustained by foreigners in consequence of the revolution of 1911–1912 and undertook to make just and equitable indemnity therefor. For the exact wording of these undertakings the Department is referred to the abstract which accompanied my despatch No. 57 of January 2, 1914 (Inclosure 3). At the same time it set aside the sum of £2,000,000 to meet the liabilities so assumed. This action inspired the appointment by the Diplomatic Body of a select committee to examine and classify the claims made under the undertaking of the Government, and to adopt a formulation of principles which should ensure uniform action by the several foreign governments concerned. The report of this Committee, forwarded to the Department under cover of the Legation’s despatch No. 814 of April 17th, 1913,32 and approved by the Department in its telegraphic instruction of June 11, 5:00 p.m.,33 variously termed the Report of the Diplomatic Claims Commission “and the “Report of the Claims Committee of the Diplomatic Body,” was adopted by the Diplomatic Body subject to ratification by the several governments concerned. This it duly received, and [it] is therefore binding as between the governments concerned in all matters pertaining to the presentation of claims to the attention of the Chinese Commission appointed to examine the claims arising out of the 1911–1912 Revolution. It should be noted that the Chinese Government was no party to the adoption of this report, that it is not officially cognizant of its existence, and that it is in fact strenuously opposing the payment of certain classes of claims listed in the report as just in principle (class A) as well as all the claims under the headings of B, C, and D.

Shortly after its assumption of liability the Chinese Government announced its intention of appointing a commission to examine and liquidate claims. This proposal met with a ready acceptance by the Governments concerned and the body known as the Chinese Claims Commission was accordingly instituted. It consists of a number of representatives of the Boards of Foreign Affairs and Finance. For convenience in negotiation the Commission has divided itself into committees, which meet the delegates of the several Legations individually. These committees have plenary powers, but meet from time to time as the full Commission to report action taken and to decide on leading cases in order to ensure uniformity of treatment of all claims presented. It should be noted that this commission is in no sense an international body but is purely Chinese, and in its action on claims submitted adheres to principles diametrically opposed to those embodied in the Report of the Claims Committee of the Diplomatic Body. Further, by its constitution it can deal only with claims arising out of the 1911–1912 revolution, although it is probable that it will at a later date, be authorized to deal with claims based on losses sustained by reason of the 1913 Revolt.

Following the appointment of the Chinese Claims Commission, the several foreign governments having claims for presentation designated one or more diplomatic or consular officials to negotiate with that commission respecting the same. These officials are generally termed the Foreign Claims Delegates. They have met from time to time to report action taken, to consult on procedure and to recommend to the Diplomatic Body action which seems necessary in the joint interest of foreign claimants. But it should be borne in mind that these delegates have no powers whatever as a body, partaking rather of the nature of a committee of the Diplomatic Body which can make recommendations but which depends on that body for affirmative action.

There is no international claims commission, nor are there any terms of reference agreed upon by the Chinese and [the] several foreign governments for use by the Chinese Commission and Foreign Delegates in pourparlers. All negotiations with the Chinese Commission are diplomatic in character, not of a judicial or quasi-judicial nature. The lack of terms of reference is the greatest handicap to the expeditious transaction of business, as it causes endless and repeated discussions of the same points by all the delegates. At present the chief points upon which no agreement can be reached are the payment of claims for losses other than those directly occasioned by the military operations of the forces engaged, and the payment of interest from the time of loss until the time of payment on claims allowed.

Both the undertakings of the Chinese Government in respect to losses occasioned by the 1913 revolt and the procedure followed in the presentation and liquidation of claims arising therefrom, differ materially from those respecting the losses caused by the 1911–1912 revolution. An examination of the abstract [Inclosure 3] accompanying my despatch No. 57 of January 2, 1914, will show that in the case of the 1913 revolt the Government specifically limited its liability to losses directly resulting from the military operations of either of the forces engaged, a limitation which it had neglected to make in its undertaking respecting the 1911–1912 revolution. At the request of the Chinese Government, claims for losses alleged to have been occasioned by the 1913 revolt are undergoing a preliminary examination as to the questions of fact at the hands of the foreign consuls and provincial authorities working together. It is understood that these, claims will eventually be referred to Peking for final adjustment.

It should be noted that the Report of the Claims Committee of the Diplomatic Body has no connection with the 1913 claims, nor is it certain that these claims will necessarily be examined by the existing Chinese Commission.

In addition to claims for losses sustained by reason of the 1911–1912 revolution and 1913 revolt, there are now pending a number of American claims Which have little, if any, connection with the late disturbances. They are generally based on contracts to which the Chinese Government or some governmental department or institution is a party. Under the constitution of the Chinese Commission it is not believed that such claims are properly cognizable by it, but should be presented directly to the Foreign Office in the usual manner.

A few examples of a fourth class of claims are also pending: namely, punitive or exemplary damages. The American Government appears to be debarred from presenting claims of this sort to the consideration of the Chinese Commission by the terms of the Report of the Claims Committee of the Diplomatic Body. Moreover, it would seem that the Chinese Claims Commission is hardly competent to assess punitive damages against the Government, its function being rather to restrict the amount of liquidated claims to actual loss proven by the claimants. For these two reasons it is believed that such claims should also be presented directly to the Foreign Office.

The sum of £2,000,000 sterling, set aside for the payment of claims arising out of the 1911–1912 disorders is a part of the proceeds of the Five Power Loan, set aside upon the special insistence on the part of the Diplomatic Body. The Diplomatic Corps and especially the representatives of the Five Powers who furnished the loan are watching over the expenditure of this money with considerable care. It has even been stated in the Diplomatic Meeting that as the Five Powers were furnishing the money no part of it could be used without their consent, that is, that the Chinese Government will not be allowed to pay out any part of this fund except under rules and arrangements agreed to and sanctioned by the Five Powers. Any claims which fall outside of the classes favored by the diplomatic representatives of these powers and sanctioned by them would have to paid out of funds provided by the Chinese Government from other sources.

I have [etc.]

Paul S. Reinsch.

31 Receipt acknowledged February 14, 1914.

32  For. Rel. 1913, p. 204.

33  Id. 210.

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch. File No. 493.00/1.

[Document 85]

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

No. 38.] Department of State,
Washington, February 4, 1914.

Sir: The Department is in receipt of your dispatch No. 57 of January 2, 1914, enclosing correspondence exchanged with the Consul General at Hankow relative to claims against China growing out of the revolution of 1911–1912. Your dispatch and its enclosures have been read with interest.

With respect to the proposal to limit the grounds for claims against China, you are authorized to endeavor to induce the Diplomatic Body to consent to such limitations as will prevent injustice to the Chinese Government, bearing in mind in this connection the Department’s telegram of December 20, on this subject.34

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
J. W. Folk.

34  For. Rel. 1912, p. 215.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 493.11/496.

[Document 86]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 159.] American Legation,
Peking, March 18, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to report that* * * on March 13 a representative of the Banque de l’Indo-Chine is reported to have announced, at a meeting of the Five Power Group representatives, that France “will not consent to any advance of loan moneys, or to any new quintuple loan, or to any revision of the customs tariff until every centime of French losses during the revolution has been paid to the satisfaction of the French Legation.” This tying up of entirely unrelated considerations does not have anything to recommend itself except the fact that it may succeed inasmuch as under the circumstances even a policy so unjust may be forced upon China.

As the Chinese Government is as unwilling as ever to admit the justice of the indirect claims made against it, it will continue its efforts to have the matter submitted to The Hague Tribunal for arbitration. I therefore have the honor to request telegraphic instructions as to whether the American Government is disposed to support the Government of China in its efforts to submit to international arbitration the question of the justifiability of the indirect claims on account of the revolution of 1911–1912, and whether the United States Government would be willing to submit to arbitration the claims of this nature which have been listed on behalf of American citizens.

It is extremely unlikely that all the powers will agree to have this question arbitrated. The Chinese Government, however, feels that if the justice of these claims could be tested by The Hague Tribunal in the case of one or more powers, the principles thus judicially established would form a basis upon which China could protect herself against unjust claims from other sources.

I have [etc.]

Paul S. Reinsch.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 493.11/497.

[Document 87]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

No. 165.] American Legation,
Peking, March 24, 1914.

Sir: In continuation of my despatch No. 159 of the 18th instant, I have the honor to report that it seems possible that the Governments of Great Britain and Germany, and perhaps some other powers, may be willing to refuse definitely to present to China claims for indirect damages, without regard to the action taken by certain others of the powers. The attitude heretofore adopted by these two Governments has been practically identical with that already approved by the Department in the case of American claims: namely, the prior presentation of claims for direct losses and the presentation of claims for indirect losses subject to the payment of such claims by China to some other power.

In the event of the British and German Governments expressing their willingness to take the action contemplated above, I have the honor to inquire whether the Department would authorize me to take a similar step with regard to the American claims concerned. There are important considerations in support of such action, not the least of which is that it comports better with the dignity of the United States to abandon definitely and voluntarily claims the payment of which by China it has consistently opposed throughout the recent negotiations as of doubtful propriety, rather than to make the presentation of such claims contingent on the less scrupulous action of any other power. There is no doubt that independent action by Great Britain, Germany and the United States along the lines indicated would materially strengthen the hands of the Chinese Government in resisting the demands of those powers which are now pressing for the payment of indirect claims and therefore opposing the immediate payment by China of liquidated claims. It would thus have practically the same effect as a decision rendered by a court of arbitration declaring those claims unfounded in equity. Apart from questions of policy there remains the question of the abstract justice of demanding payment by China of the claims concerned. A dispassionate examination of these will, I believe, convince the Department that they are of a nature which no Government would for a moment entertain unless compelled to do so in consequence of its own impotence.

Of claims based on indirect and non-proximate damages suffered, the Legation has received only four. In view of the prevailing doubt as to their ultimate presentation* * * I enclose abstracts of the four claims in question * * *.35

In conclusion I have the honor to request that the Department’s instructions in the premises be transmitted by cable. I have [etc.]

Paul S. Reinsch.

35 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch. File No. 493.11/497.

[Document 88]

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

No. 80.] Department of State,
Washington, April 23, 1914.

Sir: The Department acknowledges the receipt of your despatch No. 159 of March 18 and your No. 165 of March 24, regarding claims against the Chinese Government growing out of the revolution of 1911–1912.

In the event of the British and German Governments, or either of them, expressing their willingness to refuse definitely to present to China claims for indirect losses, such as are set forth in the summary sent with your No. 165 of certain claims received by the Legation, you are instructed to refuse to present such claims.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Cone Johnson.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 493.11/507.

[Document 89]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. 36

No. 266.] American Legation,
Peking, June 18, 1914.

Sir: With reference to your instruction No. 80 of April 23 I have the honor to report as follows:

The British and German Legations are willing to take the position, identical with that of the American Legation, that the Chinese Government by its undertaking to compensate for losses growing out of the Revolution of 1911–1912, did not assume liability for indirect losses, and that, therefore, claims for such losses will not be pressed against the Chinese Government. Should, however, the Chinese Government, by paying claims of this nature to other countries, voluntarily assume, as a supplement to its original undertaking, to pay claims for indirect losses, these Governments reserve the right to a like privilege of indemnification.

I have orally informed the Foreign Office that this Legation will take the position above stated. It is believed that this will greatly strengthen the hands of the Chinese Government in resisting claims which it may not fairly be said to have assumed in the original undertaking.

I have [etc.]

Paul S. Reinsch.

36 Receipt acknowledged July 11, 1914.

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State. File No. 493.11/512.

[Document 90]

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 299.] American Legation,
Peking, July 8, 1914.

Sir: Referring to the telegram37 of June 30 by which the Department instructed Mr. C. L. L. Williams, who has for some time been detailed to the Legation as delegate for the settlement of claims arising out of the Revolution of 1911, to proceed at once and take up his post as Consul at Nanking, I have the honor to enclose herewith the despatch, under date of June 25, in which Mr. Williams reported to the Minister the status of the claims with the negotiation of which he has been charged by the Department.* * *

I have [etc.]

J. Y. A. MacMurray.

[Inclosure—Extract.]

Consul Williams to Minister Reinsch.

American Legation,
Peking, June 25, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to submit the following report on the several claims the presentation of which to the Chinese Claims Commission was entrusted to my care; on the principles which apparently have guided that commission in effecting such liquidations; and on a few questions which have been debated with that Commission without any agreement having been reached between it and the claims delegates of the several legations.

Generally speaking, the Chinese Commission has been ready to recognize the liability of the Chinese Government under its undertakings of February 1, 1913, and April 12, 1913,38 * * * it has denied liability for damages sustained through looting when such was due solely to the generally disturbed state of the country and when it cannot be shown, or inferred from their presence in large bodies, that troops participated therein. It has further denied the liability of the Chinese Government for all such indirect and non-proximate damages as those suffered by foreign trading interests through the default of Chinese debtors, even when such default was the direct result of bankruptcy caused by the Revolution. The position of the Chinese Commission with respect to this latter class of claims has been attacked by several of the legations, and the question of principle involved does not yet appear to have been decided finally. * * *

The two chief grounds of dispute still unsettled between the claims delegates of the Legations and the Chinese Commission are: (a) the liability of the Chinese Government for damages of an indirect nature, and (b) its liability for interest on claims allowed.

The majority of the claims alleged by the Chinese Commission to be “indirect” (and practically all of the American claims of that description) are for damages sustained by reason of the inability of Chinese debtors of foreign firms to discharge their liabilities, such inability proceeding from bankruptcy due to the disturbed conditions of trade caused by and consequent upon the Revolution. These claims may be divided roughly in two classes: (1) those preferred by banking institutions on account of their inability to recover sums advanced in the ordinary course of trade, and (2) those preferred by merchants on account of the inability of Chinese merchants to fulfill contracts entered into with the claimants.* * * By the terms of the report of the committee of the Diplomatic Body39 * * * the claims here under discussion were listed under class B, section 7, as “legitimate in principle” but open to discussion as to the facts, it being remarked that not all of such claims were attributable to the Revolution. * * *

The liability of the Chinese Government for interest on the claims passed for payment has also occasioned considerable discussion. Under the report of the committee of the Diplomatic Body mentioned above it was recommended that interest be charged at the rate of 5% par annum on ordinary claims and 7% per annum on commercial claims, from the date of loss to the date of payment. The Chinese Government has resisted these demands strenuously and has suggested informally that the question be sent to arbitration.* * * I respectfully venture to suggest that if the Chinese Government be held to the payment of interest—a liability which the majority of the precedents would seem to justify—the term during which it runs should commence in each case from the date on which the Chinese Government was put in notice of the existence of the claim concerned and should cease on payment of the claim. * * *

The Chinese Government has given a voluntary assurance that it will indemnify foreign interests for losses sustained by reason of the 1913 revolt, but has limited its liability in the premises to damage occasioned directly by the military operations of either force. As regards the losses due to the ravages of brigands, the liability of the Government may be inferred from its undertaking to make good the damages sustained in several specific instances* * * and from the fact that investigations with a view to ascertaining the actual amount of damage sustained by foreigners are now being made by the Chinese authorities. It should be noted that the liability of the Chinese Government to pay interest on the 1913 claims does not appear to have been suggested.* * * I have [etc.]

C. L. L. Williams.

37 Not printed.

38 Inclosure 3 with despatch No. 57 of Jan. 2, 1914.

39  For. Rel. 1913, p. 206.

The Secretary of State to Chargé MacMurray. File No. 493.11/512.

[Document 91]

The Secretary of State to Chargé MacMurray.

Department of State,
Washington, August 11, 1914.

Sir: The Department is in receipt of the Legation’s despatch No. 299 of July 8, 1914, enclosing report of Mr. C. L. L. Williams on the status of the claims arising out of the revolution of 1911.

The Department regards Mr. Williams as deserving of commendation for his excellent work as claims delegate.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State. File No. 493.11/529.

[Document 92]

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 367.] American Legation,
Peking, September 12, 1914.

Sir: Referring to previous correspondence in regard to the payment of interest by the Chinese Government on claims arising out of the Revolution of 1911–1912, I have the honor to enclose herewith copies of diplomatic circulars embodying recent communications which have passed between the Foreign Office and the Dean of the Diplomatic Body on this subject.

It will be seen therein that the Chinese Government has finally acquiesced in the demands of the Diplomatic Body that interest should be allowed, and has notified it that interest at the rate of 5 per cent will be paid on liquidated claims, calculated from April 26, 1913, until the date of actual payment; and that this offer has been accepted.* * *

I have [etc.]

J. V. A. MacMurray.

[Inclosure 1—Summary.]

[Untitled]

Report, dated July 10, of the Dean to the Diplomatic Body that he had made a verbal demand upon the Wai Chiao Fu for interest on settled claims at 5% from January 1, 1913; and that the Minister for Foreign Affairs had refused to consider this request. Request of the Dean for the Diplomatic Body’s authorization to convey formally its decision that interest should be so paid.

[Inclosure 2—Summary.]

[Untitled]

Incloses, July 25, a note addressed on July 22 by the Dean to the Wai Chiao Pu formally conveying the Diplomatic Body’s demand for interest on all settled claims at 5% from January 1, 1913.

[Inclosure 3—Extract.]

[Untitled]

Incloses, August 26, the following: Peking, August 25, 1914

To the Dean of the Diplomatic Body:

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your excellency’s note of July 22 on the subject of the payment of interest on Revolution indemnity claims.

After the Revolution of 1911 the Government, out of compassion for foreign merchants, set apart a portion of the loan in order to compensate them for their losses, and appointed a committee of investigation. All cases of claims on account of direct losses have since been impartially considered in conjunction with the foreign commissioners, and successive payments have been made. The Chinese Government may be said to have been most generous in its consideration for foreign merchants. If in addition payment of interest be demanded, the amounts individually received by foreign merchants will be small while the burden falling on the Chinese Government will be very heavy. In view, however, of the repeated requests made by your excellency in your capacity as Dean, this Ministry will give consideration to your views and those of your honorable colleagues and will, as an exceptional proceeding, admit the payment of 5 per cent interest in addition to the payment of indemnities; such interest to be calculated from April 26, 1913, being the date of signature of the Reorganization Loan wherein China admitted the payment of compensation to foreigners for losses suffered during the 1911 revolution, until the date on which such payment was made.

I have [etc.]

Seal of the Wai Chiao Pu.

[Inclosure 4—Extract.]

[Untitled]

Incloses, September 9, the following: British Legation,
Peking, September 9, 1914.

His Excellency Sun Pao-ch’i
Minister for Foreign Affairs.

Sir: With reference to your excellency’s note of August 25, I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Diplomatic Body authorize me to accept the proposal made by your excellency’s Government that interest should be paid by your Government on indemnities admitted on revolution claims, such interest to be at the rate of 5 per cent per annum and to run from 26th April, 1913, the date of the signature of the Reorganization Loan, to the date on which payment of the claim was made.

I avail [etc.]

J. N. Jordan,
Dean of the Diplomatic Body.

Huai River conservancy and prevention of famine; surveys initiated by the American National Red Cross; good offices of the United States; appointment of a United States Army engineer to superintend surveys. Loan proposals and contractHuai River conservancy and prevention of famine; surveys initiated by the American National Red Cross; good offices of the United States; appointment of a United States Army engineer to superintend surveys. Loan proposals and contract

[93] The Secretary of State to Minister Calhoun.

Department of State, Washington, May 16, 1911.

File No. 893.811/44a.

[94] Minister Calhoun to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, May 25, 1911.

File No. 893.811/46.

[95] The Secretary of State to Minister Calhoun.

Department of State, Washington, May 27, 1911.

File No. 893.811/46.

[96] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Calhoun.

Department of State, Washington, June 12, 1911.

File No. 893.811/50.

[97] Chargé Williams to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, April 28, 1913.

File No. 893.811/85.

[98] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, December 19, 1918.

File No. 893.811/98.

[99] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, January 23, 1914.

File No. 893.811/104.

[100] The Counselor of the Department of State, as Chairman of the International Relief Board of the American National Red Cross, to the President.

Department of State, Washington, January 26, 1914.

File No. 893.811/104.

[101] The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

Department of State, Washington, January 27, 1914.

File No. 893.811/104.

[102] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, January 28, 1914.

File No. 893.811/104.

[103] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, January 30, 1914.

File No. 893.811/106.

[104] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, February 3, 1914.

File No. 893.811/112.

[105] The Counselor of the Department of State, as Chairman of the International Relief Board of the American National Red Cross, to the President.

Department of State, Washington, February 4, 1914.

File No. 893.811/106.

[106] The President to the Counselor of the Department of State, as Chairman of the International Relief Board of the American National Red Cross.

The White House, Washington, February 6, 1914.

File No. 893.811/130.

[107] The Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, to the Counselor.

Department of State, Washington, April 1, 1914.

File No. 893.811/119.

[108] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, May 8, 1914.

File No. 893.811/125.

[109] The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

Department of State, Washington, May 9, 1914.

File No. 893.811/125.

[110] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, May 12, 1914.

File No. 893.811/126.

[111] The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

Department of State, Washington, May 18, 1914.

File No. 893.811/126a.

[112] The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

Department of State, Washington, May 18, 1914.

File No. 893.811/127a

[113] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, May 18, 1914.

File No. 893.811/127.

[114] The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

Department of State, Washington, May 19, 1914.

File No. 893.811/127.

[115] The Chinese Minister to the Secretary of State.

Chinese Legation, Washington, May 23, 1914.

File No. 893.811/129.

[116] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, May 28, 1914.

File No.893.811/128.

[117] Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, September 29, 1914.

File No. 893.811/157.

[118] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, October 28, 1914

File No. 893.811/166.

[119] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, November 2, 1914.

File No. 893.811/156.

[120] The Acting Secretary of State to the American Red Cross.

Department of State, Washington, November 2, 1914.

File No. 893.811/156.

[121] The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

Department of State, Washington, November 13, 1914.

File No. 893.811/158.

[122] The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

Department of State, Washington, December 11, 1914.

File No. 893.811/166.

[123] The Secretary of State to the American National Red Cross.

Department of State, Washington, December 11, 1914.

File No. 893.811/166.

[124] The Chairman of the Central Committee of the American National Red Cross to the Secretary of State.

American Red Cross, National Headquarters, Washington, December 19, 1914.

File 893.811/167.

[125] The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

Department of State, Washington, December 22, 1914.

File No. 893.811/167.

[126] The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the Central Committee of the American National Red Cross.

Department of State, Washington, December 23, 1914.

File No. 893.811/167.

The Secretary of State to Minister Calhoun. File No. 893.811/44a.

[Document 93]

The Secretary of State to Minister Calhoun.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 16, 1911.

American Red Cross, believing that much future suffering can be prevented in present famine-stricken region of China by improvement of rivers there, desires to send at its own expense an engineer to study and report upon the situation, provided the Chinese Government is willing arid desires to improve the rivers. Discreetly ascertain views of the Chinese Government. The Department trusts China will adopt the suggestion as a measure of economy and humanity.

Knox.

Minister Calhoun to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.811/46.

[Document 94]

Minister Calhoun to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Peking, May 25, 1911.

In reply to May 16. Sheng Kung Pao is specially entrusted by Prince Regent with work of improving river conditions in famine district. He will gladly accept offer of Red Cross to furnish American engineer. He hopes the latter will come as soon as possible. He will organize corps of necessary assistants. Situation requires prompt attention.

Calhoun.

The Secretary of State to Minister Calhoun. File No. 893.811/46.

[Document 95]

The Secretary of State to Minister Calhoun.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 27, 1911.

The Red Cross requests Department to inform you that engineer will be chosen within few days and urged to leave without delay.

Knox.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Calhoun. File No. 893.811/50.

[Document 96]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Calhoun.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 12, 1911.

Referring to previous telegrams. Mr. Charles Davis Jameson has been engaged by the Red Cross to study and report upon river conservancy and will leave for Peking via Siberia within a few days. You will be informed of exact date later. You will inform Chinese Government of Mr. Jameson’s appointment and afford him every possible facility in his mission.

Wilson.

Chargé Williams to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.811/85.

[Document 97]

Chargé Williams to the Secretary of State.

No. 828.] American Legation,
Peking, April 28, 1913.

Sir: I have the honor to forward a number of copies of Mr. C. D. Jameson’s Conservancy Report, which Mr. Jameson is forwarding to the Department at the request of the American Consul General at Shanghai.

I have [etc.]

E. T. Williams.

[Inclosure—Extracts.]

Preliminary Report of Charles Davis Jameson, Mem. Am. Soc. C. E., American Red Cross Engineer.

In those portions of Anhui and Kiangsu which lie north of the Huai River, the Hungtze Lake and the old bed of the Yellow River, south of the Province of Shantung and the present bed of the Yellow River, and extending east and west from the sea to the Ke River, is a section of country which has known but little rest from floods and subsequent famines for the last two thousand five hundred years. * * *

During the last ten or twenty years the frightful suffering due to these floods has been brought to the notice of western nations through the foreign missionaries, and year after year hundreds of thousands or even millions of dollars have been poured into China for the relief of the sufferers, three-quarters from the United States and most of the remainder from Canada. Year after year this money from outside has gone to feed China’s starving millions, and much of China’s money has gone the same way, but in all these years China has not made one single effort to have the cause of these almost annually recurring floods investigated, and to ascertain whether it were not possible to lower the flood level and thus do away with the cause of the famines. * * *

During the summer of 1911 the National Committee of the American Red Cross and the Department of State decided that an engineer should be sent to China to make a thorough examination of this flood and famine region, with a view to designing some scheme by means of which the flood level could be lowered, the rivers properly trained, and the swamps and shallow lakes drained and made available for agriculture. Through the American Legation in Peking this offer was conveyed to the Chinese Government, which accepted it with much pleasure, stating that it would furnish all the assistance the American engineer might need in the way of survey parties, etc., and would also pay the field expenses of such parties and the expenses of the American engineer from the time of the arrival in China until his preliminary examination and work were completed, the National American Red Cross paying the salary of the engineer sent. I had the honor to be appointed by the National Committee of the American Red Cross with the approval of the Department of State for this work, and arrived in Peking on July 16, 1911.

[Here follows the technical engineering report and recommendations.]

The estimated cost of the work outlined in this report will be about 35,000,000 Mexican dollars, and the time necessary for its completion—provided no delays are occasioned by lack of money at the time when it is needed—will be from six to seven years.

As to the results which will be obtained after the completion of the work, they will be: the doing away of all but abnormal floods over an area of some 17,000 square miles, the draining of this whole area and the lowering of the flood level to such an extent that in all but abnormal years two crops will be possible each year where under present conditions two crops in five years is the rule.

In addition to this improvement in land which is now supposed to be under cultivation, there will also be reclaimed some 6,000,000 Chinese mou of land which is now absolutely valueless, being covered with shallow lakes or swamps.

There will also be a saving of the cost of the annual famine relief, which for many years has been poured by millions and millions of dollars into this section of China.

The moral results will be the elimination of the suffering, starvation and degeneration of several millions of people, who now are fast becoming beggars and robbers; the turning into producers of these millions who now are not only non-producers but are becoming a menace to the country and cause of unrest and lawlessness.

In view of these obtainable results, the expenditure of this vast sum of money for the conservancy of this region is not only justifiable from a financial point of view but is a moral necessity for the good name of China.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.811/98.

[Document 98]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Peking, December 19, 1918.

Chinese Government obliged to seek abroad for funds for the Hwai River project. It invites American capital and would probably give an option of one year to Americans to raise loan and make contract for construction. The necessity for the work for the safety and well-fare of millions and its soundness as a business investment undoubted. Mr. Jameson will proceed to the United States with engineering plans to assist in making arrangements for capital if the Red Cross is willing to continue support to the extent of endeavoring to interest American financiers and industrials in the taking up this work. Please instruct.

Reinsch.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.811/104.

[Document 99]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Peking, January 23, 1914.

* * * The Minister of Communications is prepared to offer me, in favor of the American Red Cross, an exclusive right to undertake the Huai conservancy work on the terms embodied in the following memorandum, which is the result of long-continued painstaking negotiations in which every phase was considered:

[Here follows the text of the memorandum, printed hereafter as inclosure with Mr. Reinsch’s despatch No. 18 of February 3, 1914.]

For position of chief engineer, army engineer preferred. Work offers task worthy of highest talent both from point of view of engineering and of model execution of most important public work beginning a new era in China’s development. Mr. Jameson to be retained as general adviser, which is acceptable to him provided a man of first order can be sent as chief engineer. I also suggest desirability of immediately sending army engineer expert in reclamation work, accompanied possibly by engineer representing construction company selected in order to make examination on the spot and give opinion on the plans of Jameson, who supports this suggestion.

Please cable whether I am authorized in behalf of Red Cross to accept preliminary agreement embodied in memorandum. As the Chinese Government is forced to make a decision now, prompt action is necessary.

Reinsch.

The Counselor of the Department of State, as Chairman of the International Relief Board of the American National Red Cross, to the President. File No. 893.811/104.

[Document 100]

The Counselor of the Department of State, as Chairman of the International Relief Board of the American National Red Cross, to the President.

Department of State,
Washington, January 26, 1914.

My Dear Mr. President: This letter is written by me as chairman of the International Relief Board of the American Red Cross. It relates to certain proposed river conservancy work in China with a view to prevent destructive floods and resulting famines. Suggestions have been made for a conference with you, but it seems to me that you can deal with the subject more conveniently in writing.

In May 1911, after the famine of 1910–11 in the Provinces of Anhui and Kiangsu had somewhat abated, the American Red Cross, which had contributed largely to the relief of the sufferers, made to the Chinese Government through the Department of State an offer to send an expert engineer to China to make a thorough examination of the afflicted region lying along the Huai River with a view to the formulation of a plan to prevent the recurrence of devastating floods. The Chinese Government accepted the offer and agreed to furnish the necessary assistance to the American engineer and to pay the field expenses of the surveying party.

The Red Cross selected as an expert engineer, Mr. C. D. Jameson. He arrived at Peking in July 1911, and, with the assistance of the American Legation, promptly concluded the necessary arrangements for his work. On July 30, 1912, after spending almost a year in making surveys and investigations in the flood and famine region, he made a preliminary report, which was presented to the President of China and to this Department. The Department, after examining the report, expressed to the Chinese Government the hope that it would find in the report some practical suggestions looking to the collection of further technical data and the making of plans and estimates through a commission of engineers, and that it would, meanwhile, lend its aid to the adoption of measures for the provisional protection of the inhabitants and the prevention of another famine in the Huai valley. Representations were also made to induce the Chinese Government to proceed with the work along the lines laid down in Mr. Jameson’s report and under his supervision.* * *

In December last the Chinese Government, through the American Legation at Peking, offered to the American Red Cross an option for one year to raise money and to make a contract for the carrying out of the work of conservancy. Since that time such progress has been made that the Chinese Government has offered to the American Red Cross a form of contract, in which it is proposed that the Red Cross shall undertake to provide contractors and funds for carrying out the work. Such a contract the Red Cross deems itself to be precluded from making, but that there is every reason to believe that the Chinese Government will accept a counter-proposal of the Red Cross under which the latter is within a year to find a responsible contractor and, for the supervision of the work, to name an American engineer. The contractor will make his own terms with the Chinese Government. The Red Cross can not enter into engagements which would give it an interest in an enterprise carried on for profit.

The American Red Cross is advised that the contracting firm of J. G. White and Company of New York, which is among the largest and most responsible contracting firms now in existence, stands ready to enter into a contract with the Chinese Government for the performance of the work on a moderate basis of profit, say, ten per cent of the value of the work done, and that this company would, as the Chinese Government requires, accept payments largely in bonds of that Government. This would obviously necessitate the conclusion of an arrangement between the contractors and responsible bankers, through whose marketing of the bonds the contractors would receive the moneys necessary to the carrying on of the work.

This is the only feasible plan by which the end in view can be obtained. If it is not accomplished in this manner under American auspices, it must, if accomplished at all, be done in the same manner.* * * The Red Cross is, however, advised that neither contractors nor bankers will enter into the work unless an assurance is given by the Government of the contractors that it will lend to the latter its good offices and diplomatic support in carrying out the work. Such an assurance to the contractors would be deemed by them to be essential not only for their own justification in entering into such an enterprise in China, but also for the justification of the bankers in agreeing to take from the contractors the bonds of the Chinese Government at a certain figure.

Mr. Jameson estimates that the cost of the conservancy work would be $20,000,000; that it would result in the draining of an area of some 17,000 square miles, and that it would throughout this area lower the flood level to such an extent that in all but abnormal years two crops would be possible in each year, whereas, under present conditions, on an average only two crops in five years can be made. In addition to this improvement in the area now normally under cultivation, Mr. Jameson estimates that there would be reclaimed some 6,000,000 Chinese mou (1,000,000 acres) of land which is now practically valueless, being covered with shallow lakes or swamps, and in this relation he points out the great saving that would result in the cost of annual famine relief, for which in recent years many hundreds of thousands of dollars have had to be spent in this section. In conclusion Mr. Jameson says: The moral results will be the elimination of the suffering, starvation and degeneration of several millions of people, who now are fast becoming beggars and robbers; the turning into producers of these millions who now are not only nonproducers, but are becoming a menace to the country and cause of unrest and lawlessness.

I may add that the Red Cross has been considering the possibility of securing the services as engineer of one of our own Engineer Corps prominently employed in the construction of the Panama Canal.

The question immediately before us is whether the Government of the United States will give the assurance of good offices and diplomatic support in behalf of the American contractor, should he be able to agree with the Chinese Government on fair and equitable terms.

Very respectfully yours,

J. B. Moore.

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch. File No. 893.811/104.

[Document 101]

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 27, 1914.

Your January 23. The American Red Cross has authorized its officers to accept from the Chinese Government exclusive authority for one year to bring about, by the use of the good offices of the American Red Cross, a suitable contract or agreement for the accomplishment of the necessary conservancy work upon the Huai River indicated by the report of the preliminary survey heretofore made by Mr. C. D. Jameson under the directions of the American Red Cross, and with the approval of the Chinese Government.

In the exercise of its good offices the American Red Cross has already secured the consent of the J. G. White and Co. Engineering Corporation of New York, which has done much work for the United States Government in America and in the Philippines, to undertake the work and to negotiate with bankers for the necessary loan in accordance with the proposals of the Chinese Government, as set forth in your January 23.

In case the Chinese Government makes the necessary contract with the contractor above named, the American Red Cross agrees further to use its good offices to secure a competent and experienced engineer, preferably an army engineer, who shall meet with the approval of the Chinese Government and the contractor, for appointment by the Chinese Government as engineer-in-chief, to the end that the conservancy work may be carried on under the supervision of such chief engineer with C. D. Jameson as general adviser, and under general plans to be determined by an engineering board to be composed of the chief engineer, the general adviser, and three other engineers: one to be nominated by the contractor and two to be recommended by the American Red Cross and appointed by the Chinese Government.

The American Red Cross recommends that, as the terms of the loan and the terms of the contract must necessarily bear an intimate relation to each other, the delegates or agents appointed by the Chinese Government to negotiate the terms of a contract with the J. G. White Engineering Corporation of New York carry on the negotiations in the United States for convenience of consultation, both with the proposed contractor and with the bankers from whom the contractor may expect to secure the necessary funds; and it is further recommended that such delegates or agents shall be invested with full powers to conclude a final agreement.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 893.811/104.

[Document 102]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, January 28, 1914.

The Red Cross requests that the Department supplement its January 27 as follows: The action taken January 27 on your January 23 was preceded by the following preamble: The American Red Cross, in the course of expending upwards of $600,000 during the past six years for the relief of sufferers by famine caused by the overflow of the Huai River and its tributaries, became satisfied that it was of the utmost importance to have the repetition of such disasters prevented by permanent conservancy.

The Red Cross accordingly caused a preliminary survey to be made by a competent engineer, with the approval of the Chinese Government.

The preliminary survey is reported as showing the practicability of controlling the floods in the Huai River and its tributaries by suitable conservancy works.

Bryan.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.811/106.

[Document 103]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Peking, January 30, 1914.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Agriculture and Commerce to-day signed memorandum giving the Red Cross one year in which to exercise good offices for obtaining a loan to carry out Huai conservancy in the form reported in my telegram of January 23.

Reinsch.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.811/112.

[Document 104]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 18.] American Legation,
Peking, February 3, 1914.

Sir: With reference to my telegram of January 30, I have the honor to transmit herewith one of the three originals of the memorandum executed by his excellency Chang Chien in behalf of the Chinese Government and accepted by myself in behalf of the American Red Cross; which embodies the text cabled to the Department in my January 23.

I have [etc.]

Paul S. Reinsch.

[Inclosure.]

Huai River Conservancy Memorandum addressed by the Government of the Republic of China to the American National Red Cross, or its representatives or successors.

I. In consideration of the interest already practically manifested by the American National Red Cross in the Huai River region, and in consideration of the readiness of that organization and its representatives or successors to take steps with a view to obtaining the funds for carrying out the engineering works of the Huai River Conservancy,

II. The Government of the Republic of China engages itself to allow the American National Red Cross, or its representatives, or successors, a period of one year from date for the purpose of preparing and effecting a Huai River Conservancy Loan. The amount of this loan is to be Twenty Million Gold Dollars ($20,000,000), or such sum as may be found necessary, after complete surveys have been made, to carry out the work of improving the water courses embraced in the Huai River district, including the Huai River from Hsin-yang-chow, in Honan, passing through Hsi-hsien, Hou-ch’iu-haien, Feng-t’ai-hsien, Huai-yuan-hsien, Wu-ho-hsien, and Yu-i-hsien, the Inner Grand Canal, the Yi, Ssu, and Shu Rivers, in the province of Kiangsu, the Sui, Ko, Fei, K’uai, Ch’ung, T’ung and T’o Rivers, in the province of Anhui, and the Hungtzu Lake, together with the contemplated outlets to the sea and the Yangtze River. If, after the above conservancy work has been in progress for some time, it shall appear that the original loan is insufficient to provide for its completion, then, after complete investigations as to requisite amount have been made by the Engineer-in-chief, the Director General of the National Conservancy Bureau, upon approving the report submitted by the Engineer-in-chief, shall approach the American National Red Cross, who will continue to use their good offices for increasing the loan, on terms mutually satisfactory at the time of such increase, to such an amount as will render possible the completion of the Huai River Conservancy work as herein delimited.

III. The loan shall be a Government of China Gold Loan, bearing interest at the rate of five (5) per cent per annum and shall be secured as follows: (a) All Government revenue derivable or now derived from government lands in the Conservancy Area as defined in Article II and Appendix A, and also all additional revenues which may in the future accrue to the Government of the Republic of China as a result of the conservancy work, which shall include revenue from the sale or lease of reclaimed lands, as well as special conservancy taxes to be levied by the Government of the Republic of China on all lands benefited by the conservancy work; also all tolls levied for the use of the Grand Canal within the Conservancy Area.

(b) Should the above revenues and taxes derived by the Government of the Republic of China be insufficient to meet the payments of the interest and principal of the loan when they fall due, the Government of the Republic of China undertakes to repay in full both principal and interest, on their due dates, with revenue derived from other sources.

IV. The issue price of the bonds shall be fixed by agreement between the Government of the Republic of China and the American National Red Cross, or its representatives, or successors, in accordance with the most favorable market price of the similar obligations of the Government of the Republic of China, such as bonds for railway construction, at the time of signing the loan contract. The price payable to the Government of the Republic of China shall be the actual rate of issue to the public less an equitable amount for bankers’ commissions, flotation charges, and stamps.

V. The Government of the Republic of China expresses its desire to trust the American National Red Cross to secure an engineer of at least five years’ experience in the United States in river conservancy work of the first magnitude and of the highest professional reputation, for the post of Engineer-in-chief of the Huai River Conservancy work, who shall be entrusted with the preparation of definitive plans for the engineering work and shall be in charge of all the works in the Conservancy Area as defined in paragraph II and delimited in Appendix A. As an evidence of its good intention to assist the Republic of China the American National Red Cross shall designate for appointment by the Government of the Republic of China an engineer possessing the qualifications desired by the Chinese Government as stated above. In order to give evidence of American fairness and strengthen the confidence felt in the Chinese Government any consulting engineer representing the Director General of the National Conservancy Bureau who shall be under orders to inspect the progress of the works of the Huai River Conservancy and the other conservancy works in the Conservancy Area as delimited in Appendix A, shall be afforded reasonable facilities for such inspection, in the same way that he is assisted in the inspection of all the other works undertaken by the National Conservancy Bureau.

VI. The construction work shall be carried out under a percentage contract, and the construction company selected to carry out the work shall have the approval of the Government of the Republic of China and of the American National Red Cross, or its representatives or successors. All sub-contracts, of a nature to be specified in the Final Agreement, which may be let out by the construction company for the prompt prosecution of the work, are to be made on the basis of public tender.

VII. If within the Huai River Conservancy Area there are engineering works of lesser magnitude that, either from the standpoint of conservancy or water communication, demand immediate action and necessitate the preliminary advance of one or two million dollars gold, then the American National Red Cross, or its representatives or successors, actuated by a friendly purpose to assist China, agrees to use its good offices, after receiving the representations of the Government of the Republic of China, to secure at the earliest possible moment an advance to the amount required, said advance to be repaid from the large loan when made.

VIII. All arrangements for the efficient handling of disbursements and receipts and for the mutual protection of the Republic of China and the bondholders shall be settled by negotiation and embodied in the Final Agreement. General lump sum appropriations from the proceeds of the loan must first receive the sanction of the Director General of the National Conservancy Bureau, but all payments made therefrom shall be made only upon joint approval by the Managing Director and the Engineer-in-chief.

IX. As soon as possible after the signing of this Memorandum the two parties shall appoint delegates with full powers to negotiate and conclude a Final Agreement subject to the approval of their principals. When the expiration of the time covered by this Memorandum has arrived should either party thereto be unable to fulfill its engagement it shall become of no effect.

X. The English and Chinese texts of this Memorandum have, been carefully compared; but in the event of there being any difference of meaning between them, the sense as expressed in the English text shall be held to be the correct one.

Appendix A.

The Huai River Conservancy Area shall include the following watercourses, together with such subsidiary works as according to the final plans of the Engineer-in-chief shall be necessary for the proper working of the whole system:

Huai River.—Starting, from Hsin-yang-chow, in Honan, it proceeds through Hsi-hsien, Hou-ch’iu-hsien, and Feng-t’ai-hsien to Huai-yuan-hsien, uniting the following rivers: Sui, Ko, Fei, K’uai, Ch’ung, T’ung, and To; it passes through Wu-ho-hsien and Yu-i-hsien, to the Hung-tzu Lake; it subsequently passes through Ch’ing-ho-hsien and An-tung-hsien to the sea.

Inner Grand Canal.—Starting from Kua-chow on the Yangtze it proceeds to Ch’ing-ho-hsien and joins the Grand Canal.

Yi River.—Starting from Ch’i-ts’un it proceeds to Yao-wan, where it enters the Grand Canal.

Ssu River (also called the Pu-lso River).—Starting from the Lin Chia Pa it goes to a place between Yao-wan and Hsu-t’ang, where it enters the Grand Canal.

Shu River.—Starting from Ta San Ch’a K’ou it goes eastward to Chou Chia K’ou, where it enters the Lin T’ang River. (This portion is known as the “Ch’ien, Anterior, Shu River.”)

Arriving at Lung Wang Miso it makes a turn to the north and proceeds to Ma Chia K’ou and enters the Ch’ing Yi Lake. (This portion is known as the “Hou, Posterior, Shu River.”)

For purposes of the security for the loan under paragraph III, the area shall also include the entire drainage area of the above-mentioned water courses.

Signed at Peking, China, this thirtieth day of January, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen;

Accepted on behalf of the American National Red Cross:
Paul S. Reinsch,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States of America.
For the Government of the Republic of China:
(Signed in Chinese) Chang Chien.
Seal of Chang Chien as Director General of the National Conservancy Bureau.

Seal of the Minister of Agriculture and Commerce.

The Counselor of the Department of State, as Chairman of the International Relief Board of the American National Red Cross, to the President. File No. 893.811/106.

[Document 105]

The Counselor of the Department of State, as Chairman of the International Relief Board of the American National Red Cross, to the President.

Department of State,
Washington, February 4, 1914.

My Dear Mr. President: On the 26th ultimo, as chairman of the International Relief Board of the American Red Cross, I had the honor to address to you a letter in relation to a proposal of the Chinese Government to employ the good offices of the American Red Cross for the purpose of securing an American contractor to take up and perform the important engineering work necessary to the prevention of floods and famines in the basin of the Huai River. I am happy to be able to advise you that the Chinese Government has, since my letter was written, signed a memorandum definitely conferring upon the American Red Cross formal authority to proceed in the matter. This step was taken by the Chinese Government sooner than we had expected, probably for the reason, as intimated by our Legation at Peking, that the Government desired to relieve itself of pressure from other quarters. In the circumstances, the American Red Cross desires itself to proceed with all possible promptitude and to this end to take up the matter with the proposed contractor in a definite way. On the 30th ultimo the American Red Cross received from Peking a telegram stating that Dr. Chen Chin Tao was on his way to London by the Trans-Siberian route and that he had full powers to treat with contractors for the conservancy work and to close a contract if proper terms could be agreed upon. I therefore trust that you will pardon me for referring to my letter of the 26th ultimo and particularly to the question therein propounded as to whether the Government of the United States will give assurance of good offices and diplomatic support in behalf of the American contractor should he be able to agree with the Chinese Government on fair and equitable terms.

Very respectfully yours,

J. B. Moore.

The President to the Counselor of the Department of State, as Chairman of the International Relief Board of the American National Red Cross. File No. 893.811/130.

[Document 106]

The President to the Counselor of the Department of State, as Chairman of the International Relief Board of the American National Red Cross.

The White House,
Washington, February 6, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Moore: I am sincerely glad to hear that the Chinese Government has consented to act through the International Relief Board of the American Red Cross in the matter of the conservation of the river waters of China, and I hasten to write not only to express my gratification but to say that, with the concurrence of the Secretary of State, I shall be very glad indeed to have it understood that the Government of the United States will give assurance of good offices and diplomatic support in behalf of the American contractor should he be able to agree with the Chinese Government on fair and equitable terms. Of course, it is no longer necessary to explain that these good offices would not go to the extent to which some Governments have gone in seeking to enforce the rights of their nationals in the matter of contracts.

Cordially and sincerely yours,

Woodrow Wilson.

The Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, to the Counselor. File No. 893.811/119.

[Document 107]

The Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, to the Counselor.

Department of State,
Washington, April 1, 1914.

Counselor:40 The attached copy of a letter, dated January 26, 1914, to the President, written by Mr. Moore as Chairman of the International Relief Board of the American Red Cross, furnishes a comprehensive review of the Huai River Project from its inception to the submission of a definite proposal in the matter by the Chinese Government.

On January 30 last, the Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs signed a memorandum giving the Red Cross one year in which to designate a contractor to finance and execute the conservancy work. The Red Cross promptly designated J. G. White and Company as the contracting firm to negotiate a contract with the Chinese Government. Some delay has been occasioned by the detention in Europe of Dr. Chen Chin-tao, Financial Agent of the Chinese Government abroad, who was authorized by the Chinese Government to negotiate with the contractors. As the contractors desired to have their own engineer’s in China at the beginning of the high water season in June, the Red Cross urged the Chinese Government to hasten the coming of Dr. Chen or to designate some other representative to carry on negotiations. The Chinese Government then instructed Mr. Shah, the newly appointed Chinese Minister to the United States, to proceed immediately to this country to conduct the negotiations. Mr. Shah will arrive at New York on April 4. Meantime Mr. Yung Kwai, Chargé d’Affaires of China here, has been authorized to enter upon preliminary negotiations with the contractors.

It has now developed that the bankers upon whom the contractors rely for funds require definite assurance as to the value of the land to be reclaimed and benefited by the conservancy scheme, the security offered for the loan being, in addition to the guaranty of the Chinese Government, the taxes on the improved land and proceeds from the sale of reclaimed land. This necessitates the sending of engineers to the conservancy region to make a resurvey for the purpose of determining the reliability and practicability of Mr. Jameson’s report and recommendations. The contractors have expressed a willingness to accept Chinese Treasury bills to defray the expense of this survey, the amount thus advanced to be included in the large loan when consummated. The decision of the Chinese Government on this point is now awaited.

Since the Chinese Government has expressed a desire to have an American Army Engineer in charge of the work, the Red Cross intends to ask Congress to pass a bill authorizing the necessary detail.

E. T. Williams.

40 Mr. Moore retired as Counselor on March 4.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.811/125.

[Document 108]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Peking, May 8, 1914.

In connection with a note received I saw Foreign Office on Huai River project. Foreign Office favors and will propose to Cabinet assumption by China of the cost of supplementary survey.

Speedy sending of engineering board much desired though three engineers considered sufficient.

It has always been kept clear that supervision by American engineer in chief should not in any manner be subject to control of others.

Reinsch.

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch. File No. 893.811/125.

[Document 109]

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 9, 1914.

Your telegram May 8th. American Red Cross gratified that Chinese Government is considering proposal of its Minister of Foreign Affairs. If adopted it will probably ensure the results so much desired by that Government and American Red Cross, which organization hopes for speedy and favorable action by Government on said proposal to finance supplemental survey. Meanwhile as further earnest of good faith and unabated interest, the Red Cross will immediately organize and send to China a board of three engineers for verification of Jameson report and estimate. Without such report by eminent engineers it will not be practicable to finance conservancy loan in America. At same time Red Cross will advance needed funds to meet early board expenses, having entire confidence that Government will recognize disinterested motives of Red Cross, and at least share the expenses of further survey for verification.

Three American engineers highest standing will make this investigation, devoting three months to survey and study, Jameson helping. Meanwhile Red Cross will omit no effort to solve problem of floating the loan, deeming it inopportune to discuss contract for execution until report of engineering board is available.

Bryan.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.811/126.

[Document 110]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Peking, May 12, 1914.

The Cabinet has decided, subject to the approval of Chang Chien,41 that the Government will guarantee payment of the cost of supplementary survey up to $100,000 gold if the necessary funds are advanced by the Red Cross and the White Company. As soon as Chang Chien has been heard from, instructions will be issued to Shah.

Reinsch.

41 Minister of Agriculture and Commerce.

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch. File No. 893.811/126a.

[Document 111]

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 18, 1914.

The J. G. White Engineering Corporation of New York, the contractor designated by the American National Red Cross, will share equally with Red Cross in making advance of $100,000 on following conditions: 1. Chinese Government will repay contractor’s part of advance on or before February 1, 1915.

2. Chinese Government approves contractor mentioned and will let contract to it on 10% basis; Chinese Government, however, to have right to subscribe for 30% of $100,000 capital stock of construction company which contractor will organize, thus virtually reducing contractor’s compensation to 7%.

3. Chinese Government and contractor both to be released from second condition if contractor, with good offices of Red Cross, can not float $20,000,000 loan on or before January 30, 1915, or if detailed construction contract has not been signed.

Endeavor on behalf of Red Cross to obtain acceptance of these conditions by note to yourself or by letter of Shah to Red Cross. Immediate action of utmost importance.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch. File No. 893.811/127a

[Document 112]

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 18, 1914.

The Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs has telegraphed Legation here that there is misunderstanding as to preliminary survey of the Hwai River, saying Wai Chiao Pu never agreed to assume whole expense and that you informed him that Red Cross expected to be reimbursed amount of its contribution. Inform Wai Chiao Pu that the Red Cross is willing to contribute up to $50,000 gold without repayment if no loan made and, with or without J. G. White Company, will advance the balance up to $100,000 with understanding that such balance is to be refunded.

Three eminent engineers, Sibert chairman, will leave for China about June first.

Bryan.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.811/127.

[Document 113]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Peking, May 18, 1914.

Your telegram of May 9. Chang Chien has wired that as preliminary surveys had been carefully made by his engineers, supplementary survey ought not to cost more than $25,000. However, Cabinet has decided to assume responsibility for repayment of cost up to $50,000 gold. Government believes that judgment as to whether the work is practicable could be formed after expenditure of that amount; further supplementary surveys regarding details could then be paid out of proceeds of the loans when raised.

Your May 13. As Chang Chien is still absent in the south, such negotiations would be difficult and lengthy. Do you desire to have me suggest that he return for conference or will negotiations be continued in the United States?

Reinsch.

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch. File No. 893.811/127.

[Document 114]

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 19, 1914.

Your May 18. Unnecessary to recall Chang to consider our telegram 13th but suggest Chinese Minister Washington be instructed.

Congress has passed act authorizing leave of absence to Army engineer for service on the board, and, afterward, as chief engineer of Huai River conservancy in service of China.

Red Cross has asked that Sibert, ex-Panama Canal engineer, be given leave and intends to make him chairman of board.

Bryan.

The Chinese Minister to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.811/129.

[Document 115]

The Chinese Minister to the Secretary of State.

No. 6.] Chinese Legation,
Washington, May 23, 1914.

Sir: With reference to the board of engineers to be composed of Colonel William L. Sibert as chief and Mr. Arthur P. Davis and Professor D. W. Mead to proceed to China to make a supplementary examination of the Hwai River region, I am authorized by my instructions to say that the Government of the Republic of China desires the board to come to China at as early a date as possible.

I have already had the pleasure of informing my Government by cable of the designation of Colonel Sibert as chief of the board.

Accept [etc.]

Kai Fu Shah.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No.893.811/128.

[Document 116]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Peking, May 28, 1914.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs has asked me to make known to you his Government’s appreciation of the good offices of our Government in the matter of the Huai River conservancy and particularly of its action in making available for this purpose so distinguished an engineer as Colonel Sibert; and he further requested me to express through the Department to the American Red Cross the gratitude of the Chinese Government for the assistance of that society in making the necessary arrangements with American financial and industrial interests and for its generosity in assuming so liberal a financial responsibility in connection with the preliminary survey which is about to be undertaken.

Reinsch.

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.811/157.

[Document 117]

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

No. 386.] American Legation,
Peking, September 29, 1914.

Sir: Referring to previous correspondence on the subject of the Huai River Conservancy, I have the honor to report that Colonel William L. Sibert and the other members of the Board of Engineers, accompanied by the Adviser, Mr. C. D. Jameson, arrived in Peking on September 5th and remained here for one week. During that time they had several meetings with the Minister of Agriculture and Commerce, Mr. Chang Chien, and were also presented to President Yuan Shih-k’ai. Both to the President and, more fully, to Mr. Chang Chien they explained their plans for the conservancy work; and pointed out that, by the projected drainage of the lakes along the present course of the Huai River their plans would reclaim such an amount of agricultural land as would virtually pay for the cost of the whole undertaking.

It is with much satisfaction that I am able to report that Colonel Sibert and his colleagues obviously made an exceptionally good impression upon both Mr. Chang Chien and the President. At their first meeting, there was evident on the part of the Minister of Agriculture and Commerce a certain feeling of distrust, if not actually of prejudice, and he was extremely cautious about committing himself in any way to approval of their plans; in subsequent meetings, however, his attitude completely changed, and although there remained certain points in regard to which he seemed to question the feasibility of their plans he showed himself in general extremely well disposed and indicated his complete confidence in the board. He has subsequently taken occasion to say to me, in the course of a conversation on other subjects, that he felt that the carrying through of the plans for the Huai conservancy would enable those friendly to American activity in China to answer the reproach that Americans have never brought to accomplishment any considerable project here.

In view of the fact that the Board of Engineers is now preparing its full report to the American National Red Cross, it is unnecessary for the Legation to attempt to outline their plans for the conservancy work.

I have [etc.]

J. V. A. MacMurray.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.811/166.

[Document 118]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

No. 424.] American Legation,
Peking, October 28, 1914

Sir: I have the honor to transmit the translation of a letter dated the 18th instant, directed to the American Minister by his excellency Mr. Chang Chien, Minister of Agriculture and Commerce, and Mr. Hsu Tung-lin, in which they set forth the extent of the calamity brought upon the Provinces of Kiangsu and Anhui through the unusual floods of this autumn, and request that an advance be made on the Huai River loan account so that the conservancy work may be begun find employment given to the starving people. I also enclose a copy of my answer to the above.

In my answer to Mr. Chang and Mr. Hsu I endeavored to make clear to them the difficulties which, under present general conditions, stand in the way of affording immediate relief in this matter. The terrible calamity which has again come over the Huai River region, however, emphasizes the necessity of carrying through the engineering work, which will not only afford permanent relief but will turn a region now so desolate into one of the richest garden spots in China. The report of the Engineers’ Commission upon this work is so favorable that all doubts with regard to the undertaking, both as to its economic soundness and as to the lasting benefits to be secured, have been dispelled. Should it be possible for the Red Cross Society to prevail upon the bankers in the United States to undertake the furnishing of this loan immediately, so that the work could be commenced, a vast additional benefit would be gained by affording work and relief to the million or more of people who would otherwise be exposed to suffering and death. In thus combining in one enterprise immediate and permanent relief, the purposes of the American Red Cross Society would be achieved in a most striking manner.

I therefore have the honor to request that this matter be communicated to the American Red Cross Society, in order that if possible means may be devised for beginning the work of the Huai River improvement at this time when such enormous benefits would be gained by prompt action. As the work itself has now been shown to be both practicable and beneficial and its ultimate execution would seem to be assured, it would be a matter highly to be regretted if the opportunity to save these people from untold sufferings through a prompt beginning of the work would have to be passed by. Both as a sound business venture and as philanthropy in the best sense of the word, this enterprise is sure to appeal to American men of means and to the American public in general. I have [etc.]

Paul S. Reinsch.

[Inclosure 1—Translation.]

Messrs. Chang Chien and Hsu Tung-lin to Minister Reinsch.

[Undated ; received October 18, 1914]

Sir: In the spring and summer of this year northern Kiangsu and Anhui suffered from drought and the people were reduced to extremities. In the autumn the rain fell continuously day and night for ten days so that water stood over the level ground to a depth of twenty feet. Houses were washed away and innumerable people were drowned. Such a calamity has not occurred for several decades. Husbands and wives have hanged themselves. Nine members of one family hanged themselves. Parents, knowing that they themselves had to die, have tied their children on to wooden doors and let them float off in hope that they might be rescued by someone, and the children have starved to death after floating so for many days. Many such incidents reported wound one’s heart.

Formerly benevolent men of your honorable country helped the people in the stricken regions of Kiangsu and Anhui, and now the American Red Cross Society is contemplating a loan for the conservancy of the Huai River in order to prevent floods. The Chinese people are very grateful for their earnest efforts. But the mere confining of the waters of the Huai River to a deepened channel without improving the channels of the branch streams entering the Huai will not of itself prevent floods. We have already asked you to explain to the American Government the gravity of the present flood in Kiangsu and Anhui, and to ask it to consult with the managers of the Red Cross Society, in view of the extraordinary sufferings of the people, with reference to an advance on the Huai River loan account of $5,000,000 gold to be used in deepening at once the channels of the tributaries of the Huai and I rivers. In this way wages would take the place of alms, the wages paid to one supporting two, so that the afflicted people to the number of over a million might be kept alive. We shall be deeply grateful if this request can be granted. We now enclose a list of the districts affected and a chart of the streams to be deepened, which we ask you to forward to the American Government, so that negotiations may be carried on at once with the directors of the Red Cross Society and the starving people may be saved by giving them work. The merit so acquired would be boundless.

With compliments.

Chang Chien.

Hsu Tung-lin.

[Inclosure 2.]

Minister Reinsch to Messrs. Chang Chien and Hsu Tung-lin.

American Legation,
Peking, October 28, 1914.

Sirs: I desire to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 18th instant, in which you describe the flood and famine conditions in the Provinces of Kiangsu and Anhui. You also ask me to explain to the American Government the gravity of the present situation and to request it to consult with the managers of the Red Cross Society with reference to an advance on the Huai River loan account.

The condition which you describe is indeed so serious and threatens such terrible calamity that I should only consider it my duty to make the utmost efforts in aiding you to devise means for relief. The past interest of the American people and of the American Red Cross Society in the region which is again visited by so severe a misfortune makes it certain that great sympathy will be felt for the sufferers in my country, and that its people will be predisposed to lend their assistance as far as possible.

As you know the American Red Cross Society aims to relieve suffering in all parts of the world. The terrible war which is now devastating Europe has engaged the energies of the Red Cross Society in an effort to relieve the suffering incident thereto; this is a difficult undertaking which is taxing the energies and resources of the American Red Cross Society, and the financial disturbances which accompany the war make it more difficult than ever to get funds even for the most important and worthy objects. All this renders the work of the Society especially difficult at the present time.

I feel every assurance that the American Red Cross Society is continuing to feel a deep interest in the conditions of northern Kiangsu and Anhui. As I have often expressed to you, however, the Society in acting in the matter of the Huai River loan is only exercising its good offices to bring the Chinese Government in touch with the bankers and contractors, whose cooperation is necessary to carry out the great work of the Huai River Conservancy. The American Red Cross Society itself can not raise any money for loans; it can only extend its good offices.

I shall be glad to submit this matter to the American Department of State, asking that the Red Cross Society be informed. However, whether it will be possible to get a large advance on the loan at this time, upon this I can not give you any assurance. The report of the engineers is indeed favorable, and we have every reason to hope for the ultimate success of this great enterprise. But it is almost impossible to get large sums of money for any purpose at the present time; and the bankers may not desire to take up any part of this loan before the entire contract has been definitely settled so that they may be assured that the work will be completely carried out so that the object of this undertaking may be achieved and permanent relief afforded to the entire region.

I have felt it necessary to call your attention to the above difficulties. I shall, however, report the whole situation to my Government and I may assure you that every consideration will be given to this matter both by the American Government and by the American Red Cross Society, so that, if at all possible, a certain amount of relief at least may be afforded in so far as is possible in view of the distress in other parts of the world and of the abnormal financial conditions now prevailing. I have [etc.]

Paul S. Reinsch.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.811/156.

[Document 119]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Peking, November 2, 1914.

Minister of Agriculture and Commerce, in view of the terrible suffering affecting over a million people which is again visiting Huai River region, has asked me to communicate to you the request of the Chinese Government that the American Red Cross use its good offices towards consummating Huai River loan immediately and making an advance so that work of relief may be begun.

Reinsch.

The Acting Secretary of State to the American Red Cross. File No. 893.811/156.

[Document 120]

The Acting Secretary of State to the American Red Cross.

Department of State,
Washington, November 2, 1914.

Sirs: There is enclosed herewith, for your information and for whatever action you may deem appropriate, paraphrase of a telegram received to-day by the Department of State from the American Minister at Peking regarding the need for immediate relief work in the Huai River region.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch. File No. 893.811/158.

[Document 121]

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

No. 197.] Department of State,
Washington, November 13, 1914.

Sir: Referring to your telegram of November 2, and in reply thereto, there are enclosed herewith two copies of a letter dated November 10, 1914, to the Department of State from the American Red Cross relating to the Huai River Conservancy project and two copies of a letter dated October 31, 1914, to the Chinese Minister here from the Red Cross on the same subject. You will in your discretion communicate the substance of the enclosed letters to the Chinese Government.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

[Inclosure.]

The Chairman of the Central Committee of the American National Red Cross to the Secretary of State.

American Red Cross, National Headquarters,
Washington, November 10, 1914.

Sir: Receipt is hereby acknowledged of your favor of November 2, transmitting paraphrase of a telegram received on the same date by the State Department from the American Minister at Peking, regarding the need for immediate relief work in the Huai River region in China. It is also noted that the telegram itself expresses the hope of the Minister of Agriculture and Commerce of China that the American Red Cross will use its good offices toward consummating the Huai River loans immediately, so as to furnish employment and relief for those who are now suffering from the floods.

On the 30th of October the Red Cross received from the Chinese Minister in Washington a request of somewhat similar import to the one transmitted from Peking by the American Minister, and on the following day we replied to his excellency, the Chinese Minister, as per the copy herewith. This gives a review of the present financial situation touching the proposed loan which will be necessary to realize the expectations of China, and I hand it to you as the best reply we can now make to the suggestion of the Minister of Commerce and Agriculture in Peking.

The Red Cross has not failed to keep in close touch with the banking element in the United States who, should Chinese bonds be offered, would necessarily be concerned in their placing, and we are satisfied that at the present time it would not be possible to obtain from reliable bankers in the United States an underwriting of such an amount—estimated at thirty million dollars ($30,000,000)—as would be required to execute the proposed works.

Geo. W. Davis.

[Subinclosure.]

The Chairman of the Central Committee of the American National Red Cross to the Chinese Minister.

American Red Cross, National Headquarters,
Washington, October 31, 1914.

My Dear Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 30th instant, in which you mention receipt of the text of the report of the Board of Engineers which I had the honor to submit to your excellency on October 28th. I also note that you are ready to take up with Miss Boardman the question of the placing of the loan, in the issuance of which the Red Cross has undertaken to exercise its good offices with the American bankers.

Until the full report, with all requisite maps, is completed and published, it will be impossible to obtain the opinion of bankers upon the underwriting of the Chinese bonds that must be issued, for they will certainly wish to have the advice of their own consulting engineers respecting the feasibility of the undertaking and the value of the assigned revenue.

Respecting this presentation of the business to the bankers we are embarrassed, in deciding whether or not in submitting the report proper we should also make known the opinion that the Minister of Agriculture and Commerce of China has expressed as to a feature of the design of the board that must be adhered to, if the revenue assigned for the service of the bonds shall have any adequate positive value.

As at present advised, and until it is known whether your excellency’s Government adopts or rejects the view of the Minister of Commerce, we are inclined to submit to the bankers only the report proper, for if the expressed opinion of Mr. Chang Chien (which it is felt might properly be considered as inopportune, since he has not seen the official report) were submitted to the bankers, we do not believe the project would receive a moment’s consideration.

We are expediting the completion of the maps, etc., so that there may be a full presentation of the project at the earliest possible moment, of the result of which you will receive timely advices.

Your excellency will not be surprised to learn that we fear the present disturbed condition of the world’s finances—due to the European war, which also involves to some degree the Orient—makes the attempt to place at this time any large loan, for any purpose, anywhere in the world, most inopportune. We fear that we will be told that until the warring nations are all at peace, and the territory of China shall no longer be involved in this world warfare, the bankers will be unable to place the bonds required for this great work of Chinese internal improvement, in which accomplishment the Red Cross has a purely philanthropic interest, an interest that China has already recognized and commended.

It is true that the period of time within which the Red Cross was given by China certain exclusive rights to develop the project and negotiate for funds is drawing to a close, but when these obligations to further the interests of China with respect to this conservancy project were assumed by the Red Cross, no one had in mind the possibility that before the expiration of the period allowed all but one of the great powers of the world, and some of the lesser, would be engaged in the greatest conflict that has ever occurred in the history of mankind, a convulsion that is so colossal in magnitude and so far-reaching in its effects upon commerce, industry, and finance that disturbed conditions everywhere have taken the place of system, method and stability. But these conditions must, sooner or later, come to an end, and when they are normal we believe that the means may be found for financing the proposed Chinese loan, if the project has the unqualified indorsement of China; and the Red Cross will always be ready to lend its aid in accomplishing the result we all desire. Of course, China can insist on holding literally to the terms of the optional agreement, which, as to time, will expire within a few months.

The United States is the only one of the great world powers that is not a party to the present conflict, and, fortunately, is possessed of large financial resources, so that when the conflict is ended America will soonest be ready to finance such an enterprise as the Huai River Conservancy.

If China should regard the promised good offices of the American Red Cross as an asset of value after the termination of the period specified in the provisional agreement of last February, it would be very satisfactory for us to know this as soon as practicable, for our interest in this great humanitarian work is unabated and we wish to leave nothing undone, now and hereafter, that might contribute to the desired result.

I have [etc.]

Geo. W. Davis.

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch. File No. 893.811/166.

[Document 122]

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

Department of State,
Washington, December 11, 1914.

Sir: Receipt is acknowledged of your despatch No. 424 of October 28, 1914, with enclosures, regarding flood conditions in the Provinces of Kiangsu and Anhui and the need for an immediate loan in order that the proposed conservancy work may be begun.

The substance of your despatch and of the enclosures has been given to the press.

In this connection the Department invites your attention to its No. 197 of November 13, 1914, to you, transmitting two copies of a letter dated November 10, 1914, to the Department from the American Red Cross and two copies of a letter dated October 31, 1914, from the Red Cross to the Chinese Minister here.

Copies of the despatch under acknowledgment and of its enclosures have been sent to the Red Cross for its information.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The Secretary of State to the American National Red Cross. File No. 893.811/166.

[Document 123]

The Secretary of State to the American National Red Cross.

Department of State,
Washington, December 11, 1914.

Gentlemen: There is enclosed herewith for your information copies of despatch No. 424 of October 28, 1914, from Peking, and of its enclosures, relating to flood conditions in the Provinces of Kiangsu and Anhui in China and the need for beginning work on the Huai River conservancy project. In acknowledging receipt to the Minister at Peking of this despatch the Department called attention to its No. 197 of November 13, 1914, transmitting copies of a letter from you to the Department, dated November 10, 1914, and from you to the Chinese Minister here, dated October 31, 1914, showing the situation with reference to the proposed conservancy loan.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The Chairman of the Central Committee of the American National Red Cross to the Secretary of State. File 893.811/167.

[Document 124]

The Chairman of the Central Committee of the American National Red Cross to the Secretary of State.

American Red Cross, National Headquarters,
Washington, December 19, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of December 11, 1914, transmitting copies of dispatch No. 424, of October 28, 1914, from Peking, and its inclosures, relating to flood conditions in the Provinces of Kiangsu and Anhui, in China.

We have read the correspondence referred to and have also received a number of letters from missionaries and other residents of the famine regions in China, all giving most distressing pictures of the existing situation. We have also read the correspondence between the American Minister at Peking and His Excellency Chang Chien and Hsu Tung-lin.

The Minister of Agriculture and Commerce of China, in his memorandum presented to the American Minister in a letter42 received October 18, 1914, refers to a contemplated loan to be procured by the Red Cross for the conservancy of the Huai River to prevent floods, and his excellency asks the American Minister to consult with the Red Cross with a view to an advance on the Huai River loan account of $5,000,000 gold, to be used in deepening at once certain river channels, so that wages may be paid and suffering prevented among those who are afflicted by famine.

In my letter to the Department of November 10, 1914, I had the honor to inclose a copy of a letter addressed on the 31st of October by the undersigned to the Chinese Minister in this city, and both these letters the Department forwarded, on November 13, 1914, to the American Minister at Peking.

At the time the Minister wrote his dispatch No. 424 of course he was not in possession of the facts and conditions existing in America, quite fully set forth in my letter to the Chinese Minister of the 31st of October which has before been adverted to. Having received these communications, the Minister will have received what practically amounts to a reply to his dispatch of October 28.

Since the return to America of the Board of Engineers sent to China to study the Huai River conservancy, and the submittal of their report, the Red Cross has not failed to take counsel with financiers or high repute and standing, and who are in very close touch with European finance, respecting the placing of a Chinese loan such as would be required to carry out the works projected by the Board of Engineers of which Colonel Sibert was Chairman. I am very sorry to say that we have received absolutely no encouragement whatever that would lead to a conclusion in any way contrary to the opinion I had the honor to express to the Chinese Minister on the 31st of October.

We have also taken counsel with one of the great philanthropic agencies of America that has large means available for humanitarian, philanthropic and scientific application [the Rockefeller Foundation] and have endeavored to enlist its efforts in relief of the suffering in China. But up to the present time we have received no encouragement whatever that should justify us in promising any advance of funds such as his excellency, Mr. Chang Chien, suggested, or any other sum of lesser amount.

The optional agreement, dated January 31, 1914, between the Chinese Government and Dr. Paul S. Reinsch as representing the American National Red Cross, conceded to the Red Cross one year from the date last stated within which time we should have exclusive rights of placing this matter before financiers with a view to the execution of the works that might be required to carry out the engineering project. The expiration of that period is now close at hand, and the Central Committee of the American Red Cross regrets to say that it can hold out no encouragement that the object sought to be accomplished by the agreement between the Red Cross and China can be realized within the period of time allowed by the agreement for the option.

At the last meeting of the Central Committee, held a few days since, a special committee was appointed to frame the notification that should be sent to the Government of China respecting the accomplishment of the purposes for which the agreement was made. At a meeting of that committee to-day the Chairman of the Central Committee was instructed to request the Department of State to telegraph to the American Minister at Peking in substance as follows: Engineer’s report indicates Huai River project entirely practicable but war conditions make impossible now to negotiate loan or contract or obtain advance of funds for immediate use. Does China desire continued interest of Red Cross in working out project, which assistance Red Cross will be glad to render as soon as world conditions improve? If so, formal extension of exclusive option to Red Cross desirable, which extension, if conceded by China, Red Cross would be glad to have arranged by the American Minister at Peking. Two hundred copies of final report of Board of Engineers with maps will be forwarded to China within a week.

The Red Cross asks that the American Minister at Peking communicate to the Government of China the information contained in the proposed telegram, and the assurance of the Red Cross of its sincere regret that the prospects of a successful floating of the loan, which looked so favorable in the spring, should be entirely reversed by the European war.

George W. Davis.

42 Inclosure 1 with Mr. Reinsch’s No. 424 of October 28.

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch. File No. 893.811/167.

[Document 125]

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 22, 1914.

Your despatch No. 424 of October 28.

The engineers’ report indicates Huai River project entirely practicable, but war conditions make impossible now to negotiate loan or contract or obtain advance of funds for immediate use, which Red Cross sincerely regrets. Does China desire continued interest of Red Cross in working out project, which assistance Red Cross will be glad to render as soon as world conditions improve? If so, formal extension of exclusive option to Red Cross desirable. If extension conceded by China, Red Cross would be glad to have it arranged by the American Minister. Two hundred copies of the final report of the Board of Engineers with maps will be forwarded to China within a week.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the Central Committee of the American National Red Cross. File No. 893.811/167.

[Document 126]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the Central Committee of the American National Red Cross.

Department of State,
Washington, December 23, 1914.

Sir: Receipt is acknowledged of your letter of December 19, 1914, giving the views of the Red Cross on the proposed advance of $5,000,000 on the Huai River loan.

Pursuant to the suggestion of the Central Committee of the Red Cross, the Department sent a telegram to the American Minister at Peking on December 22, 1914, a paraphrase of which is herewith enclosed for your information, setting forth the views of the Committee on the loan.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Taxation of foreigners. New stamp tax. Interpretation of the Treaty of 1903 in relation to Chinese internal taxes and to the status of treaty portsTaxation of foreigners. New stamp tax. Interpretation of the Treaty of 1903 in relation to Chinese internal taxes and to the status of treaty ports

[127] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, March 10, 1914.

File No. 893.512/31.

[128] The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

Department of State, Washington, May 4, 1914.

File No. 893.512/31.

[129] The Chinese Minister to the Secretary of State.

Chinese Legation, Washington, May 12, 1914.

File No. 893.512/32.

[130] The Secretary of State to the Chinese Minister.

Department of State, Washington, May 15, 1914.

File No. 893.572/32.

[131] Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, July 20, 1914.

File No. 893.512/36.

[132] The Secretary of State to Chargé MacMurray.

Department of State, Washington, July 21, 1914.

File No. 893.512/36.

[133] Consul Williams to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Nanking, August 8, 1914.

File No. 893.512/38.

[134] Consul Williams to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Nanking, August 13, 1914.

File No. 893.811/39.

[135] Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, September 12, 1914.

File No. 893.512/40.

[136] The Secretary of State to Consul Williams.

Department of State, Washington, September 23, 1914.

File No. 893.512/38.

[137] The Secretary of State to Chargé MacMurray.

Department of State, Washington, September 30, 1914.

File No. 893.512/39.

[138] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

Department of State, Washington, October 23, 1914.

File No. 893.522/40.

[139] Consul Williams to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Nanking, November 23, 1914.

File No. 893.512/42.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.512/31.

[Document 127]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

No. 149.] American Legation,
Peking, March 10, 1914.

Sir: With reference to the Department’s instruction No. 685 of December 22, 1909,43 which was in reply to the Legation’s despatch No. 1287 of November 8, 1909,43 and to Mr. Calhoun’s No. 660 dated November 11, 1912,43 with which was enclosed a translation of the law regulating the imposition of the stamp tax, I have the honor to report that in reply to the note of the Wai Chiao Pu, cited in Diplomatic Circular No. 210, copy of which is enclosed,43 the Diplomatic Body on the 17th ultimo decided to send a collective note in the form contained in Diplomatic Circular No. 39, hereto annexed.43 This collective note was forwarded to the Foreign Office on February 28.

Under the terms of this note, the Ministers of the Powers here represented are now referring the question of the stamp tax law to their respective Governments for instructions.

In its instruction No. 685 of December 22, 1909, the Department took the position that the stamp tax law, in the form then proposed, * * * would in effect constitute an extra charge on foreign goods, in contravention of Articles XI and XII of the Japanese Treaty of 1896.44

In the Legation’s despatch No. 660 above mentioned, which deals with the law in its present form, the American Minister, William J. Calhoun, Esquire, takes the position that, * * * if the burden is not too heavy, then in view of China’s great need of additional revenue and of the further fact that other countries, including our own, do impose or have imposed similar taxes, it is a question whether or not in fairness to China the foreigners ought to object to these taxes. This, however, is only a matter of first impression.

In asking for the instructions of the Department in this matter, I have the honor to submit the following considerations:

The treaty between the United States and China concluded in 1903,45 after making provisions for the eventual abandonment of likin in return for a surtax to be imposed upon foreign goods imported and on Chinese produce destined for export, makes the following reservation, which does not occur in any other treaty of a foreign power with China: Nothing in this article [IV] is intended to interfere with the inherent right of China to levy such other taxes as are not in conflict with its provisions.

An interchange of notes accompanying the conclusion of this treaty contains the following statement made by the Chinese Commissioners (vide Customs collection of “Treaties between China and Foreign States,” Volume I, p. 553): In our discussions we have on several occasions insisted that this treaty should embody the provisions contained in the revised British Commercial Treaty recognizing the right of China to collect consumption duty and excise duty, and also her right to levy production duty in order to make good the duty which would have been leviable on goods in transit by the native customhouses inland, now abolished. While you have not agreed to embody these provisions in your treaty, you have constantly replied that the United States has no intention of limiting in this treaty the sovereign rights of China excepting as specified therein.

It was our intention to write a dispatch to be an annex to the treaty specially affirming the right of China to levy the taxes mentioned above. However, you have at our urgent request inserted in the 4th article of this treaty a very broadly worded clause as follows: “Nothing in this article is intended to interfere with the inherent right of China to levy such other taxes as are not in conflict with its provisions.”

This more completely covers the ground than such a dispatch would have done. We therefore only desire now to state again that China reserves her right to levy any and all taxes, provided only that they do not conflict with the provisions of our treaty with you.

To which the American Commissioners replied as follows: In framing this treaty we have endeavored to recognize the right of China as a sovereign state to levy such taxes as are not in conflict with the provisions of this treaty, which is intended to extend the commercial relations between, and promote the best interests of, the people of the two countries. With this end in view, we inserted at your request in Article IV the clause, “Nothing in this article is intended to interfere with the inherent right of China to levy such other taxes as are not in conflict with its provisions.” We, with your excellencies, appreciate the fact that this clause is comprehensive and conserves to the fullest extent the sovereign rights of China except as specified in this treaty.

It seems, therefore, that in these negotiations and in their result, the Government of the United States intended to acknowledge completely China’s sovereign rights of taxation in so far as they were not specifically limited by the terms of the treaty itself; that is, in so far as they did not affect taxation of imports and exports. The treaty does not claim for American citizens the total exemption from all charges provided for by Article XL of the French Treaty of Tientsin of 1858, to the effect that “it is understood that any obligation not admitted expressly in the present convention shall not be imposed upon [French] consuls or consular agents nor upon their nationals.”

The question now arises whether, by the admission of the sovereign rights of taxation contained in Article IV of the Treaty of 1903, the American Government has foregone, in behalf of its citizens, the extensions by means of the most-favored-nation clause of the exemption contained in the French Treaty of 1858.

Considerations of justice and equity would favor the claim of the Chinese Government to the right to impose the stamp tax on commercial papers if reasonable in amount; and this form of taxation is one that, while it does import a certain inconvenience to commerce, is nevertheless in accord with approved fiscal methods. In order to have contracts or other commercial papers respected as valid and in force, foreigners must rely upon the courts of the Chinese Government whenever Chinese citizens are concerned. It would seem to be a justifiable exercise of China’s sovereignty to prescribe the general conditions of validity of contracts and of their enforcibility in courts, so long as there would be no attempt to make rules unduly harassing to commerce or unfavorable to foreign merchants. To ask the Chinese Government for the use of its courts and of its legal protection while refusing to contribute to the maintenance of that Government any charges except the small import and export duties would certainly not seem to be an attitude consonant with a respect for the rights of the Chinese Government and nation.

The tendency to interpret the extraterritoriality of foreigners in China as implying entire exemption from all duties ordinarily imposed by sovereign governments upon persons residing within their territory is certainly not in accord with equity nor with sound policy. Were the position taken by the Government of the United States in the Treaty of 1903 to be generally accepted by the Powers, it would be possible for the Chinese Government gradually, in a measure as its efficiency increased, to develop its just powers of sovereignty throughout the Republic. But by construing extraterritoriality as implying an absolute exemption, the current international practice in China stands in the way of the development of an efficient and adequate government.

On the other hand, it is unquestionably true that were the just rights of foreigners not carefully guarded, they would often be subjected to burdens of impositions, unjust and intolerable. As long as the whole question is dealt with on the basis of the outside nations trying to enforce absolute immunity of their nationals, the Chinese, on the other hand, will not be free from a desire to take advantage of every opportunity offered, regardless of principle, to get the better of the foreigner. This situation can be remedied only if due recognition, under severe tests of efficiency, is given to the efforts of the Chinese Government to reform and improve the methods of governmental business. Such recognition can come only by allowing the exercise of the sovereign powders of China, where such exercise seems reasonable and just according to the general principles of government practiced by the nations of the world.

Should the Department be of the opinion that the Chinese Government should be accorded the right of imposing a stamp tax, as far as American citizens are involved, this recognition could either be limited to the principle that whenever proof of a document may be eventually necessary in a Chinese court, it must bear the required stamps; or it might be accompanied by a regulation affecting the United States Court for China and the consular courts to the effect that, for instance, “No document liable to stamp duty under the Chinese law, to which this Government has assented, shall be received as creating, transferring or extinguishing any right or obligation, or as evidence in any civil procedure unless such document is stamped according to said Chinese law.” This arrangement could be carried out through a regulation to be made by the American Minister under Section 4086 of the Revised Statutes of the United States. Should the Department decide, on principle, to support the exercise of sovereign power by China, in this matter, the discussion of minor items in the bill which might be found unduly onerous by American merchants in China, if any such objection there be, might still be reserved for further reference to you; and the time for communicating to the Chinese Government the support of the United States in this matter might be fixed in accordance with convenience determined by other negotiations and with some reference to the action of the other Powers.

On the basis of the facts and considerations as reported, I have the honor to ask for your instructions.

I have [etc.]

Paul S. Reinsch.

43 Not printed.

43 Not printed.

43 Not printed.

43 Not printed.

43 Not printed.

44 Treaty of commerce and navigation between China and Japan; signed July 21, 1896; Article XI. It shall be at the option of any Japanese subject desiring to convey duly imported articles to an inland market to clear his goods of all transit duties by payment of a commutation transit tax or duty equal to one half of the import duty in reject of dutiable articles, and two and a half per cent upon the value in respect of duty-free articles; and on payment thereof a certificate shall be issued which shall exempt the goods from all further inland charges whatsoever. It is understood that this Article does not apply to imported opium.

Article XII. All Chinese goods and produce purchased by Japanese subjects in China elsewhere than at an open port thereof, and intended for export abroad, shall in every part of China be freed from all taxes, imposts, duties, likin, charges, and exactions of every nature and kind whatsoever, saving only export duties when exported, upon the payment of a commutation transit tax or duty calculated at the rate mentioned in the last preceding Article, substituting export duty for import duty, provided such goods and produce are actually exported to a foreign country within the period of twelve months from the date of the payment of the transit tax; all Chinese goods and produce purchased by Japanese subjects at the open ports of China, and of which export to foreign countries is not prohibited, shall be exempt from all internal taxes, imposts, duties, likin, charges, and exactions of every nature and kind whatsoever, saving only export duties upon exportation; and all articles purchased by Japanese subjects in any part of China may also, for the purposes of export abroad, be transported from open port to open port, subject to the existing Rules and Regulations.

[Translation contained in “Treaties between China and Foreign States,” 2d edition, vol. ii, p. 609.]

45  For. Rel. 1903, p. 91.

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch. File No. 893.512/31.

[Document 128]

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

No. 90.] Department of State,
Washington, May 4, 1914.

Sir: The Department is in receipt of your despatch No. 149 of March 10, 1914, enclosing translation of the new Chinese stamp-tax law. Your observations on the subject have been read with interest.

The Department is of opinion that a stamp-tax upon bills of lading, shipping company’s receipts, consignee’s receipts and other documents relating to imported or exported goods is technically a contravention of the letter of the treaties since the stamp duty will slightly increase the tariff duty, but the Department does not believe that the treaty commissioners, when stipulating that the payment of import duties and commutation transit tax or half-duty should exempt the goods from all further inland charges whatsoever and that “exports having paid transit tax should be exempt from all internal taxes, imposts, duties, likin, charges and exactions of every nature and kind whatsover saving only export duties,” had in mind the levy of a stamp duty upon the shipping papers, but referred only to duties under a variety of names upon the goods themselves.

This Government is, therefore, disposed to consent to the collection of these taxes from American citizens, provided the other foreign governments assent to the tax.

In the event that the other treaty powers consent, you will, in accordance with the suggestions made in your despatch under acknowledgment, endeavor to secure such a revision of the regulations as may seem advisable to make them more acceptable to American citizens in China. In notifying the Chinese Government of this Government’s assent in principle to the proposed taxes, it should be stipulated that they shall not be increased beyond the rates fixed in the proposed tariff of stamp duties without the consent of this Government.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The Chinese Minister to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.512/32.

[Document 129]

The Chinese Minister to the Secretary of State.

No. 5.] Chinese Legation,
Washington, May 12, 1914.

Sir: In pursuance of instructions from my Government, I have the honor to bring to your notice and consideration the question of payment on the part of foreign residents in China of the stamp tax imposed by Chinese law.

This law was passed by the National Assembly of the Republic in October, 1912, and duly promulgated by the President of the Republic. It went into effect in Peking on March 1, 1913, and in the Provinces thirty days after the receipt of the official notification from the Ministry of Finance. The operation of the law has been gradually extended to the treaty ports, so far as Chinese residents at those ports are concerned. But foreigners residing in China have not yet been required to pay the tax.

Last year at the request of the Ministry of Finance, which ruled that on all legal and commercial documents used by foreigners in business transactions with Chinese merchants the required stamps should be affixed, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs communicated to the Representatives of the Foreign Powers at Peking, through the Dean of the Diplomatic Corps at that capital, copies of the Stamp Law and Regulations for their information, with the view of securing general compliance with the law on the part of foreigners in China. The foreign representatives, however, replied in a joint note that they would have to refer the matter to their respective Governments for consideration.

I am instructed, therefore, by my Government to ask your Government for an expression of views on this subject, in the hope that the United States will lend the weight of its influence with its nationals residing in China in favor of their compliance with the law as well as with the other Governments towards a speedy and satisfactory settlement of the question. Any assistance which the United States may give to China in this direction will be gratifying to, and appreciated by, my Government.

Accept [etc.]

Kai Fu Shah.

The Secretary of State to the Chinese Minister. File No. 893.572/32.

[Document 130]

The Secretary of State to the Chinese Minister.

No. 15.] Department of State,
Washington, May 15, 1914.

Sir: In reply to your note of May 12, 1914, regarding the payment by foreign residents in China of the stamp tax imposed by Chinese law, I have the honor to inform you that on May 4, 1914, the Department, in response to an inquiry from the American Legation at Peking as to the attitude this Government would assume toward the collection of the stamp tax from American citizens, advised the Legation that it was disposed to consent in principle to the stamp tax, provided the other foreign Governments assented, and directed the Minister to endeavor to secure such a revision of the regulations as might seem advisable to make them more acceptable to American citizens in China and to stipulate, in notifying the Chinese Government of this Government’s assent, that the tax should not be increased beyond the rates fixed in the proposed tariff of stamp duties without the consent of this Government.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.512/36.

[Document 131]

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Peking, July 20, 1914.

There have recently been brought to the attention of the Legation numerous instances of illegal levy of inland taxes in Chekiang, Kiangsu, Anhui, involving the following questions:

First. Levy of likin within open ports.

Second. Levy of likin by private organizations to which the collection has been farmed out.

Third. Specific discrimination against certain American products in the tariff of charges levied under the conditions above indicated; an American consignment is reported as seized at Nantao on the 16th instant for refusal to pay increased likin taxes under the circumstances.

Fourth. Levy of likin upon goods covered by transit passes. Fifth. Levy of consumption taxes on transit pass goods at destination.

Sixth. Imposition of a special consumption tax specifically upon foreign goods brought into the interior under transit passes, which tax is moreover calculated on the basis of the likin and consumption taxes payable on goods brought in without such protection.

Chekiang Lo Ti Chuan regulations, which came into effect last October and are now being enforced in Anhui and Kiangsu, involve discriminations indicated in the last above category against goods seeking to avail themselves of the protection provided by treaties. In spite of the repeated protests of British Legation, which have been otherwise completely ignored, the taxes have been twice increased and the Governor of Chekiang has been commended by presidential mandate for his successful administration of taxation. Concurrently with the British, the Legation on the 17th instant asked the Foreign Office for the cancellation of the Chekiang regulations.

In discussions involving the first, second and fifth categories above, the Foreign Office has manifested a disposition to yield nothing to the contentions of the treaty powers, as to the effect of the treaty stipulations in regard to the commutation of and exemption from inland taxation. It seems evident that the Central Government is countenancing, if not in fact abetting, subversion of even the most explicit rights in the matter of inland taxation granted by treaty, and may therefore be expected to follow a line of obduracy and evasion in dealing with both the long-standing questions in dispute and those which are now of first importance.

I beg to request, therefore, that the Legation be authorized in that event, and in its discretion, to advise the Minister for Foreign Affairs that, failing scrupulous observance by the Chinese Government of its treaty obligations, the American Government cannot feel itself justified in the interests of its citizens in assenting to forego any of its treaty rights in the closely connected matters of the proposed stamp tax (Department’s instruction Number 90 of May 4th); and that our Government might even find itself eventually forced to reconsider approval already given by it under the Department’s telegram December 17,46 to the Chinese proposal for revision of tariff.

MacMurray.

46 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to Chargé MacMurray. File No. 893.512/36.

[Document 132]

The Secretary of State to Chargé MacMurray.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 21, 1914.

Your July 20. Your suggestion regarding stamp tax approved; but statement to Foreign Office should contain no reference to tariff revision.

Bryan.

Consul Williams to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.512/38.

[Document 133]

Consul Williams to the Secretary of State.

No. 6.] American Consulate,
Nanking, August 8, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose a copy of my despatch No. 5 of August 7th, 1914, addressed to the American Legation at Peking, respecting the collection of likin at Hsiakuan, the area set apart by the Chinese for foreign trade and residence.

I have [etc.]

C. L. L. Williams.

[Inclosure.]

Consul Williams to Chargé MacMurray.

No. 5.] American Consulate,
Nanking, August 7, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose a copy of a communication46 received from the local agency of the Standard Oil Company of New York complaining of the likin collections at Hsiakuan.

It is believed that this matter will be self explanatory, and it will be seen that it raises two separate issues: first, the outstanding dispute as to whether or not Nanking is open to foreign trade as a treaty port; and second, whether or not the Chinese may stultify the opening of a port by the collection of likin on every package of merchandise leaving the area set apart for foreign trade and residence.

A reference to the sketch enclosed in the company’s letter shows that its installation is on the Island of Hsiakuan, and is therefore within the area which, the Chinese allege, constitutes the port of Nanking. To transport merchandise into the city two routes are available, via a system of creeks to the Han Hsi Gate, and by road through the I Feng Gate. On each route is a likin station which levies a tax on goods passing in or out. If the contention of the foreign treaty powers be adopted, i. e. that Nanking itself is an open port—as clearly stated by treaty—there can be no doubt that the collection of likin on goods en route between Hsiakuan and the city is a violation of treaty stipulations. Unfortunately, it is more than likely that the likin stations of which complaint is made were instituted by the Chinese with the object of emphasizing the fact that they do not regard the city of Nanking as a treaty port. As this question is one of some years standing, which has already been discussed from every possible point of view, I have no hope of being able to remedy locally the abuses of which complaint is made, and, while representations will be made to the provincial authorities, it is believed that the only chance for a settlement favorable to foreign interests lies in pressure on the Central Government by the Diplomatic Body. I am informed that the British and German Ministers have made representations on this subject recently.

The second point mentioned raises a much broader and less clearly defined issue. As has been stated likin is collected on all goods destined for Nanking city, and, incidentally, for other points to the south. The only other direction in which merchandise can be moved from Hsiakuan is via the Hui Min Creek to the Yangtze, and in point of fact the only important point to which the merchandise is moved—apart from the city itself—is Pukow. The Chinese authorities have established apparently a likin station on the east bank of this creek—see sketch plan—within the area admitted by them to be the open port, and collect there likin on all merchandise passing. “Apparently” is used advisedly as the Standard Oil Company states it has suspicions of the legality of the collection. It may prove possible to obtain the abolition of this station on the ground either that it is illegitimately established or that it is within the settlement area.

But it is felt that the authorities should not be permitted to establish likin stations on all the boundaries of any settlement or settlement area, as thereby they stultify the whole object of an open port and, in effect, increase the import duty to the extent of the likin collected. It appears to be an absurdity that the payment of import duty should free goods only to the wharf or go-down and that when moved to any market in any direction they should be compelled to pay an additional exaction.

I venture to suggest that the company be directed to refuse payment of this latter tax, and that the matter be taken up with the Chinese authorities along the lines indicated in the preceding paragraph; the possible illegitimacy of the station and its establishment within the settlement are being raised as minor issues only.

I have the honor to request the Legation’s instructions in the premises. A copy of this despatch has been forwarded to the Department of State.

I have [etc.]

C. L. L. Williams.

46 Not printed.

Consul Williams to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.811/39.

[Document 134]

Consul Williams to the Secretary of State.

No. 10.] American Consulate,
Nanking, August 13, 1914.

Sir: For the information of the Department, I have the honor to enclose herewith a copy of my despatch No. 6, dated August 11, 1914, to the American Legation at Peking, regarding the proposal of the Anhui provincial authorities to collect a consumption tax on liquor and tobacco.

I have [etc.]

C. L. L. Williams.

[Inclosure.]

Consul Williams to Chargé MacMurray.

No. 6.] American Consulate,
Nanking, August 11, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose a copy of a communication from the Anhui provincial authorities giving notice of a proposed tax on alcoholic beverages and tobacco. It appears that this tax is to be levied and collected on the sale of the commodities concerned, and is additional to the collection of a licensing fee from the dealers. Indeed no attempt has been made to disguise this tax under the name of a licensing fee, as has been done in some other ports of China, and it should be noted that the avowed objects of the tax are not only to raise revenue but to penalize a trade the legitimacy of which has never before been questioned, and which has received the formal sanction of the Government by inclusion in the conventional tariff.

While it is not believed that any American interests are directly involved, the measure appears to be such a flagrant violation of treaty, in so far as it authorizes the collection of a tax in a treaty port on foreign imported goods, that I propose to protest vigorously against it, unless otherwise instructed by the Legation.

If the tax is uniformly enforced against native as well as foreign goods, it is difficult to find any effective grounds for protest in the case of shipments into the interior without the protection of a transit pass. But it should be remembered that the authorities do not admit that a transit pass frees goods from the collection of “loti shui,” a species of which they appear to consider this new tax to be; on the other hand it is commonly reported that goods which pay likin are frequently freed from the payment of “loti shui.” It is therefore morally certain that an attempt will be made to collect the proposed tax on goods shipped into the interior under transit pass.

To show the extent to which the violation, under the guise of “loti shui,” of the treaty exemption from inland taxation of goods covered by transit pass has been carried by the Anhui authorities, I submit copies of correspondence46 between the Wuhu agency of the Standard Oil Company and this office, reporting an attempt to collect this tax on goods destined for points without the province; in other words, the fiction that “loti shui” is a local tax collected at the point of destination was permitted to give way for a space to the truth, that it is simply likin, or a duty on internal trade, under another name and collected in a slightly different way in order to avoid an open breach of the treaty obligation to respect transit passes. As will be seen from the correspondence, the goods held at the border have been released, thanks to the intervention of the British Consul at Wuhu.

This matter is cited here, as it is believed that the proposed tax on liquor and tobacco is but a part of a general scheme to tax foreign trade in Anhui. Its enforcement in Wuhu would be, I believe, the first time an attempt has been made to collect a consumption, destination or similar tax in a treaty port.

It is hoped that sufficient pressure may be brought to bear in Peking to secure the issuance of such a reprimand or such instructions as may cause the Anhui authorities to respect China’s treaty obligations. I have [etc.]

C. L. L. Williams.

46 Not printed.

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.512/40.

[Document 135]

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

No. 366.] American Legation,
Peking, September 12, 1914.

Sir: With reference to the note of the Wuhu Commissioner for Foreign Affairs, transmitting to the American Consul at Nanking certain regulations with regard to the proposed imposition of a tax on tobacco and wines in the Province of Anhui, which correspondence was forwarded by Mr. Williams to the Legation in his dispatch No. 6 of August 11th, a copy of which it is understood was sent to the Department, I have the honor to enclose a copy of the Consul’s reply to the note of the Wuhu Commissioner for Foreign Affairs (sent under instructions from the Legation); also a copy of a similar protest addressed by the Legation to the Foreign Office. I have the honor to request such instructions in the matter as the Department may consider appropriate.

I have [etc.]

J. V. A. MacMurray.

[Inclosure 1.]

Consul Williams to the Wuhu Commissioner for Foreign Affairs.

No. 370.] American Consulate,
Nanking, [not dated].

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your despatch of the 8th instant, stating that, in addition to the collection of a licensing fee from dealers in foreign tobacco and alcoholic liquors, the Provincial Government of Anhui proposes to collect a consumption tax of 2½ per cent on the sale of these commodities within the treaty port, of Wuhu and throughout the interior of the province, with the dual object of increasing the revenue and of restricting the trades concerned.

I find that the treaties in force between China and the foreign powers prescribe a definite tariff on foreign merchandise imported into the treaty ports of China, and further authorize the issue of transit passes against the payment of extra half duty to free foreign goods so imported of any further dues or duties on transportation into the interior. The revised import tariff annexed to the Commercial Treaty of 1903 between the United States and China states in detail the duty to be paid on imported cigars, cigarettes, tobacco, wines and other alcoholic liquors. The effect of the taxes now proposed by the Provincial Government would be to increase the import duty authorized by treaty by over one half, and this Consulate, therefore, cannot consent to the collection of the proposed tax from American dealers or on American products, it being a clear violation of treaty.

I desire to point out further that the legality of the trades concerned has never been questioned, and has been admitted clearly by China by the inclusion in the import tariff of specified duties on the commodities concerned. This Consulate cannot admit the right of the Provincial authorities to impose any tax on legitimate foreign trade with the object of penalizing or restricting that trade.

In addition to reporting the contents of your despatch under acknowledgment to the American Legation at Peking for its information and such action as it may consider advisable, I am forwarding this reply in the hope that appropriate steps may be taken by the Anhui authorities to cancel the proposed regulations, thereby conforming to treaty engagements.

I have [etc.]

C. L. L. Williams.

[Inclosure 2.]

Chargé MacMurray to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

No. 216.] American Legation,
Peking, September 4, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to call your excellency’s attention to the regulations recently issued by the Governor of Anhui imposing a special tax on imported tobacco and wines. Since tobacco and wines are included in the tariff appended to the treaties, the Chinese Government has agreed that no taxes other than those provided for in the treaties shall be imposed upon them. The regulations recently issued in Anhui are therefore clearly illegal in so far as they apply to imported tobacco and wines, and I trust that orders will be issued at once to modify the regulations to bring them in accordance with treaty stipulations. If your excellency’s Government wishes to propose to my Government a modification of the treaty regulations which may allow special treatment to be given to tobacco and wines I shall be glad to transmit the proposal for the consideration of my Government. When two parties have entered into an agreement it is not proper for one to change arbitrarily the methods of procedure before there has been mutual consultation and mutual consent.

I avail [etc.]

J. V. A. MacMurray.

The Secretary of State to Consul Williams. File No. 893.512/38.

[Document 136]

The Secretary of State to Consul Williams.

No. 7.] Department of State,
Washington, September 23, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your despatch No. 6 of August 8th enclosing a copy of your despatch of August 7th to the Legation at Peking concerning the collection of likin at Hsiakuan, the area set apart by the Chinese for foreign trade and residence.

This Government has heretofore insisted that when a city is opened to foreign residence and trade it is the city and not [merely] an adjacent district that is open and that therefore likin can not be collected on goods carried from the landing or settlement into the city. Certain places, however, were opened to trade not by treaty but by voluntary action of the Chinese Government, and in these cases a definite area has been set aside, usually outside the city gates, for the residence and trade of foreigners.

The Chinese authorities have claimed the right to place likin barriers between these settlements and the city proper. Nanking was declared an open port, however, in the French treaty of 1858. It was not formally opened until 1899, when the river suburb, Hsiakuan, was set aside for the foreign settlement. It is the opinion of the Department that the long delay in carrying out the provision of the treaty can not alter the tenor of that provision and that Nanking, not [merely] Hsiakuan, is open to foreign residence and trade.

As to the second point raised in your despatch to the Legation, the treaties provide for import upon payment of import duty. No likin is collectible, therefore, on goods going from the port into the city. Goods going elsewhere are subject to payment of inland transit tax in lieu of likin or must pay likin.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

The Secretary of State to Chargé MacMurray. File No. 893.512/39.

[Document 137]

The Secretary of State to Chargé MacMurray.

No. 161.] Department of State,
Washington, September 30, 1914.

Sir: The Department encloses herewith for your information a copy of its instruction of the 23rd instant to the American Consul at Nanking in reply to his despatch transmitting a copy of his despatch to the Legation, dated August 11 [7], 1914, regarding the proposal of the Anhui provincial authorities to collect a consumption tax on liquor and tobacco.

The Legation’s telegram of July 20th reports numerous instances of the illegal levy of inland taxes in China. The Legation in 1912 and 1913 suggested that the United States should adopt a liberal construction of the treaty provisions under which we with other foreign powers have for years protested against such levies as are reported in this despatch from Nanking. The treaties provide that when foreign imports have paid the import duty and the inland transit commutation tax, or in the case of duty-free articles the 2½ per cent ad valorem inland transit duty, they shall be exempt from “all other inland charges whatever.”

The Chinese hold that the context shows this to be “all other inland charges while in transit,” but the foreign legations in China have unanimously held that the language is to be literally interpreted.

At various times the Legation has secured a removal of obnoxious taxes levied in violation of this provision, but recently the Chinese officials have adopted a firmer stand and the complaint of the Legation in the telegram referred to above shows the need of caution in yielding to Chinese demands respecting the question.

The heavy taxation in Chekiang is reported by Shanghai papers to have considerably checked the sale of foreign imports in that province. On the other hand, tobacco and liquors are dealt with by all governments in an exceptional manner. Many countries levy an excise and it may appear advisable to yield with reservations as to the treatment of other goods.

You will, therefore, endeavor to reach an understanding in which in return for China’s yielding on the question of whether or not Nanking City is open, you will agree to an excise on liquor and tobacco with reservations as to treatment of other goods.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch. File No. 893.522/40.

[Document 138]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

No. 182.] Department of State,
Washington, October 23, 1914.

Sir: Receipt is acknowledged of the Legation’s No. 366 of September 12, 1914, with enclosures, relating to the proposed imposition of a tax on tobacco and wines in the Province of Anhui.

The Department approves the note No. 370 of the American Consul at Nanking to the Wuhu Commissioner for Foreign Affairs on this subject and also the Legation’s note No. 216 of September 4, 1914, to his excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

In this connection your attention is invited to the Department’s instruction No. 161 of September 30, 1914, to the Legation, in which you were directed to endeavor to reach an understanding by which, in return for China’s yielding on the question of whether or not Nanking City is open, the American Government will agree to an excise tax on liquor and tobacco, reserving all its rights as to other goods.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

Consul Williams to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.512/42.

[Document 139]

Consul Williams to the Secretary of State.

No. 24.] American Consulate,
Nanking, November 23, 1914.

Sir: With reference to the Department’s instruction No. 7 of September 23, 1914, respecting the status of Nanking as a treaty port, I have the honor to report that shortly after the receipt of the Department’s instruction mentioned, I was directed by the Legation at Peking to submit to it a full report on the present features of this question. A copy of my report made in compliance with the Legation’s instructions is enclosed.

With particular reference to the question of likin collection at Hsiakuan, the Standard Oil Company has complained of two distinct matters: first, the collection of likin on goods destined for the city, the objection in this case being on treaty grounds; and second, the collection of likin by a barrier near their installation on goods destined for Pukow. The ground for complaint in the second case is that the barrier in question does not appear to be authorized, as it issues no receipts, that it is within the area set apart by the Chinese as a foreign settlement, in violation of all precedents, and that it is so situated as to tax the American Oil, while the competing Asiatic Petroleum Company, whose installation is also within the “settlement” and not far from the Standard Oil Company, pays no likin. I have made informal representations to the authorities on these grounds, avoiding, however, the second point mentioned, except in a general way, lest the contention might be taken as an admission of the correctness of the Chinese attitude regarding the treaty port question in general. The third point contains the real objection, as this likin collection handicaps the Standard Oil Company to the advantage of the competitors.

As stated in my report to the Legation, I am awaiting its further instructions before proceeding to any active protests for the reasons set forth therein.

I have [etc.]

C. L. L. Williams.

[Inclosure—Extract.]

Consul Williams to Minister Reinsch.

No. 26.] American Consulate,
Nanking, November 21, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Legation’s instruction No. 770 of November 12th last, directing me to report to the Legation on the present status of the Nanking treaty port question.

With respect to this question, there is enclosed a copy of a recent instruction from the Department of State; this, it is believed, sets forth very clearly the position held by all the foreign consuls resident in Nanking, a position which is summed up in the Department’s words, “that the long delay in carrying out the provisions of the treaty [French, of 1858] cannot alter the tenor of that provision, and that Nanking, not Hsiakuan, is open to foreign residence and trade.”

The question has not been formally discussed between the Chinese authorities and the consular body for some years. Unfortunately the archives of this office are not complete and I am unable to say whether it has ever been so discussed or not. It is arising constantly, however, in an incidental manner, and there is no doubt at all concerning the attitude of the Chinese authorities. Thus there is a special office charged with the conduct of affairs of the “commercial port” (shang fou) of Hsiakuan; whenever local regulations respecting land tenure, taxation, police, etc., appear, the “commercial port” of Hsiakuan is always specifically mentioned and often separately dealt with. It appears that the authorities desire to limit foreign residence even further; for in some instances Hsiakuan west of the Hui-min Creek is mentioned as the area prescribed for that purpose, in other words the island of Hsiakuan. This view excludes that portion of the mainland between the city wall and the Hui-min Creek, where are several foreign business houses. * * *

The authorities have not been successful, however, in preventing the establishment within the city of foreign firms. I am informed by my Japanese colleague that there are at present some “seventeen Japanese houses carrying on business in the city. Some of these houses opened their business only last year and one quite recently, all with no difficulties raised by the Chinese authorities.” As the opening of business houses does not require any positive action by the authorities, such as the stamping of deeds in the purchase of land, they would be practically powerless to prevent foreign merchants from residing and trading in the city; they cannot well expel them by force, and, of course, a protest to the Consulate concerned would be useless. * * *

Should the Legation or the Diplomatic Body be inclined to force the issue, I venture to suggest that a cause would be provided best by an application for the issue of a title to property. A refusal to pay likin would result in a temporary cessation of business, or in the payment of the same “under protest,” a procedure which the Chinese hardly appreciate or understand.

The argument suggests itself that the United States is in a peculiarly fortunate position to support such a claim through the absence of American concessions in China. For to hold that foreigners were limited to residences in foreign settlements and concessions would be to hold that Americans are barred entirely from residing in many ports where the area set apart for foreign use consists entirely of the concessions of other nations, to residence in which Americans are admitted by favor only, not by right, and often under more or less vexatious restrictions.

I venture to request the Legation’s instructions as to what steps it is advisable to take locally in the matter. My personal opinion is that nothing can be done beyond raising the question concretely and formally.

I have [etc.]

C. L. L. Williams.

Mining regulations affecting treaty rights; objections of the United States theretoMining regulations affecting treaty rights; objections of the United States thereto

[140] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, March 24, 1914.

File No. 893.631/1.

[141] The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch

Department of State, Washington, May 1, 1914.

File No. 893.631/1.

[142] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, June 1, 1914.

File No. 893.631/2.

[143] Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, July 23, 1914.

File No. 893.631/5.

[144] Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, September 11, 1914.

File No. 893.631/4.

[145] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

Department of State, Washington, October 23, 1914.

File No. 893.631/4.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.631/1.

[Document 140]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

No. 166.] American Legation,
Peking, March 24, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose, for the information of the Department, copies46 of the Mining Enterprise Regulations issued by the Chinese Government on March 11, as well as an article46 from the Peking Gazette of even date containing a general criticism of the new regulations.

The essential provision of the regulations, with respect to the participation of foreigners in mining enterprise in China, are (Article 4) that foreigners will not be allowed to hold more than half of the total number of shares of the mining concern, and that they must, through a diplomatic officer or consul representing their respective Nation, make a formal statement that they are ready to submit to the mining laws and regulations of the Chinese Government; and (Article 93) that foreign partners in Chinese mining enterprises must submit to having any dispute in connection with mining affairs settled by the decision of the Director of the Mining Supervision Office.

The Mining Regulations have, from the point of view of foreigners, been criticized in two respects: (a) in that they restrict foreign participation to one half of the interest in any concern; and (b) in that, in the administration of these detailed regulations and others that may follow, it may be possible for the local mining officials to exert a vexatious control over mining enterprises if the regulations are not strictly carried out in good faith.

With regard to the first objection I would observe that while the regulations demand an equal share in the property rights in behalf of Chinese co-owners, they do not contain any provisions which would make it impossible for the foreign participants to secure administrative control of the enterprise: for instance, through having a majority on the board of directors.

With reference to the second objection it would seem that the position of the foreign participants who have placed themselves explicitly under Chinese law and regulations would not favor diplomatic interference in their behalf, unless, indeed, there should be a gross disregard of their property rights, in which case it is conceived that even such an undertaking as is required would not disentitle them to the protection of their national representatives. It should, however, be noted that Article 93 is drawn in terms which would appear broad enough to confer upon the Director of the Mining Supervision Office jurisdiction to deal not only administratively but judicially with all cases involving mining affairs, even where a defendant may be a citizen of a country enjoying extraterritorial rights under the treaties. In this connection I would suggest that the right of jurisdiction is one granted in favor of the treaty nation and not of individual citizens; and that in this view of the case the individual taking up mining rights in China is not competent to waive, even by an explicit undertaking to acquiesce in the mining regulations, the right of his own government to exercise the jurisdiction conceded to it by treaty. I would therefore recommend that in accepting these regulations as applicable to its citizens the United States should make explicit reservation of its established extraterritorial jurisdiction in the judicial determination of questions in which an American may be made defendant.

I have [etc.]

Paul S. Reinsch.

46 Not printed.

46 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch File No. 893.631/1.

[Document 141]

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch

No. 87.] Department of State,
Washington, May 1, 1914.

Sir: The Department is in receipt of your despatch No. 166 of March 24, 1914, regarding the new Mining Enterprise Regulations.

While these regulations appear to be an improvement over those of 1907, they seem still to be subject to some of the objections which were pointed out by the Department in its No. 413 of February 12, 1908, to the Legation (Foreign Relations 1908, pp. 152, 173 and 175).

The provisions of Article 4, first paragraph, subjecting American citizens to the “regulations” and “laws” referred to, are objectionable unless coupled with a saving clause relating to our extraterritorial rights in China. The limitation in paragraph 2 of Article 4 upon the rights of American citizens with respect to the number of shares they may hold in a mining concern seems objectionable, such objection being based upon the provision of Article VII of the Treaty of 190347 that the Chinese Government in recasting its mining regulations “will offer no impediment to the attraction of foreign capital.”

With respect to paragraph 3 of Article 4, it is very doubtful whether the diplomatic and consular officers of the United States have the capacity to issue the certificate contemplated by the provisions of this paragraph, and moreover it would be unwise for such officers to issue these certificates even if they had the capacity, unless with the addition of the saving clause above referred to.

Article 93 is also objectionable as in derogation of our extraterritorial rights in China, as are also Articles 94–105 relative to the punishments for violations of the mining regulations, which appear to apply to all persons as there seems to be no provision in the regulations excepting foreigners from the local jurisdiction. Under the regulations as they stand it would seem that China might plausibly claim the right to inflict the punishments in question upon American citizens. It would appear, therefore, that the regulations should contain a provision for the exception of foreigners from the local jurisdiction with respect to the punishments in question and setting forth that they should be dealt with by their own courts.

It may be said, moreover, that it would appear that Articles 86 and 87 might well operate prejudicially and unfairly as against persons engaged in mining enterprises, and that warrant exists for a protest against the features of the regulations which seem to be unduly “restrictive” as well as against the provisions in subversion of the extraterritorial rights of the United States.

You are accordingly directed to bring to the attention of the Chinese Foreign Office the views of this Government as expressed above.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

47  For. Rel. 1903, p. 95.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.631/2.

[Document 142]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

No. 248.] American Legation,
Peking, June 1, 1914.

Sir: Referring to your instruction No. 87 of May 1, just received, and to my despatch No. 166 dated March 24, 1914, I have the honor to report that the objections of the Diplomatic Body to the proposed Mining Regulations of the Chinese Government were on May 4 transmitted to the Foreign Office by the Dean in the form of the enclosed note, which was prepared by the American Minister in consultation with the Russian Minister and later with the Russian Charge d’Affaires.

The formal exceptions taken to the Mining Regulations in the above note correspond with the principles laid down in the Department’s instructions Nos. 413 of February 12, 1908, and 87 of the 1st ultimo. The Legation will also bring to the special notice of the Chinese Government the fact that the objections raised in the note of the Diplomatic Body apply equally to articles 86 and 87.

With respect to the provision that foreign subjects are to be restricted to holding no more than one-half of the total number of shares in a mining concern, I have the honor to state that unofficial assurance has been given me by the Minister of Finance that this provision was not intended actually to restrict the ultimate ownership and control of mining properties, but that its purpose was to hold open the opportunity, in every instance, for Chinese to acquire a one-half interest in any new mining enterprise; if that opportunity had been afforded, foreigners could nevertheless acquire a majority of the stock either through taking up shares not actually purchased by the Chinese, or by purchasing such shares from the Chinese later in the open market. It seems therefore that the purpose of the Chinese Government was not so much actually to prevent control by foreign owners as to maintain an equal opportunity for the Chinese.

In consequence of the objections raised by the Diplomatic Body it is understood that the Chinese are contemplating a more liberal arrangement of this matter.

I have [etc.]

Paul S. Reinsch.

[Inclosure.]

Diplomatic Circular No. 84.

British Legation,
Peking, April 23, 1914.

The Dean has the honour to circulate herewith, for the approval of his Honourable Colleagues, a draft note to the Wai Chiao Pu on the Mining Regulations, which his excellency the American Minister and the Russian Charge d’Affaires have been so good as to prepare.

Sir: I have the honor to inform your excellency that the Diplomatic Body have duly considered the Mining Enterprise Regulations, published by the Government on March 11, 1914, and that they have arrived at the following conclusions:

Article 4 makes it incumbent upon any foreign subjects who may desire to engage in mining enterprise to secure a certificate, issued by their own diplomatic or consular officer, proving that they are willing to be subject to these regulations. Unless confined to a mere witnessing of the signature, such certificates cannot be issued by diplomatic or consular officers, as such issuance would involve approval of the Regulations, which must be considered inadequate in the following respects: 1. The security of the investment is not sufficiently protected. More especially, Article 46 provides that a mining right shall be cancelled for the following, among other, grounds: when the mining enterprise injures the public interest; when there is non-compliance with the orders of the police; when the plans and descriptions given are not followed; and when any mining tax is not paid upon falling due. The forfeiture of a right upon which much capital may have been, expended, on so indefinite a ground as that “it injures public interest” or for non-compliance with regulations so minute as those contained in Article 54 of the Detailed Regulations for Mining Enterprises issued April 2, 1914 (dealing with plans and descriptions), would be an excessive penalty, incompatible with due protection of property rights.

2. While persons engaged in mining should be subject to administrative regulations properly made, foreign citizens would not thereby give up the rights of extraterritorial jurisdiction enjoyed under existing treaties. Insofar as implying the surrender of such rights, it would be necessary to modify Article 93.

3. The provision that foreign subjects are not to hold more than one half of the total number of shares of the mining concern is not consonant with the promise contained in the Treaty of 1903 between China and Great Britain to the effect that foreign capitalists shall not be placed at a greater disadvantage than they would be under generally accepted foreign regulations. Efficient development of mining resources through participation of foreign capitalists can be secured only by according to the latter the right to own or lease mining properties.

For the above reasons, the Diplomatic Body find it impossible to accept the Mining Regulations as in agreement with the treaty rights accorded, until they shall have been further modified in accordance with the above suggestions; and I have the honor to give your excellency this notification in order to avoid any misunderstanding.

I avail [etc.]

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.631/5.

[Document 143]

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

No. 314.] American Legation,
Peking, July 23, 1914.

Sir: Referring to the Department’s instruction of May 1, No. 87, and to the Legation’s reply, No. 248, of June 1, with which was transmitted a copy of the diplomatic circular of April 23, I have the honor to transmit herewith a copy of the circular (No. 142) of the 11th instant with which the Dean communicated to the Diplomatic Body the reply made to their objection by the Wai Chiao Pu. The reply thus communicated through the Wai Chiao Pu from the Ministry of Agriculture and Commerce would not appear to dispose satisfactorily of any of the objections made to the Regulations, which may therefore be expected to fail of acceptance by the Treaty Powers unless amended in deference to their protests.

I take occasion in this connection to enclose for the information of the Department a copy of the note in which the Legation is making known to the Ministry for Foreign Affairs the views set forth in the instruction of May 1, to which reference is made above. I have [etc.]

J. V. A. MacMurray.

[Inclosure l.]

Diplomatic Circular No. 142.

British Legation,
Peking, July 11, 1914.

With reference to the Circular No. 84 of April 23, the Dean has the honor to circulate herewith the translation of a note which he has received from the Wai Chiao Pu in reply to his note of the 4th of May last on the subject of the draft Mining Regulations.

Foreign Office,
Peking, July 8, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s note of May 4, stating that the Mining Enterprise Regulations must be considered inadequate in certain respects. You give particulars as to these and state that the regulations should be modified in accordance with your suggestions.

I wrote to the Ministry of Agriculture and Commerce in the matter and have now received the following reply: “It is observed, with reference to the statement in the Dean’s note—that the cancellation of a mining right on the two grounds that the mining enterprise injures the public interest and that the plans and descriptions given are not followed, is too indefinite and would be an excessive penalty—that the words ‘ injures the public interest’ refer to an injury to the interest of the whole community, such as injury to the public health or to the peace of the locality where the mine is situated. Investigation of the mining laws of every country shows that such a provision is universal. Regarding the question whether or not a mining interest injures the public interest, the administrative officials should lay down a proper fixed principle. The provision as to not following the plans and descriptions given is inserted with a view to the assistance of mining enterprise. If owing to some natural calamity the necessity for modification of the plans arises, it is of course permissible for those who hold the mining right to request a modification of the plans on the basis of Article 56 of the Detailed Regulations. The administrative officials will have absolutely no right blindly to cancel a mining right without consideration of the capital invested in it.

“As regards the statement that Article 93 contravenes the rights of extraterritorial jurisdiction enjoyed under existing treaties and should therefore be modified, it is observed that the meaning of the word ‘settlement’ in that article is an act of administrative government, and, being limited to disputes in mining affairs, is different to an exercise of legal jurisdiction. Looking at the matter in the view of existing treaties, there is nothing not consonant therewith.

“Turning to the statement that the provision that foreign subjects are not to hold more than one half of the total number of shares of the mining concern is not consonant with the promise contained in the Treaty of 1903 between China and Great Britain to the effect that foreign capitalists shall not be placed at a greater disadvantage than they would be under generally accepted foreign regulations, I have the honor to observe that it was also laid down in the Mining Regulations of the late Dynasty that in joint Chinese and foreign enterprises the capital should be half foreign and half Chinese; but in addition there was a limitation as regards the shares to be held by the landowner. The present Mining Enterprise Regulations contain the same provision as the old Regulations, but the limitation as regards the landowner’s shares has been abolished. Thus the treatment accorded to foreign merchants engaged in mining enterprises is, as compared with the old Regulations, on the most favorable footing. Moreover, the provision as to half the capital being held by Chinese and half by foreigners ensures that, as gains and losses will be shared equally, there will be no reason to fear that capital will be placed at a disadvantage.”

The Ministry requests me to reply in this sense to your excellency. In view of the above detailed explanation by the Ministry of Agriculture and Commerce of the various points in the Mining Enterprise Regulations raised by you, no further misunderstanding should arise.

I have the honor to request you to transmit this reply to your Honorable Colleagues.

I avail [etc].

Seal of the Wai Chiao Pu.

[Inclosure 2.]

[Untitled]

No. 191.] American Legation,
Peking, July 23, 1914.

Excellency: With reference to the note dated May 4 in which the Dean communicated to your excellency the objections of the Diplomatic Body to the Mining Enterprise Regulations published by the Chinese Government on March 11 last; also to your excellency’s reply thereto dated July 8, addressed to the Dean of the Diplomatic Body, quoting a communication of the Minister of Agriculture and Commerce, in explanation of certain points of the Regulations: I have the honor to inform your excellency that my Government instructs me to bring to your attention its view that, no less than Article 93 of the Regulations, to which exception has already been taken by the Diplomatic Body,

Articles 94–105 (relative to the punishments for violations of the Mining Regulations) are objectionable in that they appear to apply to all persons, as there seems to be no provision in the Regulations excepting foreigners from the local jurisdiction. Under the Regulations as they stand it would seem that China might plausibly claim the right to inflict the punishments in question upon American citizens. It would appear, therefore, that the Regulations should contain a provision for the exception of foreigners from the local jurisdiction with respect to the punishments in question and setting forth that they should be dealt with by their own courts.

It further appears to my Government that Articles 86 and 87 of the Regulations might well operate prejudicially and unfairly as against persons engaged in mining enterprises; and I am therefore instructed to bring to your excellency’s attention its view that warrant exists for a protest against the feature’s of the Regulations which seem to be unduly “restrictive” as well as against the provisions in subversion of the extraterritorial rights of the United States.

I avail [etc.]

J. V. A. MacMurray.

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State. File No. 893.631/4.

[Document 144]

Chargé MacMurray to the Secretary of State.

No. 364.] American Legation,
Peking, September 11, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith a copy of a note received from the Foreign Office in reply to my communication of July 23, a copy of which was enclosed with despatch No. 314 of the same date to the Department, in reference to the objections which the American Government raised against certain provisions of the Chinese Mining Regulations of March 11 last.

The reply thus communicated does not appear satisfactorily to dispose of the objections above referred to. Unless instructed to the contrary, however, the Legation will make no further rejoinder inasmuch as the objections are now a matter of record and the meetings of the Diplomatic Body, on which the acceptance of the Mining Regulations depends, have been indefinitely suspended on account of the present European War. The Legation has forwarded a copy of the enclosed reply to the Dean of the Diplomatic Body.

I have [etc.]

J. V. A. MacMurray.

[Inclosure.]

Foreign Office,
Peking, August 12, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note No. 191 of July 23, 1914, in which you stated that you had received instructions from your Government in which objections were raised to Articles 94–105 and to Articles 86 and 87 of the Mining Regulations.

Upon receipt of this note this Ministry sent a communication to the Ministry of Agriculture and Commerce requesting a reply, which has now been received, as follows: The “decision” referred to in Article 93 falls within the category of administrative settlements, and, being limited to disputes in mining affairs, is distinct from a legal decision. This has already been explained in a communication previously sent (see Diplomatic Circular No. 142). Furthermore, in accordance with clause 2 of Article 7 of the Detailed Regulations for Mining Enterprises the representative of a Chinese-foreign joint mining enterprise must be a Chinese. Therefore, in case there should be a dispute in mining affairs the punishments inflicted under Articles 93 to 105 would still be borne by a citizen of the Republic of China, would in no way affect foreigners, and would certainly constitute no violation of the principle of extraterritoriality.

In regard to the provisions of Article 86, by which the employment and dismissal and the qualifications of the experts fall within the scope of the mine policing arrangements, the idea in drawing up this law was nothing less than to protect merchants engaged with limited capital in mining enterprises, who work for a small profit and who employ men improperly, thereby causing loss to themselves and to others. Educated and experienced engineers employed by large mines would be treated with the utmost respect by the Ministry and by the various supervision offices, who would not interfere with the arrangements for their employment and dismissal. This Ministry would not be very strict as regards the qualifications of experts of the kind referred to. The law regarding the policing of mines has now been drawn up. Problems of this sort are especially considered therein. The experts and advisers of this Ministry have gone over the law item by item as a precaution and not with the idea of framing excuses. After the law has been promulgated the matters in question will be clearly explained.

The provisions of Article 87 are the customary general provisions of all civilized countries; that is, when merchants are engaged in mining they must naturally assume the responsibility of guarding against danger. In case, however, within one year after the cancellation of the rights in a mining enterprise there should be no one succeeding thereto, and if at such a time unexpected dangers should occur, affecting injuriously either the life or property of the original owner or the safety of the holders of neighboring mining rights, under such circumstances if the original holder of the mining rights were not to take the responsibility, then upon the appearance of the danger who would be responsible?

But it is clearly stipulated in the article in question that “the provisions for precautions against danger shall continue to have force”; thus, after the cancellation of the rights in a mining enterprise, responsibility is confined to precautions against danger. Aside from this no other obligations will be incurred. Both Chinese and foreign mine owners will all keep the law equally and there will be no danger of discrimination.

It was requested that the above statement be transmitted to the American Legation.

I have the honor to state that as the articles referred to in the Legation’s note have been clearly explained in order by the Ministry of Agriculture and Commerce, there should be ho further misunderstanding on the points in question. I have the honor to request that you will be so good as to transmit the contents of this note to your Government. With compliments.

Seal of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch. File No. 893.631/4.

[Document 145]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

No. 179.] Department of State,
Washington, October 23, 1914.

Sir: Receipt is acknowledged of the Legation’s despatch No. 364 of September 11, 1914, with enclosure, relating to the objections which this Government has raised against certain provisions of the Chinese Mining Regulations promulgated March 11, 1914.

The Department approves the attitude taken by the Legation in this matter.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

Protection by the United States of Chinese—in Costa Rica. (See Costa Rica: Representation of Chinese interests, etc.) in Mexico. (See Mexico: Protection of Chinese subjects, etc.)Protection by the United States of Chinese—in Costa Rica. (See Costa Rica: Representation of Chinese interests, etc.) in Mexico. (See Mexico: Protection of Chinese subjects, etc.)

(See Costa Rica and Mexico, respectively.)

Third International Opium Conference; report of the American delegates.Third International Opium Conference; report of the American delegates.

(See Netherlands.)

Colombia:Colombia:

Contents

Message of the President, Carlos E. Restrepo, to the CongressMessage of the President, Carlos E. Restrepo, to the Congress

[146] Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bogotá, August 15, 1914.

File No. 821.032/10.

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State. File No. 821.032/10.

[Document 146]

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

No. 95.] American Legation,
Bogotá, August 15, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith a copy of the Message of the President of Colombia to the Congress of 1914.

I have the honor also to enclose an English translation of that part of the message under the section assigned to foreign relations which refers to the United States. Dr. Restrepo mentions your peace proposal and the A. B. C. mediation and also gives a short history of the precedents to the negotiation of the treaty of April 6 last.

The Department will note that the last administration was in favor of using the indemnity solely for works of public improvements.

Dr. Restrepo’s message as a whole is in the nature of a defense of his four years of administration from 1910 to 1914.

I have [etc.]

Thad. A. Thomson.

[Inclosure—Translation—Extract.]

president Wilson’s peace proposal.

Last year His Excellency the President of the United States, desiring to put in practice his noble aspirations for the peace of all nations, presented to the consideration of friendly countries through his diplomatic representatives the project to facilitate the settlement of differences, in order to avoid war, in the event of failure by diplomatic negotiations.1 In this project it is agreed that all questions which may cause an international difference shall be submitted to the study and report of a commission. The parties shall abstain from declaring war or opening hostilities until the commission has made its report, which shall be rendered within a period previously agreed upon, and the investigation shall be officially undertaken by the commission upon its own initiative, without it being necessary for either of the parties so to petition it. The said parties reserve to themselves the right to act independently upon the question in dispute once the report is presented. The Secretary of State, Mr. Bryan, suggests that the commission be composed of five members and indicates the mode of their election.

Naturally, this Government received the proposal with keen sympathy, since it was so much in accord with the traditions of the Republic, but informed the American Government that this matter, as was the case with various others, should be given special attention after the termination of our questions with the United States relative to the separation of the Isthmus of Panama, through the ratification by the Legislatures of both countries of the treaty of April 6, 1914.2

south american mediation.

Owing to the deplorable conflict between the United States and Mexico during this year, the countries of South America, headed by Argentina, Brazil and Chile, offered them their friendly services in the capacity of mediators; the two Republics accepted the intervention and the result was a real triumph, since the differences are about to be settled in a fully satisfactory manner.

Colombia adhered to the mediation and lent all the moral assistance possible.

Besides the immediate material result of the friendly interposition, we should not fail to appreciate and applaud its international importance in the politics of the civilized world; the advantageous situation in which it has placed the Latin peoples of this continent; its significance for the united defense of their mutual interests, and its strength as a practical basis for interamerican fraternity.

treaty with the united states.

Both the Treaty of April 6 and Law 14 of June 9 of this year, “for the settlement of the differences growing out of the events which took place in the Isthmus of Panama in November 1903,” are well known; this knowledge will be perfected by the special report2 which is presented to the Congress of this year by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, with all the necessary details.

The precedents of the treaty in the opening days of the present administration and the difficulties which had to be overcome to reach the actual results are less well known.

In a note dated October 26, 1909, the American Minister, Mr. Northcott, informed our Chancellor that his Government could not conclude any arrangement with Colombia alone, insisting upon the original idea of a tripartite treaty.3

The last Minister for Foreign Affairs of the late Administration presented to the said Mr. Northcott several new bases for an arrangement on December 28, 1909.4 They were transmitted to the Secretary of State of the United States but his Government refrained from considering them.5

The present Colombian Administration moreover did not find these bases acceptable, and, taking advantage of the good will of the then American Minister, agreed with him to embody and express their ideas in a note6 addressed to the Colombian Legation at Washington, which was done on November 30, 1910. These ideas indicated the formation of an arbitral tribunal to fix the proper interpretation that should be given the Treaty of 1846 and the consequences which would ensue from this interpretation.

The Chargé d’Affaires, Mr. Frazier, acknowledged the receipt of the memorandum and reported that he had forwarded it to Washington. The Minister instructed first Dr. Borda and afterwards General Ospina to sound the intention of President Taft and Secretary Knox, with a view to initiating an arrangement upon bases of a real reparation to Colombia. Although there existed no official declaration, yet it was quite evident that the decision of the Government at Washington had been modified in a sense favorable for a new and a direct negotiation with Colombia, laying aside every project for arbitration.

In a note dated June 14, 1911, General Ospina, at that time in charge of our Legation at Washington, refers to an interview between an important American and President Taft, from which our Minister deduced that the chief magistrate of the United States at that time was favorably disposed to a direct arrangement upon a basis of an indemnity to Colombia for her rights in the Panama Railroad. And dating from the same month of June of that year our Legation at Washington began to report upon the movement in the public opinion of the United States in favor of Colombia, in the initiation of which the resolution presented by Mr. Rainey in the Foreign Relations Committee of the House of Representatives of the United States played a principal ró1e. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs authorized the Legation to make every effort to enlighten American public opinion. At the same time also General Ospina was instructed to address a note to the Government of the United States to renew the request to submit to arbitration the pending questions arising out of the events which took place in Panama in November, 1903, which was carried out by our Minister in a note7 dated November 23 [25], 1911, addressed to the Secretary of State and which received no reply.

In 1911 there was accredited as Minister of the United States to the Government of Colombia Mr. James T. DuBois, an intelligent diplomat, a just man and perfect gentleman. Unfortunately his good will was far superior to the instructions which he had received from his Government, and my Government greatly regretted to have to reject the proposals for a settlement presented by Mr. DuBois.

The Minister of Foreign Affairs made an opportune and minute report8 upon these proposals and the reasons for not accepting them. It is sufficient to recall that they implied a diminution of the national sovereignty over the Islands of San Andres and Providencia and the Choco, and that those proposals which were susceptible of discussion were declared by Mr. DuBois himself to be informal in character and were disapproved by the American Minister of State.

Notwithstanding, I only perform a duty of justice in recalling the gratitude which Colombia owes Mr. DuBois, both for his noble and chivalrous conduct when he was amongst us as well as for the constant and fervent defense which he has continued to make in his home for our cause and for our rights.

There is no reason for me to call to mind in this place those painful incidents in which my Government had to proceed energetically and implacably but in the surety—both at that time and confirmed to-day—that without such conduct our relations with the United States would have been impossible as also its consolidation by the treaty of April 6th.

Mr. DuBois was replaced by Mr. Thaddeus A. Thomson, endowed with natural gifts of prudence and equity similar to those of his predecessor. His good intentions and those of his Government were very evident from the time of the first conference which upon his arrival he had with the President of the Republic; inasmuch as the latter informed him that no settlement could be initiated except upon the basis that Colombia should make no concession whatsoever to the United States, seeing that she owed nothing, the Minister categorically stated that he had instructions from his Government to request nothing and to make, above all, a perfectly clean proposition.

Upon this basis, which was fulfilled with entire probity, there commenced the discussion of the treaty, which the nation has well known and which it has judged favorably.

The treaty was denounced as unconstitutional before the Supreme Court of Justice; but this high tribunal declared itself disqualified to take note of international pacts, and consequently the law approving the treaty remains in full force.

Up to the moment of drafting this message the discussions of the pact have not yet terminated in the American Congress, where it has undergone lively investigation.

In the event, as many of us fondly hope, that the treaty be approved in the United States, I deem it my duty to express my opinion upon the use which should be made of the indemnity of $25,000,000.

It is quite simple: apply the money solely to those essentially national works of an urgent character; railways from Bogota to Buenaventura and from Bogota to Puerto Wilches or to any commodious and permanently navigable port of the Magdalena River; railway from Cucueta to Tamalameque or to some equivalent point; and to the sanitation and improvement of the ports of Tumaco, Buenaventura, Cartagena, Puerto Colombia (or Bocas de Ceniza), and Santa Marta. Neither more nor less.

1  For. Rel. 1913, p. 8.

2 See post.

2 See post.

3  For. Rel. 1910, p. 405.

4  For. Rel. 1913, p. 301

5  For. Rel. 1910, pp. 406–407; 1913, p. 301.

6  For. Rel. 1913, p. 302.

7  For. Rel. 1913, pp. 284 and 302.

8  Id. 318.

Report of the Minister for Foreign Affairs to the CongressReport of the Minister for Foreign Affairs to the Congress

[147] Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bogota, August 22, 1914.

File No. 022.21.

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State. File No. 022.21.

[Document 147]

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

[Extract]

No. 98.] American Legation,
Bogota, August 22, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith the “Memoria del Ministro de Relaciones Exteriores al Congreso de 1914.”

I have also the honor to enclose an English translation of that part of the Memoria which refers to the United States, which will be found on pages 34–50 inclusive.* * *

I have [etc.]

Thad A. Thomson.

[Inclosure—Translation—Extract.]

the united states of america.

Our Legation at Washington continues in the charge of Don Julio Betancourt. Dr. Roberto Ancízar was appointed Secretary thereof.

In my report last year8 I gave an account of the proposals made by the plenipotentiary of the United States, Mr. James T. DuBois; also of the rejection which the Government was obliged to make and of the reasons on which this was based.

On August 30th of last year Mr. Thaddeus Austin Thomson presented his credentials as Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States in Colombia. Since the commencement of his high diplomatic mission and with the lofty spirit and noble intentions which distinguish them, Mr. Thomson conveyed to this Government the just sentiments of the Government of Mr. Wilson towards Colombia and the desires of that eminent magistrate, those of the Secretary of State, Mr. Bryan, and the personal desires of the new Envoy, to offer Colombia a moral and material reparation for the events which took place on the Isthmus of Panama in November 1903.

Since the first conferences which I held with Mr. Thomson, and in reply to his initiatives in the sense of a direct negotiation, I informed him that the Government of Colombia did not reject this procedure as a means to arrive at the desired solution, as long as the negotiations should take place in Bogota, as long as everything concerning territorial options and concessions for coaling stations involved in the DuBois proposition should be laid aside from the beginning, and as long as any proposition that might be made should include a moral reparation. I also stated to Mr. Thomson that it was understood that in case the direct negotiations should not be concluded, Colombia would insist upon her demand for arbitration. This is made clear in the Minutes of the Conference of September 23, 1913, as follows: minutes of the conference of september 23, 1913.

There were present their excellencies the Minister for Foreign Affairs; the Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States of America; Mr. Harrison, Secretary of the Legation of the United States; and Mr. L. Montejo, translator of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs stated that after a conversation with His Excellency the President of the Republic, he had to inform the Minister of the United States that in attention to the desire expressed by the Government of the United States through its Plenipotentiary at Bogota to submit to the consideration of the Colombian Government certain proposals which might conduce to the satisfactory settlement of pending questions, the said Government would have no objection to consider the first formal written proposal of which the American Minister had spoken yesterday, which would be given more careful study so that the reply thereto would combine the views of Colombia upon all the points which should serve as a basis of a possible arrangement, all of which were tentatively suggested in yesterday’s conference.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs also stated that he had informed both His Excellency the President of the Republic as well as the members of the Commission of Foreign Affairs, in accordance with what Mr. Thomson had told him, that the initial proposal of the Legation of the United States would not contain anything regarding options or territorial concessions analogous to those of the DuBois Memorandum and which would render a consideration of the proposal impossible.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs also stated that, interpreting Mr. Thomson’s idea expressed yesterday, he had informed His Excellency the President of the Republic and the members of the Commission of Foreign Affairs, that the fact that the initial proposition which Mr. Thomson was about to submit, would make no mention of boundaries or other points of substantial importance, especially regarding the first, did not imply the idea of the Department of State to exclude them from the negotiation which was now to be opened, but simply the desire that the Colombian reply should minutely express the Colombian views regarding boundaries and other points of which mention had been made.

Lastly, the Minister for Foreign Affairs requested that careful note should be taken of the following official declaration, which he then made:

“The Government of Colombia was confident that through the good will of the United States to settle in a satisfactory manner Colombian claims in a direct and friendly way it might be possible this time to reach an acceptable arrangement, but if this happy result should not be realized Colombia would again renew its demand for arbitration now pending before the Department of State.”

The Minister of the United States believed that he would be able to send his written formal proposal in the course of the present week.

Francisco José Urrutia.

Thaddeus A. Thomson.

[Here follows the exchange of notes between the Legation and the Ministry of Foreign Relations. An English translation of Dr. Urrutia’s reply was transmitted to the Department with my despatch No. 10 of October 8, 1913.9 ]

The negotiations being thus initiated were continued for several months in a spirit of frank cordiality. During the precarious absence of Mr. Thomson from this capital, they were continued with the Secretary of the Legation, Charge d’Affaires ad interim, Mr. Leland Harrison.

The negotiations were conducted together with the valuable and essential assistance of the Commission of Foreign Relations whose members, in addition to their talents and counsels, added the prestige of their names to the pact of April 6 by accepting the special commission given them by the Government for the conclusion and signature of the treaty.

Likewise the assistance rendered during the negotiations by the Minister of the Republic in Washington, Don Julio Betancourt, and by the Secretary of the Legation, Dr. Roberto Ancizar, has been very important. Both have been indefatigable in their labor, as difficult as it was intelligent, in favor of our rights. Worthy also of special mention is the efficacious propaganda carried on by our Consul General in New York, Mr. Francisco Escobar.

I would, moreover, fail in my duty if I did not avail myself of this opportunity to place on record the gratitude of the Government toward the noble friends of the cause of Colombia—several of them North Americans—who have contributed by their writings and by propaganda of various kinds in making still clearer Colombia’s right to a reparation.

The text of the Treaty of April 6, as well as the Memoria of the Commission of Foreign Relations, reporting the course of the negotiations which preceded it and the most important documents in regard to the discussion of the pact in the extraordinary session of Congress during the month of May of this year, make up the second volume of “Anexos” to this report.

A few days after the signature of the treaty, the Government published it profusely throughout the Republic. The discussion thereof was absolutely full and free in the press as it was subsequently in Congress. The discussion was marked by a serene atmosphere, which constitutes a notable example of the progress made by us in our parliamentary debates and in our press.

According to the advices received from our Legation at Washington, the treaty was presented on the 19th ultimo by the Secretary of State to the Senate of the United States. That eminent body referred it to the Committee on Foreign Relations. The Secretary of State, Mr. Bryan, has given the press an explanation in order to enlighten public opinion, making powerful arguments in defense of the treaty and insisting that it is necessary to approve it and fulfill an unavoidable duty.

After Law No. 14 of this year, which approved the treaty, had been sanctioned by the Executive Power, a certain citizen denounced it before the Supreme Court as being unconstitutional. The Supreme Court by a resolution dated the 6th instant, considered that it lacked legal faculties to decide upon the constitutionality or unconstitutionality of this law. In the first volume of “Anexos” attached to this report you will find the luminous decision of the Supreme Court, which is a document of greatest import in our constitutional and international life.

The above-mentioned denunciation and the decision of the Supreme Court caused the Ministry of Foreign Relations to address to the Legation of the United States of America the following communications which faithfully reflect the opinion of the Government and of the Commission of Foreign Relations on this subject:

[See my despatch No. 77 of June 19, 1914.]

arbitration treaty.

The civilizing ideas of the President of the United States and of his Secretary of State can be no less than sympathetic to Colombia in view of the well-known adhesion of the latter to the principles of arbitration, its sentiments and its traditions in favor of everything that may tend to render more respected the principles of justice and to make international peace more secure. Nevertheless, the Government believed that the negotiation of a pact, such as that now proposed, should be postponed until the definite completion of the negotiations relative to Panama and the exchange of ratifications of the treaty. I spoke in this sense to the Chargé d’Affaires of the United States and the same was also said by our Minister in Washington a short while thereafter.

After the ratification of the treaty of April 6, our Chancellery, without doubt, will give the deepest attention to the proposal of the Government of Washington and will enter upon the study of the terms of a possible treaty of general arbitration between Colombia and the United States of America. It is, moreover, proper to observe that it would be most desirable that all the nations of America should agree upon an extensive arbitration treaty which would bind them all and which would constitute a solemn confirmation by the nations of the New World of the isolated efforts which have been made since the dawn of emancipation as well as of the principles proclaimed a hundred years ago by Colombia and by her Liberator in favor of international equality upon the august basis of justice. Such a pact, if it could be celebrated, could then be presented by the nations of America at the next peace conference at The Hague as a magnificent tribute to peace and universal civilization and would take advantageously the place of the Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Conflicts, which has not been able to prevent the international wars which have occurred since 1899 up to the present day nor the sorrowful outrages against right, and which owing to its vague formulae is still scarcely but a deficient step towards the realization of an ideal.

mediation of american republics between the united states and mexico.

In the last days of the month of April a conflict at arms seemed imminent between the United States and Mexico. Consequently the diplomatic representatives of Brazil, Argentina and Chile in Washington, under instructions from their respective Governments, offered their friendly mediation, which was accepted both by the Governments of the United States and Mr. Huerta. Upon learning of the step, the Government of Colombia authorized its Minister at Washington to adhere to the offer of mediation, in the name of the Republic. And later, when the same information was communicated by the Legation of the United States in this capital, the undersigned took pleasure in ratifying the adhesion of the Government of Colombia to such a sympathetic and civilized action for the solution of a conflict which otherwise might have had the most grave and lamentable consequences.

panama-pacific exposition.

Under date of July 26, 1912, the Legation of the United States in this capital invited the Government of Colombia to take part in the Panama-Pacific International Exposition which should take place in San Francisco, California, next year to commemorate the completion of the Panama Canal. In later communications of August 19, 1913, and January 12th of this year, the Legation of the United States has informed the Colombian Government regarding various resolutions relative to the organization of that international competition.

The Colombian Government has found itself obliged to put off making reply to the invitation of the United States of America, in order to see if, after the satisfactory and definite settlement of the pending questions and the re-esablishment of our ancient friendship, it would be possible for Colombia to take part in some form in the aforesaid exposition.

international congress of americanists.

There is also pending the invitation which the Government of the United States has extended through the Legation in this capital to Colombia to be represented in the XIX International Congress of Americanists which will convene at Washington in October of this year.

8  Id. 318.

9  For. Rel. 1913, pp. 321–323.

Conclusion of a treaty between the United States and Colombia for the settlement of their differences arising out of the events which took place on the Isthmus of Panama in November, 1903Conclusion of a treaty between the United States and Colombia for the settlement of their differences arising out of the events which took place on the Isthmus of Panama in November, 190310

10 Continued from For. Rel. 1913, pp. 284–329.

[148] Chargé Harrison to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bogota, January 9, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 711.21/220.

[149] Chargé Harrison to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bogota, January 17, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 711.21/221.

[150] Chargé Harrison to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bogotá, February 5, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 711.21/226.

[151] The Secretary of State to Chargé Harrison.

Department of State, Washington, February 28, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 711.21/226.

[152] Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bogota, March 7, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 711.21/234.

[153] The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson.

Department of State, Washington, March 10, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 711.21/234.

[154] Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bogotá, March 11, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 711.21/235.

[155] The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson.

Department of State, Washington, March 13, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 711.21/234.

[156] Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bogotá, March 24, 1914, noon.

File No. 711.21/239.

[157] The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson.

Department of State, Washington, March 27, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 711.21/239.

[158] Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bogotá, March 31, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 711.21/240.

[159] The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson.

Department of State, Washington, April 2, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 711.21/240.

[160] Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bogota, April 6, 1914.

File No. 711.21/242.

[161] The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson.

Department of State, Washington, April 8, 1914.

File No. 711.21/242.

[162] The Colombian Minister to the Secretary of State.

Colombian Legation, Washington, April 9, 1914.

File No. 711.21/244.

[163] Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bogotá, April 15, 1914.

File No. 711.21/254.

[164] The Secretary of State to the Colombian Minister.

Department of State, Washington, April 18, 1914.

File No. 711.21/244.

[165] Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bogotá, June 8, 1914.

File No. 711.21/275.

[166] The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson.

Department of State, Washington, June 10, 1914.

File No. 711.21/275.

[167] Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bogotá, June 17, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 711.21/277.

[168] Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bogotá, June 17, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 711.21/278.

[169] Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bogota, June 19, 1914.

File No. 711.21/284.

[170] The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson.

Department of State, Washington, June 24, 1914.

File No. 711.21/277.

[171] Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bogotá, July 7, 1914.

File No. 711.21/285.

[172] The Secretary of State to the Colombian Minister.

Department of State, Washington, July 19, 1914.

File No. 711.21/266.

[173] The Colombian Minister to the Secretary of State.

Colombian Legation, Washington, July 22, 1914.

File No. 711.21/292.

[174] Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bogotá, August 29, 1914.

File No. 711.21/299.

[175] The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson.

Department of State, Washington, September 5, 1914.

File No. 711.21/299a.

[176] The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson.

Department of State, Washington, September 24, 1914.

Fle No. 711.21/302.

Chargé Harrison to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.21/220.

[Document 148]

Chargé Harrison to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Bogota, January 9, 1914, 5 p.m.

I have seen the Minister for Foreign Affairs by appointment to receive Colombia’s reply to the proposition of your December 19, 6 p.m.11 The Minister apologized for the delay in answering, due to unavoidable absence of one of the members of the Consultatory Commission of the Foreign Office. He hopes to have a reply for me by the 13th instant.* * * Our negotiations are, in fact, not with the Government but with the Commissioners, representing all political parties, with whom the Government has but little influence.* * *

Any concession the Department may be able to grant would go far toward a settlement. If, however, the Department cannot accept their draft,12 a full frank explanation of the reasons therefor would undoubtedly have a beneficial effect.

Harrison.

11  Id. 328.

12  Id. 324.

Chargé Harrison to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.21/221.

[Document 149]

Chargé Harrison to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Bogota, January 17, 1914, 7 p.m.

Article I of your December 19, 6 p.m, accepted.

Article II. The Minister for Foreign Affairs proposes the following modifications:

Section 1. Accepted.

Section 2. The first sentence to read: “Colombian merchant ships, whatever be their port of departure or destination, and the products of the soil, etc.” And after the word “payable” insert “by merchant ships of the United States of the same class and”; also, after the words “to entry in the Canal Zone” insert “islands and lands accessory thereto.”

Section 3. Accepted.

Section 4. After the word “interrupted” insert “or whenever it shall be necessary for any other reason to use the railway.”

Section 5. After the word “coal” insert “petroleum”; and for the word “ordinary” substitute the word “lowest.”

The Minister feels confident of obtaining the Commissioners’ approval of Article II thus modified. He hopes that after their acceptance of your draft for Article I it will be found possible to grant Colombia equal treatment in the use of the Canal and, especially, similar privileges for the Colombian merchant marine. He believes that this would greatly assuage Colombian feeling, create an identity of interest in the Panama Canal and preclude the desire for a Colombian canal.

If the word “lowest” is substituted for the word “ordinary” in section 5, I would respectfully suggest insertion of the word “similar” before the word “products.”

I venture to hope that in making reply the Department will, in the event of non-acceptance of the proposed modifications, again be willing to give reasons therefor.

If and when the time comes for the discussion of Articles III and IV, would you go above 25 millions? And would you concede a rectification of the boundary, the lines to run from the heights of Aspave direct to Cocalito?

Harrison.

Chargé Harrison to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.21/226.

[Document 150]

Chargé Harrison to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Bogotá, February 5, 1914, 5 p.m.

I have received to-day from the Minister for Foreign Affairs the following counter-proposition, which has been endorsed by the Commission of the Foreign Office: The Preamble presented by you in the form of a minute to Mr. Taylor is accepted.

Article I. The draft of your December 19, 6 p.m., is accepted.

“Article II. The Republic of Colombia shall enjoy the following rights in respect to the Interoceanic Canal and the Panama Railway: “Paragraph 1. [Draft of your December 19, 6 p.m., accepted, with the following addition.] As regards the use of the Canal, Colombian merchant ships are placed on terms of equality with the merchant ships of the United States.

“Paragraph 2. The products of the soil and industry of Colombia passing through the Canal, as well as the Colombian mails, shall be exempt from any charge or duty other than those to which the products and mails of the United States may be subject. The products of the soil and industry of Colombia, such as cattle, salt and provisions, shall be admitted to entry in the Canal Zone, and likewise in the islands and mainland auxiliary and accessory thereto, without paying other duties or charges than those payable by similar products of the United States.

“Paragraph 3. [Draft of your December 19, 6 p.m., accepted.]

“Paragraph 4. During the construction of the Interoceanic Canal and afterwards, whenever traffic by the Canal is interrupted, or whenever for any other reason [it] will become necessary or convenient, the troops, materials of war, products and mails of the Republic of Colombia, as above mentioned, shall, even in case of war between Colombia and another country, be transported on the Panama Railway or on any other railway substituted therefor or in addition thereto, paying only the same charges and duties to which the troops, materials of war, products and mails of the United States are subject. The officers, agents and employees of the Government of Colombia shall, upon proving their official character, also be entitled to be transported by the said Railway on the same terms as officers, agents and employees of the Government of the United States.

“Paragraph 5. Coal, petroleum and sea salt, being the products of Colombia, passing from the Atlantic coast of Colombia to the Colombian coast of the Pacific, and vice versa, shall be transported over the aforesaid Railway free of every charge except the actual cost of transportation and loading and unloading in the trains, which shall not in any case exceed one half of the usual or ordinary freight charges which are levied on similar products of the United States in transit from one port to another of the United States.

“Article III. The United States of America agrees to pay to the Republic of Colombia, within six months after the exchange of ratifications of the present treaty, the sum of $30,000,000 gold, United States money. The United States will also pay to the Republic of Colombia during 100 years to be counted from the aforesaid date an annuity of $250,000 in the same money.

“Article IV. The Republic of Colombia recognizes Panama as an independent nation and, taking as a basis the Colombian law of June 9, 1855, agrees that the boundary shall be the following: From Cape Tiburón to the headwaters of the Rio de la Miel, and following the mountain chain by the ridge of Gandi to the Sierra of Chugargun and that of Mali, going down by the ridges of Nigue to the heights of Aspave, and from thence to Cocalito on the Pacific.

“It is distinctly understood that in recognizing the independence of Panama, Colombia rejects and declines all responsibility in respect to any Governments, entities or individuals for acts or events which may have taken place at any time in the territory of Panama.

“As soon as the ratifications of the present treaty have been exchanged, the Government of the United States will take the necessary steps to obtain from the Government of Panama the despatch of an agent to initiate with the Government of Colombia the negotiation of a treaty of peace and friendship based upon sentiments of fraternity and justice.”

Harrison.

The Secretary of State to Chargé Harrison. File No. 711.21/226.

[Document 151]

The Secretary of State to Chargé Harrison.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 28, 1914, 11 p.m.

Your February 5, 5 p.m. The American Minister is authorized on his arrival at Bogotà to answer Colombia’s counter-proposition as follows:

Article II. Department agrees to Colombia’s substitute for the introductory phrase, but regrets this Government’s inability to accept proposed addition to Paragraph 1. The concession embraced in this paragraph, exempting Colombian men-of-war from tolls, was based on an agreement reached by this Government with Great Britain in 1909, under which Great Britain assented to the concession on the express understanding that it was not to be taken as a precedent. For this reason this Government is precluded from approaching Great Britain again and asking what would undoubtedly be treated, and accordingly refused, as a further departure from the principle of tolls embodied in the Hay-Pauncefote Treaty.

Paragraph 2. Department accepts amended version of Paragraph 2, with the insertion after the words “islands and mainland” of the phrase “occupied by the United States.”

Paragraph 4. Department accepts amendment proposed by Colombia in your January 17, 7 p.m., but not the substitute in your February 5, 5 p.m. This Government cannot omit the proviso that the paragraph shall not apply in case of war between Colombia and Panama.

Paragraph 5. Substitute accepted, subject to correct phrasing of English text.

Article III. This Government must adhere to the proposal of December 19, 6 p.m., except that it is willing to increase the amount to $25,000,000. But this offer of twenty-five millions will not be made until we are assured that it will be accepted. We are not willing to make the offer and have it refused. When all other details are settled and agreed to and we are informed that the twenty-five millions will be accepted, the offer will be made and the matter closed.

Article IV. Department accepts the first sentence or paragraph, except the last clause, which makes the line from Aspave terminate at Cocalito. The Colombian law of June 9,1855, on which the boundary is based, expressly provides that the line from Aspave shall terminate on the Pacific between Cocalito and Ardita. The Department therefore feels obliged to adhere to its proposal to adopt a point midway between Cocalito and Ardita. The area involved is small and as the land is unproductive and conceded to be practically worthless, there appears to be no reason for departing from the law of 1855.

The Department is unable to accept the second sentence or paragraph, by which Colombia proposes to renounce liability for any acts or events which may have taken place at any time in the territory of Panama. This proposal introduces a subject which is not conceived to be germane to the present negotiation and which could be properly considered only in connection with negotiations between Colombia and Panama for the treaty of peace and friendship for which the fourth article provides.

The Department accepts the third sentence or paragraph.

The presentation of this answer is deferred till Mr. Thomson’s return because his visit to Washington has enabled him to gain an intimate personal acquaintance with certain conditions upon the pending negotiations.

Bryan.

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.21/234.

[Document 152]

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Bogota, March 7, 1914, 9 p.m.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs has today handed me Colombia’s reply13 to the proposition of your February 28, 11 p.m., consisting of lengthy reasons on behalf of this Government accepting other modifications, but insisting on equal treatment for Colombian merchant marine, an indemnity of $30,000,000 with an annuity of $250,000 for fifty years, suggesting addition of the words “or which may be occupied” after the word “occupied” in Paragraph 2 of Article II, and substitution of the word “convenient” for the word “necessary” of Paragraph 4 of Article II, and lastly insisting on inclusion of Paragraph 2 of Article IV of Legation’s telegram of February 5, 5 p.m.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs asks me to submit the above to you.

It is not [sic] my intention to refuse to consider the concession for the Colombian merchant marine, and to repeat the assurance I have already given to the effect that, if and when all other details are settled, Colombia may count on an increase in the indemnity.

As regards the above-mentioned modifications to Article II, I shall be very glad to receive instructions thereon.

Would Paragraph 2 of Article IV of the Legation’s February 5, 5 p.m., be acceptable to the Department if the following provision is added: “It is likewise understood that Colombia releases and discharges Panama from all obligations for the payment of any part of the external and internal debt of the Republic of Colombia”?

Out of courtesy to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, I decided to submit the above for your consideration, and I shall await instructions before making final reply. * * *

Thomson.

13 For the text see the Minister’s despatch No. 59 of April 15, inclosure 1.

The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson. File No. 711.21/234.

[Document 153]

The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson.

[Telegram—Paraphrase.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 10, 1914, 8 p.m.

What is the meaning of the provision affecting Panama, in your March 7, 9 p.m.?

Bryan.

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.21/235.

[Document 154]

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Bogotá, March 11, 1914, 10 p.m.

Your March 10, 8 p.m. In the Colombian counter-proposition of February 5, 5 p.m., to that of your December 19, 6 p.m., there was inserted a new clause in Article IV whereby it was understood that, in recognizing the independence of Panama, Colombia renounced liability for all claims of whatsoever nature whether of governments or individuals for acts or events which may have taken place at any time in the territory of Panama.

By your telegraphic instruction of February 28, 11 p.m., I was directed to say, and so informed the Colombian Government, that you did not consider this provision to be germane to the present treaty and that it was a proper subject for discussion between Colombia and Panama at the time of negotiating the treaty of peace and friendship for which Article IV provides.

As I have already had the honor of informing the Department in my telegram of March 7, 9 p.m., Colombia has insisted upon retaining this provision in the face of your opinion that it was not germane to the present treaty. Although my understanding had been, when leaving Washington, that the instructions [to] be sent me on my arrival at Bogota would be final, I wished to leave nothing undone in my power if possible to satisfy legitimate Colombian aspirations, and therefore ventured to inquire whether you would be willing to retain this provision proposed by Colombia if a further provision were added releasing Panama from all obligation to pay her share of the external and internal debt of Colombia existing on November 3, 1903.

Although the suggestion to insert such a provision releasing Panama from all Colombian claims has not been proposed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, I learn on reliable authority that if presented by me it would be accepted by the Minister and the Commission of the Foreign Office.

If, therefore, the Department should see fit to instruct me to accept Paragraph 2 of Article IV of the Colombian counterproposition of March 5, 5 p.m., with a proper proviso similarly releasing Panama from all claims Colombia might have against her, I have no doubt but that with this modification, and with the acceptance of the two modifications in Article II submitted to your consideration in my telegram of March 7, 9 p.m., a speedy settlement will be reached.

If, however, you maintain your former opinion that this proposal is not germane to the present treaty, or if the mutual release of obligations is unacceptable to Panama, I feel confident that I shall nevertheless be able to settle on the terms of your telegram of February 28, 11 p.m.

Thomson.

The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson. File No. 711.21/234.

[Document 155]

The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 13, 1914, 7 p.m.

Your March 7, 9 p.m. Department, for reasons stated in its telegram of February 28, is obliged finally to decline to include merchant ships in exemption from tolls.

Department agrees to add after word “occupied” in Article II, Paragraph 4, the word “convenient” for “necessary.” [sic] The phrase which Colombia asks thus to change was inserted at her request and in the precise terms submitted by her.

In Article III the Department will raise the offer to twenty-five million dollars if Colombia will agree in advance to accept it. This is to be considered final as to amount. Department cannot add an annuity.

The Department regrets that it is unable to accept the proposed insertion in Article IV. The question of reciprocal releases from liabilities and obligations would naturally form a part of the negotiations which Colombia and Panama are to undertake for a treaty of peace and friendship. It could not be dealt with by the United States and Colombia in the present negotiations without virtually making Panama a party to them. It would also import into these negotiations a subject which might give rise to extended discussions and indefinite delays.

It is hoped that Colombia will treat the contents of this telegram as a satisfactory and final response to her demands. The proposals which she has from time to time put forward have all been carefully considered with a view to make every possible concession to her desires. This has been done even when concessions previously made were understood to meet her wishes fully. The Department cannot help feeling that a continuation of the policy of constantly putting forward new proposals and requesting the alternation [alteration?] of proposals already accepted will lead the two Governments away from what has heretofore been conceived to be the essential basis of settlement and put in jeopardy the entire negotiation. The interests of both Governments will be subserved by the immediate signature of a treaty embodying the proposals on which they accord.

Bryan.

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.21/239.

[Document 156]

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Bogotá, March 24, 1914, noon.

In a counter-memorandum to my memorandum based on your March 13, 7 p.m., the Minister for Foreign Affairs withdraws demand for equal treatment for merchant marine, and for the substitution of the word “convenient” for “necessary.” He proposes, however, that the indemnity shall consist of twenty-five millions to be paid within six months after the exchange of ratifications, together with an additional five millions to be paid within a year after that date, which sum will be assigned to the sanitation and improvement of Cartagena and Buena Ventura. He also submitted the following as a second paragraph to Article IV.

As a condition of this recognition, the United States agrees, immediately after the exchange of the ratifications of the present treaty, to take the necessary steps to obtain from the Government of Panama the despatch of a duly accredited agent to conclude with the Government of Colombia the negotiation of a treaty of peace and friendship which when completed may render possible the establishment, in the usual form, of diplomatic relations between Colombia and Panama and which shall comprise a settlement relative to the internal and external debts of both countries, all in accordance with the principles of law recognized and the antecedents accepted by Colombia and Panama.

In view of your instruction to the effect that the offer of twenty-five millions is to be considered final as to amount, and inasmuch as I perceive no reason to change my opinion that a settlement can be reached on that sum, it is my intention again to repeat the assurance that if Colombia will agree in advance to accept it, the offer will be raised to twenty-five millions.

As regards the second paragraph proposed for Article IV, the Department will note that it is in substitution and amplification of the one upon which we are now agreed. Colombia does not propose a mutual release of obligations. She desires to have it made clear that the Colombia-Panama treaty, which the United States will lend its good offices to bring about, shall provide both for diplomatic relations between her and Panama and for the settlement of their respective obligations in accordance with antecedents accepted by them both. (A similar decision of obligations was arranged between New Granada, Ecuador and Venezuela, the three states that formed the original Republic of Colombia.)

I shall be glad if the Department may see its way to accept this proposal, as I have no doubt whatever that with this final concession the matter will be speedily and satisfactorily concluded.

Thomson.

The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson. File No. 711.21/239.

[Document 157]

The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 27, 1914, 10 a.m.

Your March 24, 12 noon. You may agree to second paragraph, Article IV, in the following terms, which fully embrace what Colombia asks, with only verbal changes: In consideration of this recognition, the United States agrees, immediately after the exchange of the ratifications of the present treaty, to advise the Government of Panama to despatch a duly accredited agent to negotiate and conclude with the Government of Colombia a treaty of peace and friendship, with a view to bring about both the establishment of regular diplomatic relations between Colombia and Panama and the adjustment of all questions of liability as between the two countries in accordance with recognized principles of law and precedents.

If Colombia desires, you may add to this the promise of good offices.

Your purpose to repeat assurance of 25,000,000 if Colombia will agree in advance to accept it, is approved. Department can not exceed that amount.

Bryan.

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.21/240.

[Document 158]

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Bogotá, March 31, 1914, 5 p.m.

Colombia agrees to settle for twenty-five millions, and in so doing trusts that you will agree to the following draft for Paragraph 2 of Article IV: In consideration of this recognition, the Government of the United States, immediately after the exchange of ratifications of the present treaty, will take the necessary steps in order to obtain from the Government of Panama the despatch of a duly accredited agent to negotiate and conclude with the Government of Colombia a treaty of peace and friendship with a view to bring about both the establishment of regular diplomatic relations between Colombia and Panama and the adjustment of all questions of pecuniary liability as between the two countries, in accordance with recognized principles of law and precedents.

The President and the Minister for Foreign Affairs earnestly desire this modification, not that they doubt your bona fides in the matter, but in order to render easier their efforts to obtain the ratification of the treaty by thus allaying any misapprehension as to the true intent of this clause in the minds of Congressmen.

The words “will take the necessary steps in order to obtain” were found in the former second paragraph to Article IV which was accepted in your instruction of February 28, 11 p.m.

I cannot too strongly urge your acceptance of this phraseology, not only because I have promised to recommend it to your favorable consideration but also because I feel that the adoption of this stronger and more definite language will be of no slight aid in obtaining the approval of the Colombian Congress and likewise dispel the instinctive suspicions of the public and the press.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs proposes the following as a fifth article, with the usual formal conclusion: The present treaty shall be approved and ratified by the High Contracting Parties in conformity with their respective laws, and the ratifications thereof shall be exchanged in the City of Bogota, as soon as may be possible.

Thomson.

The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson. File No. 711.21/240.

[Document 159]

The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 2, 1914, 6 p.m.

Your March 31, 5 p.m. Department accepts Paragraph 2 of Article IV. Department’s substitution of the word “advise” for the phrase “take the necessary steps” was intended merely to indicate what the necessary steps meant. They could of course only be advisory, and the Department agrees to “necessary steps” as heretofore used in that sense.

Department also accepts proposal of the Minister for Foreign Affairs for fifth article, and hopes congratulations are not premature.

We feel sure there will be no difficulty in securing despatch of duly accredited agent.

Bryan.

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.21/242.

[Document 160]

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Bogota, April 6, 1914.

I have the honor and great satisfaction to inform you that the treaty was concluded this afternoon.

The following were given full powers and signed on behalf of Colombia: Francisco José Urrutia, Minister for Foreign Affairs; Marco Fidel Suárez, First Designate to exercise the Executive Power;

Nicolás Esguerra, Ex-Minister of State;

José María González Valencia, Senator; Rafael Uribe Uribe, Senator;

Antonio José Uribe, President of the House of Representatives.

These five [last named] gentlemen comprise the Consultative Committee of the Foreign Office. As they represent all political parties, the approval of Congress is assured.

The President will immediately issue a decree convening Congress in special session for May first. The treaty will be published in the Official Gazette on the 14th or 15th instant. The Minister for Foreign Affairs will therefore be glad if you will not give it to the press before that date.

In reporting this happy termination to our negotiations, I beg to express my deep appreciation of the kindly consideration and uniform courtesy shown me by the Department.

I also venture to suggest that if it meets with your approval the President send some informal message of congratulation and good will to the President of Colombia.

Thomson.

The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson. File No. 711.21/242.

[Document 161]

The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 8, 1914.

Accept my hearty congratulations on your success in signing the treaty. You have rendered a signal service. Please express to the Foreign Office my satisfaction. * * *

W. J. Bryan.

The Colombian Minister to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.21/244.

[Document 162]

The Colombian Minister to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Colombian Legation,
Washington, April 9, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Bryan: I am very glad to know that you are in good health and I take pleasure in congratulating you on the signing of the convention which restored the friendship of yore between Colombia and the United States.

I have earnestly yearned for the restoration of friendly relations with the country of the immortal Washington, and for that reason the convention is gratifying to me; but I will frankly say to you that the bases of the treaty do not meet Colombia’s claims, which I had hoped would be entertained by the American Government.

This is my own, entirely personal, faultfinding, which I beg you to excuse; and I avail [etc.]

Julio Betancourt.

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.21/254.

[Document 163]

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State. 14

No. 59.] American Legation,
Bogotá, April 15, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith for the files of the Department a copy with English translation of the Colombian memorandum presented on March 7 last in reply to the counter-proposition contained in your telegraphic instructions of February 28, 11 p.m. This memorandum was summarized and communicated to the Department in my telegram of March 7, 9 p.m.

There is also enclosed a copy of my memorandum handed the Minister for Foreign Affairs on March 16, which was based on your telegram of March 13, 7 p.m.

I also beg to enclose a copy with English translation of the Colombian counter-memorandum of March 21, the substance of which was telegraphed to the Department under date of March 24.

After communicating to the Minister for Foreign Affairs the draft for Paragraph 2 of Article IV, proposed in your telegraphic instruction of March 27 together with an offer to add, if desired, by Colombia, a promise of good offices, I again repeated the assurance that the offer would be raised to 25 millions when all the other points were settled, with an explanation of why it was impossible for the Department to exceed that amount.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs arranged an interview for me with the President for March 30, when I had an opportunity to discuss fully the points on which we were not yet in agreement. After my assuring him that you were unable to go beyond 25 millions, the President promised to use his influence to persuade the members of the Commission on Foreign Affairs to accept this amount if I, for my part, would endeavor to obtain your acceptance of the Colombian draft for Paragraph 2 of Article IV.

After consultation with the Commission the Minister for Foreign Affairs was able to inform me that an indemnity of 25 millions was acceptable and the same day I informed you thereof and submitted their draft for the second paragraph of Article IV.

Upon receipt on the 4th of your telegram of April 2 I promptly communicated your acceptance, at the same time explaining that the phrase “take necessary steps” could of course only be in an “advisory” sense. The afternoon of the same day the texts of the treaty were carefully compared and the full powers of the respective plenipotentiaries examined and exchanged.

The question of a suitable title for the treaty came up and after some discussion, due to the difficulty of finding an appropriate yet sufficiently concise title, the following was agreed upon: “Treaty between the United States of America and the Republic of Colombia for the settlement of their differences arising out of events which took place on the Isthmus of Panama in November 1903.”

On Monday afternoon, April 6, the treaty was signed, about 5.30 o’clock, in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The hour of signing was kept a secret but the evening papers were nevertheless able to announce the completion of the treaty. All the newspapers of the capital have expressed satisfaction at the conclusion of the negotiations except two. The general public appears to be pleased and confidently expects to see the treaty ratified without serious opposition in the Colombian Congress, which will convene in special session for 20 days commencing from May 1.

I have the honor to enclose herewith copies of the Diario Oficial containing the Spanish and English texts of the treaty, and also several newspaper clippings15 which may prove of interest to the Department although there has not yet been time for the papers to express their opinions regarding the terms of the treaty, the text of which was given to the public only last evening. I have [etc.]

Thad. A. Thomson.

[Inclosure 1—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Minister Thomson.

memorandum.

In the counter-proposition presented on the 2d instant by his excellency the Minister of the United States the following modifications were proposed to the Colombian proposal: 1. The second paragraph of Section 1 of Article II was omitted, which read as follows: “As regards the use of the Canal, Colombian merchant ships are placed on terms of equality with the merchant ships of the United States.”

2. In Section 2 of the said Article II, for the phrase “likewise in the islands and mainland auxiliary or accessory thereto” is substituted the following: “likewise in the islands and mainland occupied by the United States as auxiliary or accessory thereto.”

3. In Section 4 of said Article where it reads:’”During the construction of the Interoceanic Canal and afterwards, whenever traffic by the Canal is interrupted, or whenever for any other reason it may be necessary or convenient to use the Railway,” the American counter-proposition omits the word “convenient.”

4. In the same section where the Colombian proposal reads: “on the Panama Railway or on any other railway substituted therefor or in addition thereto,” the American counter-proposal says: “on the Railway between Ancon and Cristobal, or on any other railway substituted therefor.”

5. At the end of the same section the counter-proposition of the United States adds the following, which does not appear in the Colombian proposal: “The provisions of this paragraph shall not, however, apply in case of war between Colombia and Panama.”

6. In Section 5 of the said Article II the North American proposal changes the following phrase: “Coal, petroleum and sea salt, being the products of Colombia, passing from the Atlantic coast of Colombia to the Colombian coast of the Pacific, and vice versa,” to this one: “Coal, petroleum and sea salt, being the products of Colombia, passing from the Atlantic coast of Colombia to any Colombian port on the Pacific coast, and vice versa.”

7. In the same section for the phrase “which shall not in any case exceed one half of the usual or ordinary freight charges which are levied upon similar products of the United States in transit from one port to another of the United States” there is substituted the following: “which shall not in any case exceed one half of the ordinary freight charges levied upon similar products of the United States passing over the Railway and in transit from one port to another of the United States.”

8. In the 3d article of the Colombian proposal the indemnity of $30,000,000 and an annual rental of $250,000 for one hundred years, is reduced to $20,000,000 in the American proposal.

9. In Article IV, Paragraph 1, the American proposal differs from the Colombian in that, instead of the boundary line terminating at Cocalito upon descending from the heights of Aspave, it proposes that the line shall terminate at a point on the Pacific half way between Cocalito and La Ardita.

10. The American counter-proposition omits the 2d paragraph of said Article IV, as follows: It is distinctly understood that in recognizing the independence of Panama, Colombia rejects and declines all responsibility in respect to any governments, entities or individuals for acts or events which may have taken place at any time in the Territory of Panama.”

The Colombian Government, desiring to give one more proof of its good will to hasten and terminate the present negotiation in the most cordial understanding, agrees to accept the modifications mentioned in Nos. 4, 5, 6, 7 and 9.

As regards the first modification, Colombia insists upon the necessity to keep the clause relative to the equal treatment of her merchant ships with those of the United States in the transit of the Canal. Basing her claim in the sovereignty which Colombia has possessed in the territory of the Isthmus, she demanded in her first proposal that her merchant marine be given a privileged position in the transit of the Canal; but thereafter, taking into consideration the observations of the United States, she agreed to renounce this right in order to place herself upon terms of equality with the United States in this particular, which is quite reasonable and equitable, because, if it is true that the United States are the constructors of the waterway, it cannot be forgotten that Colombia has been the sovereign of the territory, and upon renouncing this title in the convention now being negotiated the least that she can demand is for the passage of her merchant ships upon equal terms with those of the United States. When the second Hay-Pauncefote Treaty was concluded in 1901, both Great Britain and the United States also recognized the sovereignty of Colombia in the Isthmus where the Canal was to be constructed; consequently it cannot today be considered extraordinary, neither to Great Britain nor to the United States nor to any nation, that upon renouncing her dominion over all the territory of Panama, Colombia should expressly reserve for her merchant marine a juridical situation equal to that of the United States, who takes her place in the said sovereignty as regards the Canal Zone.

In consideration of all this, and in order to give one more proof of her desire to arrive at a definite settlement, Colombia proposes, after the first paragraph of Article II, the following formula, which conciliates and harmonizes all interests: If at any time the merchant marine of the United States shall enjoy especial advantages in the use of the Panama Canal, it is understood that the same advantages shall be enjoyed by the merchant marine of Colombia.

As regards the second modification, Colombia accepts it with the following phraseology, which is intended solely to clarify the idea and avoid ambiguities which might arise in the future: “likewise in the islands and mainland occupied or which may be occupied by the United States as auxiliary or accessory thereto.”

Colombia accepts the third modification with the single substitution of the adjective “convenient” for “necessary.”

As regards the eighth modification, the Colombian Government has already indicated in former memoranda to the Legation of the United States that it considers from every point of view modest an indemnity of $50,000,000 for the enormous losses suffered by the Republic by reason of the events which took place in November 1903, as compensation for renouncing her right of sovereignty over the best part of her territory, which is likewise the most precious portion of the globe. This indemnity has been substantiated, moreover, by exact numerical computations of the rights which Colombia renounces and which she held by means of contractual engagements in the form of an annual rental to run for nearly a century, respecting the Railway and Canal of Panama, and also, at the end of that period, through her proprietary right to the said works.

Animated by the conciliatory spirit which has presided over the present negotiations, the Government in its last project reduced the amount of the indemnity to only $30,000,000 and an annual rental of $250,000 for one hundred years; and now, after having consented to the greater part of the last modifications contained in the North American counter-proposition, Colombia limits the rental to fifty years, keeping the payment of $30,000,000 six months after the ratification of the present treaty, in the firm assurance that this clause will be definitely accepted in this form.

Finally, as regards the omission of the second paragraph of Article IV (No. 10), based on the reasoning that it is not germane to the treaty under discussion, Colombia insists that the said paragraph remain, as it is strictly just and the principle which applies here is quite in accordance with law. It is not considered to be out of place in Article IV, as the first paragraph thereof refers only to declarations which Colombia makes in a treaty with the United States, declarations which are exclusively for the benefit of Panama, which recognize its independence as a sovereign state, and fix its territorial limits with Colombia. Moreover, the connection between the two paragraphs of Article IV is so intimate that the second may be considered as a condition of the first, and this is the proper occasion to make all the declarations contained in the said article.

Foreign Office,
Bogota, March 7, 1914.

[Inclosure 2.]

Minister Thomson to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

memorandum.

Referring to the five points presented for consideration by his excellency Dr. Francisco Jose Urrutia on the 7th instant.

I. As regards the first modification, providing equal treatment for the Colombian merchant marine in the use of the Canal, the United States Government regrets its inability to accept this proposed addition to Paragraph 1 of Article II, and, for the reasons already given, is obliged finally to decline to include merchant ships in exemption from tolls.

II. The United States Government agrees to add after the word “occupied” in Article II, Paragraph 2, the words “or which may be occupied.”

III. The United States Government regrets inability to substitute in Article II, Paragraph 4, the word “convenient” for “necessary.” The phrase which his excellency asks to be changed was inserted at his request and in the precise terms submitted by his excellency.

IV. As regards the indemnity, the United States Government will raise the offer to 25 millions if and when all other details are settled and if the Colombian Government will agree in advance to accept it.

V. For the reasons submitted to his excellency on March 3, the United States Government regrets that it is unable to accept the proposed insertion in Article IV whereby the Republic of Colombia proposes to renounce liability for any acts or events which may have taken place at any time in the Territory of Panama.

In the belief that such would be acceptable to the Colombian Government, especially in view of the contents of Paragraph 6 of the “Resume” of Reasons presented by his excellency on January 22 last, the Government of the United States was consulted regarding the insertion of a clause similarly releasing Panama from obligation to pay its share of the internal and external debt of Colombia existing on November 3, 1903.

The Legation has been informed that in the opinion of the United States Government the question of reciprocal release from liabilities and obligations would naturally form a part of the negotiations which are to be undertaken by the Governments of the Republics of Colombia and Panama for a treaty of peace and friendship for which Article IV of the present treaty provides.

This question could not be dealt with by the United States and Colombia in the present negotiations without virtually making Panama a party to them, to say nothing of importing also into these negotiations a subject which might well give rise to extended discussions and delays.

It is to be hoped that the Colombian Government will treat this reply as a satisfactory and final response to its demands. The proposals which his excellency has from time to time put forward have all been given the most careful consideration with a view to make every possible concession to Colombia’s desires.

The United States Government believes that the interests of both Governments will be best served by the immediate signature of a treaty embodying the proposals on which they are now agreed.

American Legation,
Bogotá, March 16, 1914.

[Inclosure 3—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Minister Thomson.

memorandum.

After a careful study of the memorandum presented by his excellency Mr. Thomson on the 16th instant, the Government of Colombia communicates to his excellency the following: 1. In spite of the fully justified reasons stated in former memoranda in support of Colombia’s request that her merchant ships should be placed on the same footing as those of the United States as regards the use of the Canal, and in spite of the highest importance which such a clause would contain for the future of the Republic, this Government, desiring to reach a definite understanding in the present treaty, agrees to withdraw the said stipulation.

2. The Government of Colombia for similar reasons likewise withdraws from the position that in Article II the word “convenient” be substituted for the word “necessary.”

3. But, conforming or having conformed to these and other desires of the Government of the United States, the Colombian Government does so on the condition and assurance that the former for its part will definitely adopt the two formulas which today the Colombian Government presents for Article III and for Paragraph 2 of Article IV, which are as follows: Article III.

The United States of America agrees to pay to the Republic of Colombia, within the six months following the exchange of ratifications of the present treaty, the sum of $25,000,000 gold, United States money. In addition thereto the United States will pay to Colombia the sum of $5,000,000 gold, in the same money, one year after the said date, Colombia engaging herself to use the said sum for the sanitation and improvement of the Colombian ports of Cartagena and Buenaventura, which works shall be commenced by Colombia immediately after the exchange of the above-mentioned ratifications.

Article IV, Paragraph 2.

As a condition of this recognition, the United States agrees, immediately after the exchange of the ratifications of the present treaty, to take the necessary steps to obtain from the Republic of Panama the despatch of a duly accredited agent to conclude with the Government of Colombia the negotiation of a treaty of peace and friendship which when completed may render possible the establishment, in the usual form, of diplomatic relations between Colombia and Panama and which shall comprise a settlement relative to the internal and external debts of both countries, all in accordance with the principles of law recognized and the antecedents accepted by Colombia and Panama.

If the varied reasons which have up to this day been presented to the Government of the United States are borne in mind, in order to appreciate the enormous losses caused the Republic of Colombia by the events of November 1903, as well as that above mentioned by which the Government, with a view to facilitate this negotiation, agrees to give up the valuable right for equal treatment for its merchant marine in the use of the Canal, an indemnity of $30,000,000 and fifty annuities of $250,000 each, as proposed for Article III, can only be considered as very moderate. Nevertheless, the Government, giving still another proof of the good will animating it in this delicate affair, agrees to accept the $25,000,000 offered by the United States together with an additional $5,000,000 which will be invested in works which will not only be of service to Colombia but also to the world’s commerce and especially to the commerce of the United States and above all to the Canal, as would be the sanitation and improvement of the ports of Cartagena and Barranquilla, which are the nearest situated to the great waterway.

Moreover, an indemnity less in amount would undoubtedly meet with great opposition in Colombian public opinion.

That which is proposed in Paragraph 2 of Article IV by the Colombian Government not only is in harmony with the principles of justice and right but also with international practice, with analogous occurrences in the Republic and with the precedents of this negotiation.

In truth, a pure and simple recognition of the Republic of Panama would not be reasonable without recording anything in the same diplomatic document regarding the proportional payment of the internal debt which was borne by Colombia before the 3d of November 1903.

In 1830, at the time when the Provinces of the South of the old Colombia which now form the Republic of Ecuador seceded, the convention of New Granada, by the Law of February 10, 1832, provided as follows: Article 1. Authority is hereby given to the Executive Power to recognize through a treaty the new State which has been formed in the south of Colombia, composed of the Departments of Ecuador, Azuary and Guayaquil, in the extent of the limits which they possessed in the year 1830, fixed by the Law of June 25, 1824, relative to territorial division.

Article 2. The said treaty shall contain the following articles: I. The contracting parties shall obligate themselves to respect each other’s boundaries.

II. They shall also undertake in the most solemn manner to pay their proportional part of the domestic and foreign debt, as integral parts of the Republic of Colombia which recognized the said debts in solidum; and to be responsible for the bonds belonging to the aforesaid Republic of which they may respectively have made disposal.

In accordance with this authorization there was concluded the Treaty of December 8, 1832, of Peace, Friendship and Alliance between New Grenada and Ecuador, which contained the following provisions: Article I. The States of New Granada and Ecuador mutually recognize and respect each other, and will recognize and respect each other as Sovereign and Independent States.

Article II. The boundaries between the States of New Granada and Ecuador shall be those which in conformity with the Colombian Law of June 25, 1824, divided the Provinces of the ancient Departments of the Cauca and Ecuador.

Article VII. It has been and is hereby agreed in the most solemn manner, also in accord with the laws of both States, that New Granada and Ecuador shall pay their proportional part of the domestic and foreign debt, as having been integral parts of the Republic of Colombia, which recognized these debts in solidum. Moreover, each State undertakes to be responsible for the bonds belonging to the said Republic of which it may have made disposal.

In conformity with these provisions, the Convention of December 23, 1834, was celebrated between New Granada and Venezuela, which was accepted by Ecuador, relative to the recognition and division of the external and internal debts of Colombia.

These treaties form part of conventional and positive American public law, and include Panama as an integral part of the old Colombia. Today, upon the solution of an analogous case, neither Colombia nor Panama can separate itself from this precedent. Neither would the pure and simple recognition of the independence of Panama be possible, since, as we have seen in the law and the treaties mentioned and quoted above, the recognition of independence has been conditional and simultaneous with the provision regarding the division and payment of the internal and external debt of the State which has suffered territorial dismemberment, the cause of the recognition of the new sovereign entity.

The Government of the United States expressly concurs in the justice of a stipulation such as the one under discussion, because in the last memorandum of his excellency Mr. Thomson it is said: The Legation has been informed that in the opinion of the United States Government the question of reciprocal releases from liabilities and obligations would naturally form a part of the negotiations which are to be undertaken by the Governments of the Republics of Colombia and Panama for a treaty of peace and friendship for which Article IV of the present treaty provides.

The Legation, however, observes that the fact of introducing the said paragraph 2 in Article IV would virtually make Panama a party to the negotiation, which might possibly give rise to lengthy discussions and delays. The difficulty pointed out by the Government of the United States would, in the judgment of Colombia, be overcome by omitting, as is desired by the Government of the United States, this second paragraph, at the same time adding the third in the manner above mentioned, i. e., by means of an abstract formula which would comprise the idea which the Government of the United States considers “naturally to form part of the treaty of peace and friendship between Colombia and Panama”, without entering into details which might well now cause delays, and simply making an express mention of the object of the convention for the conclusion of which the United States promise to lend their good offices.

Moreover, the formula now proposed by the Government of Colombia for a second paragraph for Article IV is in complete harmony with the statement and promise made by the Government of the United States in the Department’s note dated January 5, 1904, addressed to the Colombian Legation at Washington, in which Mr. Hay, after stating that his Government would not agree to submit the differences that had arisen between Colombia and the United States to the decision of the Hague Tribunal, closes by saying: But there may be, no doubt, other questions which may form a proper subject of negotiation; among them, for instance, the establishment of diplomatic relations between the Republics of Colombia and Panama, the delimitation of their respective boundaries, the apportionment of their mutual pecuniary liabilities. If the Government of Colombia will take these matters up, with any others which they think may require discussion, and will put their suggestions in regard to them in a definite and concrete form, they will receive at the hands of this Government the most careful consideration with a view to bringing them, in the exercise of good offices, to the attention of the Government of Panama.

As will be seen, the formula which the Colombian Government presents today is based upon the wording of this solemn promise of the Government of the United States, which jointly includes the questions relating to the demarcation of boundaries, the establishment of diplomatic relations and the proportional division of the pecuniary liabilities of Colombia and Panama.

Foreign Office,
Bogotá, March 21, 1914.

[Inclosure 4.]

Treaty between the United States of America and the Republic of Colombia for the settlement of their differences arising out of the events which took place on the Isthmus of Panama in November, 1903.

Diario Oficial, Bogota, April 14, 1914.

[The text of the treaty will be found on p. 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 166].]

14 Acknowledged on May 21, 1914.

15 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Colombian Minister. File No. 711.21/244.

[Document 164]

The Secretary of State to the Colombian Minister.

Department of State,
Washington, April 18, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Minister: I beg you to accept my thanks for your very kind letter of the 9th instant congratulating me on the signature of the convention between the United States and Colombia.

While it would seem that the convention is not all that you would wish, I feel confident that you will share with me in the hope that it will result in the removal of all friction between the two Governments and in the restoration of their ancient cordial friendship.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.21/275.

[Document 165]

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Bogotá, June 8, 1914.

It affords me much satisfaction to report that the treaty has been approved without amendment by the Colombian Congress.

When will it be submitted to the Senate?

Thomson.

The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson. File No. 711.21/275.

[Document 166]

The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 10, 1914.

Your June 8. Congratulations. Hope to submit treaty next week.

Bryan.

63d Congress,
2d session. II

Executive H

Message of the President transmitting the treaty to the Senate.

[Referred to the Committee on Foreign Relations on June 16, 1914.]

To the Senate:

I transmit herewith, for the constitutional action of the Senate, a treaty signed at Bogota on April 6, 1914, between the United States and the Republic of Colombia, for the settlement of their differences arising out of events which took place on the Isthmus of Panama in November, 1903.

Woodrow Wilson.
The White House,
Washington , June 16, 1914.

[Inclosure.]

The Secretary of State to the President.

The President:

The undersigned, the Secretary of State, has the honor to lay before the President, with a view to its transmission to the Senate to receive the advice and consent of that body to its ratification, a treaty signed at Bogota on April 6, 1914, between the United States and the Republic of Colombia, for the settlement of their differences arising out of events which took place on the Isthmus of Panama in November, 1903.

Respectfully submitted.

William Jennings Bryan.
Department of State,
Washington , June 16, 1914.

[Subinclosure.]

TREATY BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND THE REPUBLIC OF COLOMBIA FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF THEIR DIFFERENCES ARISING OUT OF THE EVENTS WHICH TOOK PLACE ON THE ISTHMUS OF PANAMA IN NOVEMBER, 1903.

The United States of America and the Republic of Colombia, being desirous to remove all the misunderstandings growing out of the political events in Panama in November, 1903; to restore the cordial friendship that formerly characterized the relations between the two countries, and also to define and regulate their rights and interests in respect of the interoceanic canal which the Government of the United States is constructing across the Isthmus of Panama, have resolved for this purpose to conclude a Treaty and have accordingly appointed as their Plenipotentiaries:

His Excellency the President of the United States of America, Thaddeus Austin Thomson, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States of America to the Government of the Republic of Colombia; and

His Excellency the President of the Republic of Colombia, Francisco José Urrutia, Minister for Foreign Affairs; Marco Fidel Suárez, First Designate to exercise the Executive Power; Nicolás Esguerra, ex-Minister of State; José María González Valencia, Senator; Rafael Uribe Uribe, Senator; and Antonio Jose Uribe, President of the House of Representatives;

Who, after communication to each other their respective full powers, which were found to be in due and proper form, have agreed upon the following:

Article I.

The Government of the-United States of America, wishing to put at rest all controversies and differences with the Republic of Colombia arising out of the events from which the present situation on the Isthmus of Panama resulted, expresses, in its own name and in the name of the people of the United States, sincere regret that anything should have occurred to interrupt or to mar the relations of cordial friendship that had so long subsisted between the two nations.

The Government of the Republic of Colombia, in its own name and in the name of the Colombian people, accepts this declaration in the full assurance that every obstacle to the restoration of complete harmony between the two countries will thus disappear.

Article II.

The Republic of Colombia shall enjoy the following rights in respect to the interoceanic Canal and the Panama Railway: 1. The Republic of Colombia shall be at liberty at all times to transport through the interoceanic Canal its troops, materials of war and ships of war, even in case of war between Colombia and another country, without paying any charges to the United States.

2. The products of the soil and industry of Colombia passing through the Canal, as well as the Colombian mails, shall be exempt from any charge or duty other than those to which the products and mails of the United States may be subject. The products of the soil and industry of Colombia, such as cattle, salt and provisions, shall be admitted to entry in the Canal Zone, and likewise in the islands and mainland occupied or which may be occupied by the United States as auxiliary and accessory thereto, without paying other duties or charges than those payable by similar products of the United States.

3. Colombian citizens crossing the Canal Zone shall, upon production of proper-proof of their nationality, be exempt from every toll, tax or duty to which citizens of the United States are not subject.

4. During the construction of the Interoceanic Canal and afterwards, whenever traffic by the Canal is interrupted or whenever it shall be necessary for any other reason to use the railway, the troops, materials of war, products and mails of the Republic of Colombia, as above mentioned, shall, even in case of war between Colombia and another country, be transported on the Railway between Ancon and Cristobal or on any other Railway substituted therefor, paying only the same charges and duties as are imposed upon the troops, materials of war, products and mails of the United States. The officers, agents and employees of the Government of Colombia shall, upon production of proper proof of their official character or their employment, also be entitled to passage on the said Railway on the same terms as officers, agents and employees of the Government of the United States. The provisions of this paragraph shall not, however, apply in case of war between Colombia and Panama.

5. Coal, petroleum and sea salt, being the products of Colombia, passing from the Atlantic coast of Colombia to any Colombian port on the Pacific coast, and vice versa, shall be transported over the aforesaid Railway free of any charge except the actual cost of handling and transportation, which shall not in any case exceed one half of the ordinary freight charges levied upon similar products of the United States passing over the Railway and in transit from one port to another of the United States.

Article III.

The United States of America agrees to pay to the Republic of Colombia, within six months after the exchange of the ratifications of the present Treaty, the sum of twenty-five million dollars, gold, United States money.

Article IV.

The Republic of Colombia recognizes Panama as an independent nation and taking as a basis the Colombian law of June 9, 1855, agrees that the boundary shall be the following: From Cape Tiburón to the headwaters of the Río de la Miel and following the mountain chain by the ridge of Gandi to the Sierra de Chugargún and that of Mali, going down by the ridges of Nigue to the heights of Aspave and from thence to a point oh the Pacific half way between Cocalito and La Ardita.

In consideration of this recognition, the Government of the United States will, immediately after the exchange of the ratifications of the present Treaty, take the necessary steps in order to obtain from the Government of Panama the despatch of a duly accredited agent to negotiate and conclude with the Government of Colombia a Treaty of Peace and Friendship, with a view to bring about both the establishment of regular diplomatic relations between Colombia and Panama and the adjustment of all questions of pecuniary liability as between the two countries, in accordance with recognized principles of law and precedents.

Article V.

The present Treaty shall be approved and ratified by the High Contracting Parties in conformity with their respective laws, and the ratifications thereof shall be exchanged in the City of Bogota., as soon as may be possible.

In faith whereof, the said Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Treaty in duplicate and have hereunto affixed their respective seals.

Done at the City of Bogota., the sixth day of April in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and fourteen.

Thaddeus Austin Thomson.

Francisco José Urrutia.

Marco Fidel Suáreb.

Nicolás Esguerra.

José María González Valencia.

Rafael Uribe Uribe.

Antonio José Uribe.

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.21/277.

[Document 167]

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Bogotá, June 17, 1914, 3 p.m.

Apprehending that questions will arise in our Senate regarding the use Colombia may make of the indemnity, the Minister for Foreign Affairs has suggested the desirability of my informing you that while he cannot speak officially for the new administration, which will take office on August 7, it is the desire of those in authority that the indemnity should be invested exclusively in public works, especially railways and the improvement and sanitation of ports, under law enacted by Congress. My own observation leads me to believe that this is the wish of the thinking people as well as the majority of Congress. * * *

Thomson.

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.21/278.

[Document 168]

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Bogotá, June 17, 1914, 5 p.m.

As a last resort, its opponents have instituted proceedings in the Supreme Court to test the constitutionality of the law by which Congress approved the treaty.* * * I do not consider that any importance whatever should be attached to this surely fruitless attack. * * *

Thomson.

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.21/284.

[Document 169]

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

[Extract]

No. 77.] American Legation,
Bogota, June 19, 1914.

Sir: Referring to my telegram of June 17, 5 p.m., reporting that proceedings had been instituted before the (Supreme Court to test the constitutionality of the Treaty of April 6, I have the honor to enclose herewith for your information a copy of the Foreign Office note on the subject, of yesterday’s date, together with an English translation, and also a copy of my note in reply. * * *

As I had the honor to state in my telegram under reference, I do not attach any importance to this petty contretemps, the last weapon that remained to the opponents of the treaty.

I have [etc.]

Thad. A. Thomson.

[Inclosure 1—Translation.]

No. 567.] Foreign Office,
Bogota, June 18, 1914.

Mr. Minister: In view of the fact that proceedings have been instituted by a private citizen before the Supreme Court to test the constitutionality of Law No. 14 of the present year, approving the Treaty of April 6 between Colombia and the United States, the Government of the Republic deems itself bound to say to your excellency, as I have the honor now to do, that this action is absolutely without effect as regards the validity of that international document.

In Colombia, as in all civilized countries, the direction of foreign affairs pertains to the executive branch of the government, and the conclusion of public treaties, with the approval of Congress, is the special concern thereof. The Government believes that the Supreme Court, whose deliberations and decisions are founded in justice, cannot dissociate itself from this doctrine in the present case, and must therefore declare itself not qualified to entertain the matter, especially because the Judiciary has never undertaken to try the validity of public treaties.

This Ministry, therefore, has the honor to advise your excellency that the above-mentioned incident is entirely without import as to the Treaty of April 6, and to request your excellency to be good enough so to inform your Government, in order that the course of the negotiations may not encounter the least impediment by reason thereof.

I have [etc.]

Francisco José Urrutia.

[Inclosure 2.]

[Untitled]

No. 28.] American Legation,
Bogotá, June 19, 1914.

Mr. Minister: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the courteous note 55. 567 of the 18th instant in which your excellency, referring to the fact that proceedings had been instituted in the Supreme Court to test the constitutionality of the Treaty of April 6 between the United States and Colombia, was good enough to inform me that the Government of the Republic believed that the Supreme Odurt would, for the reasons mentioned in your excellency’s note, declare itself unqualified to consider the matter.

In assuring me, therefore, that this incident was entirely without import to the treaty, your excellency requested me so to advise my Government.

In reply I have the honor to inform your excellency that I have reported the matter to my Government in that sense and am confident that the natural course of the negotiation will surfer no interruption thereby.

Please accept [etc.]

Thad. A. Thomson.

The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson. File No. 711.21/277.

[Document 170]

The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson.

No. 26.] Department of State,
Washington, June 24, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your telegram of June 17, 3 p.m.

The Department will be glad to be promptly advised when any formal arrangements shall be proposed for spending the amount stipulated for payment by the United States in the pending treaty between the United States and Colombia.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.21/285.

[Document 171]

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Bogotá, July 7, 1914.

The Supreme Court this afternoon decided that it was disqualified to entertain the matter reported in my June 17, 5 p.m.

Thomson.

The Secretary of State to the Colombian Minister. File No. 711.21/266.

[Document 172]

The Secretary of State to the Colombian Minister.

Department of State,
Washington, July 19, 1914.

Sir: I have honor to invite your attention to paragraph five17 of the proposed treaty between the United States and Colombia, which is now pending ratification in the Senate of the United States. It has been brought to my attention that this paragraph five might be interpreted to require the Panama Railroad, in order to transport the specified products of Colombia, to keep the railroad open and retain rolling-stock especially for this purpose, which under the ordinary circumstances of traffic it would not be required to do. As you are aware, Mr. Minister, it was not the intention of the two Governments to impose any burdens of this character on the Panama Railroad; and therefore, in order to prevent the delay which would arise from amending the treaty, I suggest that your Government agree to the interpretation of this paragraph five in the sense which I have indicated above. A note from you to this effect will be sufficient.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

17 Of Article II.

The Colombian Minister to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.21/292.

[Document 173]

The Colombian Minister to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

No. 24.] Colombian Legation,
Washington, July 22, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to refer to the courteous note of your excellency, dated the 19th ultimo [instant], in which you draw my attention to the text of paragraph 5 of Article II of the Treaty between Colombia and the United States.

In your excellency’s opinion the wording of said text might leave room for interpretation in the sense that the Panama Railway is to be at all times bound to keep its track open and to be provided with the rolling-stock necessary for the special purpose of carrying the commodities named in the said paragraph 5. And your excellency adds that, in order to avoid later difficulties and to prevent the delay attending any amendment of the text of the treaty, it would be well for my Government to declare its concurrence in the interpretation set forth in your excellency’s note which I am now answering.

After consultation on the subject, my Government directs me to make the following declaration in its name to your excellency:

In stipulating paragraph 5 of Article II of the Treaty, the intention of the Colombian negotiators was that coal, salt and petroleum produced in Colombia should pay one half of the freight charged on the same commodities produced in North America for transportation by the railway. In consequence it is not to be supposed that the said intention was to place upon the United States the obligation always to maintain the railway exclusively for the transportation of the said Colombian commodities. This is the interpretation which the Government of Colombia puts on the above-stated stipulation.

I avail [etc.]

Julio Betancourt.

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.21/299.

[Document 174]

Minister Thomson to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Bogotá, August 29, 1914.

On assuming office the Concho administration has been confronted with a deficit of $3,000,000 and has found an empty treasury which there is at present but little prospect of replenishing, owing to the effects of the European war and the attendant trade stagnation. * * *

If the treaty can be ratified, with an amendment to pay the indemnity by installments (which I feel would now be accepted although I have received no official intimation in that sense) the effect throughout Colombia would be especially felicitous at this juncture. * * *

It is important for the Legation to know what are the prospects for ratification and whether consideration will be put off until the next session of Congress.

The present session of the Colombian Congress will come to a close next October 20. Congress will not convene again until July, 1915. If therefore, the treaty is to be amended by the Senate, it is most desirable that action be taken now and not postponed until December. * * *

Thomson.

The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson. File No. 711.21/299a.

[Document 175]

The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 5, 1914.

I have not reported more frequently because there has been nothing to report. So many domestic matters of great importance have occupied the Senate continuously and there has been no opportunity to secure consideration for a treaty if there is serious opposition. The committee has referred the treaty to a subcommittee, but ex-President Roosevelt asks to be heard and that may open up a discussion of the events of 1903 which, in our judgment, are not material to the present settlement. The President is anxious to have the treaty ratified at this session and I fully share this desire with him, but the chances are against it.* * * If I find that any votes can be gained by making the payment in installments, I will let you know, * * *

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson. Fle No. 711.21/302.

[Document 176]

The Secretary of State to Minister Thomson.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 24, 1914.

I am convinced, after consultation with the Committee on Foreign Relations, that it will be impossible to secure a report on the Colombian treaty at this session, and have so informed the Colombian Minister today.* * * Important questions, both domestic and foreign, have occupied the attention of the Senators to the exclusion of all matters not absolutely necessary.

Bryan.

Costa Rica:Costa Rica:

Contents

Message of the President, Ricardo Jiménez, to the CongressMessage of the President, Ricardo Jiménez, to the Congress

[177] Minister Hale to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, San José, May 2, 1914.

Minister Hale to the Secretary of State. [Document 177]

Minister Hale to the Secretary of State.

No. 17.] American Legation,
San José, May 2, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose a copy of the message read by President Jimenez to the Congress of Costa Rica, which met yesterday according to law, and a translation of the same.

I have [etc.]

E. J. Hale.

[Inclosure—Translation—Extract.]

[Untitled]

Gentlemen:

It gives me great pleasure to welcome you and to give here a brief outline of the general state of affairs of the Republic of Costa Rica.

In our foreign affairs, the most important matters are: Our boundary dispute with the Republic of Panama, which controversy, as you know, is about to be settled; and the difference which came up as a result of the canal treaty between the United States and Nicaragua, which was made without our opinion and without our cooperation. When the rumor circulated that the treaty was going to be signed, Costa Rica took steps to have her rights respected by those two Governments. As the treaty is as yet but a mere project, pending before the American Senate for approval, there is no need of alarm, as it might never go any further than its present state. So this Government deemed it needless to press its complaint; and I have so much faith in the high justice of those two Governments, signers of the treaty, and in the strength of our claim, that I have no doubt that the matter will be so arranged as to have the incontestable rights of Costa Rica taken into consideration.

In other respects our foreign relations with the two mentioned Republics, as well as with the rest of the world, have been good and friendly.

Boundary dispute between Costa Rica and Panama.Boundary dispute between Costa Rica and Panama.

(See Panama.)

Protest of Costa Rica in relation to a proposed Nicaraguan canal treaty.Protest of Costa Rica in relation to a proposed Nicaraguan canal treaty.

(See Nicaragua: Proposed interoceanic canal treaty, etc.)

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, concluded between the United States and Costa RicaTreaty for the advancement of general peace, concluded between the United States and Costa Rica

Signed at Washington, February 13, 1914; ratification advised by the Senate, August 13, 1914; ratified by the President, November 11, 1914; ratified by Costa Rica, July 25, 1914; ratifications exchanged at Washington, November 12, 1914; proclaimed, November 13, 1914.

[178] By the President of the United States of America.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this thirteenth day of November in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.

Treaty Series No. 603.]

By the President of the United States of America. Treaty Series No. 603.]

[Document 178]

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas a Treaty between the United States of America and the Republic of Costa Rica looking to the advancement of the cause of general peace was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Washington on the thirteenth day of February, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, the original of which Treaty, being in the English and Spanish languages, is word for word as follows:

The United States of America and the Republic of Costa Rica, being desirous to strengthen the bonds of amity that bind them together and also to advance the cause of general peace, have resolved to enter into a treaty for that purpose, and to that end have appointed as their plenipotentiaries:

The President of the United States, the Honorable William Jennings Bryan, Secretary of State; and

The President of Costa Rica, Senor Don Joaquin Bernardo Calvo, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Costa Rica to the United States;

Who, after having communicated to each other their respective full powers, found to be in proper form, have agreed upon and concluded the following articles:

Article I.

The High Contracting Parties agree that all disputes between them, of every nature whatsoever, to the settlement of which previous arbitration treaties or agreements do not apply in their terms or are not applied in fact, shall, when diplomatic methods of adjustment have failed, be referred for investigation and report to a permanent International Commission, to be constituted in the manner prescribed in the next succeeding article; and they agree not to declare war or begin hostilities during such investigation and before the report is submitted.

Article II.

The International Commission shall be composed of five members, to be appointed as follows: One member shall be chosen from each country, by the Government thereof; one member shall be chosen by each Government from some third country; the fifth member shall be chosen by common agreement between the two Governments, it being understood that he shall not be a citizen of either country. Each of the High Contracting Parties shall have the right to remove, at any time before investigation begins, any Commissioner selected by it and to name his successor, and under the same conditions shall also have the right to withdraw its approval of the fifth Commissioner selected jointly; in which case a new Commissioner shall be selected jointly as in the original selection. The Commissioners shall, when actually employed in the investigation of a dispute, receive such compensation as shall be agreed upon by the High Contracting Parties. The expenses of the Commission shall be paid by the two Governments in equal proportion.

The International Commission shall be appointed as soon as possible after the exchange of the ratifications of this treaty; and vacancies shall be filled according to the manner of the original appointment.

Article III.

In case the High Contracting Parties shall have failed to adjust a dispute by diplomatic methods, they shall at once refer it to the International Commission for investigation and report. The International Commission may, however, spontaneously offer its services to that effect, and in such case it shall notify both Governments and request their cooperation in the investigation.

The High Contracting Parties agree to furnish the Permanent International Commission with all the means and facilities required for its investigation and report.

The report of the International Commission shall be completed within one year after the date on which it shall declare its investigation to have begun, unless the High Contracting Parties shall limit or extend the time by mutual agreement. The report shall be prepared in triplicate; one copy shall be presented to each Government, and the third retained by the Commission for its files.

The High Contracting Parties reserve the right to act independently on the subject matter of the dispute after the report of the Commission shall have been submitted.

Article IV.

The present treaty shall be ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof; and by the President of Costa Rica, with the approval of the Congress thereof; and the ratifications shall be exchanged as soon as possible. It shall take effect immediately after the exchange of ratifications, and shall continue in force for a period of five years; and it shall thereafter remain in force until twelve months after one of the High Contracting Parties have given notice to the other of an intention to terminate it.

In witness whereof, the respective plenipotentiaries have signed the present treaty and have affixed thereunto their seals.

Done in Washington on the 13th day of February, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and fourteen.

[seal.] William Jennings Bryan

[seal.] J. B. Calvo.

And whereas the said Treaty has been duly ratified on both parts, and the ratifications of the two governments were exchanged in the City of Washington, on the twelfth day of November, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Treaty to be made public to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this thirteenth day of November in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.
Woodrow Wilson.

By the President:
W. J. Bryan
Secretary of State.

Arbitration agreement between the United States and Costa Rica, extending the duration of the Convention of January 13, 1909Arbitration agreement between the United States and Costa Rica, extending the duration of the Convention of January 13, 1909

Signed at Washington, March 16, 1914; ratification advised by the Senate, March 25, 1914; ratified by the President, April 23, 1914; ratified by Costa Rica, July 25, 1914; ratifications exchanged at Washington, November 12, 1914; proclaimed, November 13, 1914.

[179] By the President of the United States of America.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this thirteenth day of November in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.

Treaty Series No. 604.]

By the President of the United States of America. Treaty Series No. 604.]

[Document 179]

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas an Agreement between the United States of America and the Republic of Costa Rica extending for a further period of five years the arbitration convention concluded between them on January 13, 1909, was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Washington on the sixteenth day of March, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, the original of which Agreement, being in the English and Spanish languages, is word for word as follows:

The Government of the United States of America and the Government of Costa Rica, being desirous of extending the period of five years during which the Arbitration Convention concluded between them on January 13, 1909, is to remain in force, which period is about to expire, have authorized the undersigned, to wit: The Honorable William Jennings Bryan, Secretary of State of the United States, and Senor Don Joaquin Bernardo Calvo, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Costa Rica at Washington, to conclude the following agreement:

Article I.

The Convention of Arbitration of January 13, 1909, between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of Costa Rica, the duration of which by Article III thereof was fixed at a period of five years from the date of the exchange of ratifications, which period will terminate on July 20, 1914, is hereby extended and continued in force for a further period of five years from July 20, 1914.

Article II.

The present Agreement shall be ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by the President of Costa Rica, in accordance with the Constitution and laws thereof, and it shall become effective upon the date of the exchange of ratifications, which shall take place at Washington as soon as possible.

Done in duplicate at Washington, in the English and Spanish languages, this 16th day of March, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen.

William Jennings Bryan [seal.]

J. B. Calvo. [seal.]

And whereas, the said Agreement has been duly ratified on both parts, and the ratifications of the two governments were exchanged in the City of Washington, on the twelfth day of November, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Agreement to be made public to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this thirteenth day of November in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.
Woodrow Wilson.

By the President:
W. J. Bryan
Secretary of State.

Representation of Chinese interests by American diplomatic and consular officersRepresentation of Chinese interests by American diplomatic and consular officers

[180] Minister Hale to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, San Jose, August 25, 1914.

File No. 704.9318/2.

[181] The Chinese Minister to the Secretary of State.

Chinese Legation, Washington, September 1, 1914.

File No. 704.9318.

[182] The Secretary of State to Minister Hale.

Department of State, Washington, September 2, 1914.

File No. 704.9318.

[183] The Secretary of State to the Chinese Minister.

Department of State, Washington, September 4, 1914.

File No. 704.9318.

[184] The Chinese Minister to the Secretary of State.

Chinese Legation, Washington, September 10, 1914.

File No. 704.9318/1.

[185] Minister Hale to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, San Jose, September 12, 1914.

File No. 704.9318/3.

[186] The Secretary of State to Minister Hale.

Department of State, Washington, September 30, 1914.

File No. 704.9318/1.

[187] Minister Hale to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, San Jose, November 5, 1914.

File No. 704.9318/4.

[188] The Secretary of State to the Chinese Minister.

Department of State, Washington, December 15, 1914.

File No. 704.9318/4.

[189] The Chinese Minister to the Secretary of State.

Chinese Legation, Washington, December 21, 1914.

File No. 704.9318/5.

Minister Hale to the Secretary of State. File No. 704.9318/2.

[Document 180]

Minister Hale to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
San Jose, August 25, 1914.

Our Consular Agent at Punta Arenas asks the Acting Consul here to inquire of me if the Chinese in Punta Arenas will be allowed protection under the American flag, there being no Chinese consul in Costa Rica. The Consular Agent says that he does not know positively what the Chinamen are afraid of, but, as they have heard that there is to be a general strike among Government employees and as there is so much poverty among the lower classes just now, they are aiming for the security of their property.

The four richest merchants in Punta Arenas, representative of the whole Chinese colony, send petition for protection under the American flag, citing the precedent in Panama.1

In view of the present international complications, please cable me instructions.

Hale.

1  For. Rel. 1913, pp. 1105 et seq.

The Chinese Minister to the Secretary of State. File No. 704.9318.

[Document 181]

The Chinese Minister to the Secretary of State.

No. 19.] Chinese Legation,
Washington, September 1, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that Chinese citizens resident in Costa Rica have of late had occasion to solicit the Government of the Republic of China for protection by reason of their growing interests in that country. But the Government of the Republic has no diplomatic or consular representative in Costa Rica.

Inasmuch as the American diplomatic and consular representatives in Guatemala, Nicaragua and Salvador are now looking after Chinese interests in those countries, I am instructed by my Government to inquire whether similar instructions can be given to the American diplomatic and consular representatives in Costa Rica to use their good offices, with the consent of the Costa Rican Government, in behalf of the Chinese residents in that country in case of need. Such friendly action on the part of the American Government will be greatly appreciated by my Government.

Accept [etc]

Kai Fit Shah.

The Secretary of State to Minister Hale. File No. 704.9318.

[Document 182]

The Secretary of State to Minister Hale.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 2, 1914.

Your telegram of August 25. The Chinese Government requests the United States to exercise its good offices in behalf of Chinese in Costa Rica. You will inquire of the Costa Rican Government whether this will be agreeable and if so in case of need you will use your good offices in behalf of Chinese residents and instruct American consuls to do the same.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Chinese Minister. File No. 704.9318.

[Document 183]

The Secretary of State to the Chinese Minister.

Department of State,
Washington, September 4, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 1st instant regarding the desire of your Government that the American diplomatic and consular representatives in Costa Rica use their good offices, with the consent of the Costa Rican Government/in behalf of the Chinese residents in that country in case of need, and to inform you in reply that appropriate instructions have been sent by telegraph to the American Minister at San Jose to meet the wishes of your Government.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The Chinese Minister to the Secretary of State. File No. 704.9318/1.

[Document 184]

The Chinese Minister to the Secretary of State.

No. 21.] Chinese Legation,
Washington, September 10, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 4th instant, in which you are good enough to inform me that appropriate instructions have been sent by telegraph to the American Minister at San Jose for the diplomatic and consular representatives to use their good offices, with the consent of the Costa Rican Government, in behalf of the Chinese residents in that country in case of need.

I beg to express to you the sincere thanks of my Government for your kind compliance with its request.

Accept [etc.]

Kai Fu Shah.

Minister Hale to the Secretary of State. File No. 704.9318/3.

[Document 185]

Minister Hale to the Secretary of State.

No. 34.] American Legation,
San Jose, September 12, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose correspondence as follows: a paraphrase of my telegram to the Department of August 25; a copy of the petition (translation) of the Punta Arenas Chinamen;2 a paraphrase of Department’s reply of September 2; a copy of my note to the Foreign Office of September 3; and a copy and translation of the reply from the Foreign Office of September 9, received today.

I have [etc.]

E. J. Hale.

[Inclosure 1.]

Minister Hale to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

American Legation,
San José, September 8, 1914.

Excellency: The Chinese Government has requested the United States to exercise its good offices in behalf of the Chinese in Costa Rica; and I am instructed to inquire whether this will be agreeable to your excellency’s Government.

I avail [etc.]

E. J. Hale.

[Inclosure 2—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Minister Hale.

Foreign Office,
San José, September 9, 1914.

Mr. Minister: I have had the honor to receive your polite note of September 3, in which your excellency is pleased to inform me that the Chinese Government has addressed that of the United States requesting it to exercise its good offices in behalf of the Chinese in Costa Rica; your excellency adds that you have instructions to inquire if such a step would be agreeable to my Government.

In reply I should state to your excellency that by Decree No. 6 of May 30, 1897, the Constitutional Congress of the Republic absolutely prohibited the entrance into the country of persons belonging to the Chinese nationality, tolerating only those who had settled here prior to that date.

It is seventeen years since then and the number of Chinese, which at that time was very small, has diminished, as is natural, in a notable manner; wherefore we can say today, with all justice, that in Costa Rica there are almost no Chinese.

Possibly some have entered surreptitiously, but these should be considered as legally non-existent, since at any moment they can be expelled.

My Government therefore believes, and I very respectfully take the liberty of so stating to your excellency, that it is not in order to accede to the desires of the Chinese Government, especially if it is taken into consideration that both those individuals of that race who have a right to remain in Costa Rica and those who have entered furtively afterward enjoy among us all the guaranties which a civilized nation grants to all human beings who, either permanently or accidentally, are found on its soil.

I avail [etc.]

Manuel Castro Quesada.

2 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to Minister Hale. File No. 704.9318/1.

[Document 186]

The Secretary of State to Minister Hale.

No. 22.] Department of State,
Washington, September 30, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your dispatch No. 34 of September 12, 1914, with enclosures, relating to the request of the Chinese Government that American diplomatic and consular officers, in Costa Rica assume charge of Chinese interests in that country. The Department believes that possibly its instructions to you in its telegram of September 2 may not have been sufficiently explicit and that in consequence your representations to the Costa Rican Minister for Foreign Affairs may not have been so clear as they otherwise would have been and may not have been fully understood by the Ministry. In explanation it is well to say that this Government has not been asked and does not desire in any way to interfere in matters relating to Costa Rican internal affairs and is well aware that Chinese as well as other foreign residents in Costa Rica enjoy all the guaranties which a civilized nation can grant. Occasionally, however, questions of a international character arise which require diplomatic treatment, and since China has no diplomatic or consular representatives in Costa Rica the Chinese Government merely desires the United States representatives to act for China when such questions arise affecting the interests of Chinese legally resident in the country. Diplomatic and consular representatives of the United States have for many years represented China also in Guatemala, Nicaragua and Salvador and it was but natural that the Chinese Republic should ask this Government to perform the same service in Costa Rica. The Department therefore was induced in ordinary courtesy to agree to do so provided Costa Rica would consent.

You will make a full explanation to the Minister for Foreign Affairs so as to remove any misunderstanding upon his part and express the hope that his Government will reconsider its decision and thus enable this Government to respond favorably to the friendly request of China.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Minister Hale to the Secretary of State. File No. 704.9318/4.

[Document 187]

Minister Hale to the Secretary of State.

American Legation,
San Jose, November 5, 1914.

Sir: In response to the Department’s No. 22 of September 30, I have the honor to report that I addressed a letter to the Minister for Foreign Affairs in accordance with the Department’s instructions, a copy of which I enclose; and that I have received a reply which seems to concede all we ask, a copy of which I enclose in translation.

Awaiting the Department’s further instructions, I have [etc.]

E. J. Hale.

[Inclosure 1.]

Minister Hale to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

No. 54.] American Legation,
San José, October 22, 1914.

Excellency: In response to your excellency’s note of September 9, a copy of which I transmitted to my Government, I am instructed to say that the Government of the United States has not asked and does not desire in any way to Interfere in matters relating to Costa Rican internal affairs and is well aware that Chinese as well as other foreign residents in Costa Rica enjoy all the guaranties which a civilized nation can grant. Occasionally, however, questions of an international character arise which require diplomatic treatment; and, since China has no diplomatic or consular representatives in Costa Rica, it appears that the Chinese Government merely desires the representatives of the United States to act for China when such questions arise affecting the interests of Chinese legally resident in the country. Diplomatic and consular representatives of the United States have for many years represented China also in Guatemala, Nicaragua, and Salvador, and it is but natural that the Chinese Republic should ask the United States Government to perform the same service in Costa Rica. My Government therefore was induced in ordinary courtesy to agree to do so provided the Government of Costa Rica would consent. It did not anticipate that such consent would be withheld and my note to your excellency of September 3 was regarded by me as little more than perfunctory, and for that reason was less specific than it would otherwise have been.

I venture to express the hope that the foregoing explanation may remove from your excellency’s mind any misunderstanding of the position of the United States in this matter, and that your excellency’s Government will reconsider its decision and thus enable the Government of the United States to respond favorably to the friendly request of China.

I avail [etc.]

E. J. Hale.

[Inclosure 2—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Minister Hale.

Foreign Office
San Jose, November 4, 1914.

Mr. Minister: In reply to your courteous note No. 54 dated October 22 last, in which your excellency is pleased to state the reasons which induce your Government to desire to accede to the request, made to it by the Chinese Government, for diplomatic and consular protection by the American Government for Chinese citizens resident in this Republic, I have the honor to inform your excellency that even though my Government, for reasons which I ventured to set forth in the note of September 9, considers that the protection asked for is unnecessary there is nevertheless no impediment to granting the request of your excellency in view of the active and repeated interest you have shown in the matter.

It is understood, indeed, that the said protection, as your excellency well observes in the important communication to which I reply, extends no further than to those Chinese who are found legally established in the country.

This occasion affords me the pleasure [etc]

Manuel Castro Quesada.

The Secretary of State to the Chinese Minister. File No. 704.9318/4.

[Document 188]

The Secretary of State to the Chinese Minister.

No. 41.] Department of State,
Washington, December 15, 1914.

Sir: Referring to previous correspondence relating to the request of your Government that American diplomatic and consular officers in Costa Rica be instructed, in the absence of Chinese official representation in that country, to use their good offices, whenever occasion might require, in behalf of Chinese residents, I have the honor to inform you that this request having been communicated to the Government of Costa Rica by the American Minister at San Jose, the latter was informed on November 4, 1914, by the Costa Rican Minister for Foreign Affairs that his Government in view of the interest of the American Government in the matter assented to the exercise of good offices by American diplomatic and consular representatives in behalf of Chinese lawfully resident in the country.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Chinese Minister to the Secretary of State. File No. 704.9318/5.

[Document 189]

The Chinese Minister to the Secretary of State.

No. 40.] Chinese Legation,
Washington, December 21, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 15th instant, in which you are good enough to inform me that the Costa Rican Government has consented to the exercise of good offices by American diplomatic and consular representatives in behalf of Chinese lawfully resident in that country.

I beg to express to you the sincere thanks of my Government for this act of true friendship shown by the American Government toward China, which, I need hardly assure you, is gratefully appreciated by the Chinese residents in Costa Rica as well as by myself.

Accept [etc.]

Kai Fu Shah.

Protest of the United States against the presence in Costa Rica of certain Nicaraguan revolutionistsProtest of the United States against the presence in Costa Rica of certain Nicaraguan revolutionists

[190] Minister Hale to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, San José, November 30, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2380.

[191] The Secretary of State to Minister Hale.

Department of State, Washington, December 4, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2369.

[192] The Secretary of State to Minister Gonzales.

Department of State, Washington, December 4, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2369.

[193] Minister Hale to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, San José, December 7, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2372.

[194] [Untitled]

American Legation, San José, December 11, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2375.

[195] The Secretary of State to Minister Hale.

Department of State, Washington, December 18, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2369.

[196] Minister Gonzales to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Habana, December 19, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2378.

[197] Minister Hale to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, San José, December 24, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2382.

[198] [Untitled]

American Legation, San José, December 25, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2386.

[199] The Secretary of State to Minister Hale.

Department of State, Washington, December 29, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2382.

[200] Minister Hale to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, San José, December 31, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2388.

Minister Hale to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.00/2380.

[Document 190]

Minister Hale to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 47.] American Legation,
San José, November 30, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to report that * * *Julian Irias, well known to the Department, and half a dozen “Generals “of, or connected with the affairs of, Nicaragua have been conferring here a good deal in the last few days. * * *

I have [etc.]

E. J. Hale.

The Secretary of State to Minister Hale. File No. 817.00/2369.

[Document 191]

The Secretary of State to Minister Hale.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 4, 1914.

It is reported to the Department that General Luis Mena is in Costa Rica engaged in revolutionary propaganda against the Nicaraguan Government It is possible that he is receiving aid from the Government of Costa Rica. Investigate most discreetly and report by telegraph.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Gonzales. File No. 817.00/2369.

[Document 192]

The Secretary of State to Minister Gonzales.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 4, 1914.

General Luis Mena, Nicaraguan revolutionist, has been reported at Central Sugar Company, Guantanamo, until November 23. It is stated that General Mena left Cuba for Costa Rica for the purpose of starting revolutionary activity against Government of Nicaragua. Request Cuban Government to furnish you with all information obtainable regarding his movements. Report by telegraph.

Bryan.

Minister Hale to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.00/2372.

[Document 193]

Minister Hale to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
San José, December 7, 1914.

Department’s December 4. I could hear nothing whatever of General Mena until this morning, when the Panama papers of November 30 brought news of his arrival there the day before and of his intention to visit Punta Arenas or Port Limon in a few days. San José paper this evening records his arrival here last evening in an “ordinary passenger train” and devotes half a dozen lines to a description of him.

I do not think there is the slightest reason to believe that he is receiving aid from the Costa Rican Government.

My despatch No. 48 [47], November 30, mentioned the gathering here of Julian Irias and half a dozen Nicaraguan generals; but I have been so far unable to ascertain their purpose. Whatever the [omission in transmission], their meeting in this particular place signifies [omission in transmission], for San Jose is the asylum of political refugees.

Hale.

[Untitled] File No. 817.00/2375.

[Document 194]

[Untitled]

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
San José, December 11, 1914.

Department’s December 7 [4] and my December 7. I am told that Irias says there should be no revolution; and that Irias and his colleagues have “tied the hands of Mena.” Apparently their meeting in advance of Mena’s arrival was to consider heading him off. * * *

Hale.

The Secretary of State to Minister Hale. File No. 817.00/2369.

[Document 195]

The Secretary of State to Minister Hale.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 18, 1914.

The Department informed certain Nicaragua revolutionists are plotting to disturb peace of Nicaragua by fomenting armed revolutionary movement in provinces of Costa Rica adjoining Nicaragua. Department has received knowledge of the leading individuals in this conspiracy now in Costa Rica.

You will approach President of Costa Rica and formally and with emphasis request that, to preserve peace of Central America, in which the United States is deeply interested, following individuals be requested to leave Costa Rica to take up residence in any other country that may seem to them desirable; General Julian Irias, living at Heredia; General Luis Mena, General Ygnacio Chavez, and Colonel José María Zelaya, all in San Jose. Report by telegraph.

Bryan.

Minister Gonzales to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.00/2378.

[Document 196]

Minister Gonzales to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Habana, December 19, 1914.

Referring to Department’s telegram of December 4. Mena made the acquaintance in New Orleans of Ernesto Ybáñez and Juan Kiosofok. The three arrived in Habana October 23. On the 26th went to Camaguey, and 28th to Guantánamo via San Luis, arriving on the 29th. Mena and Ybáñez remained in town; Kiosofok went to Guantanamo Sugar Company at Los Caños securing employment as a carpenter, where he is. November 9, Mena went to Santiago and took passage on the Norwegian steamer Amanda, sailing for Jamaica that day. His address is Middleton and Abbeyllandewey Postoffice, St. Thomas, Jamaica, where he is said to have extensive land holdings. Ybáñez is now working in a drygoods shop in Guantanamo. Mena’s only purpose in going to Guantanamo seems to have been to get passage for Jamaica. During his ten days’ stay he lived moderately. Nothing suspicious was observed. He held no secret meetings and had no visitors.

Gonzales.

Minister Hale to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.00/2382.

[Document 197]

Minister Hale to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
San José, December 24, 1914.

In accordance with Department’s December 18, I presented formal and emphatic request to President of Costa Rica. In his reply of four hundred words he says that one of the chief and most constant aims of his Government has ever been to preserve peace in Central America; and that in the seven years of existence of the Treaty of Washington it has complied strictly with all its stipulations; thus a clean record. But it takes a like pride in its observance of the law and constitution governing its interior affairs. The claim in the concrete case now formulated by the United States, he declares to be “in open opposition to the constitutional articles which guarantee, solely, on the clear and determined occasions provided by the law for them.” [sic] He permits himself to state, very respectfully, his “Government is not able to accede to your demand.”

Hale.

[Untitled] File No. 817.00/2386.

[Document 198]

[Untitled]

[Extract.]

No. 51.] American Legation,
San José, December 25, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to report as follows:* * * On December 5 I received Department’s telegram of December 4, to which I replied by telegraph December 7.* * * On December 19 I received Department’s telegram of December 18. The President was out of town for Sunday. On Monday, December 21, I called upon him and presented a letter embodying the formal and emphatic request which Department’s telegram instructed me to make. A copy of this letter is enclosed. On Wednesday, December 23, I received the President’s reply (through the Foreign Office) of December 22, a copy of which, and translation, is enclosed. On December 24 I sent telegram to Department embodying the gist of the President’s reply.* * *

I have [etc.]

E. J. Hale.

[Inclosure 1.]

Minister Hale to the President of Costa Rica

American Legation,
San José, December 21, 1914.

Mr. President: I have the honor to represent to Your Excellency that the Government of the United States has been informed that certain Nicaraguan revolutionists are fomenting armed revolutionary movements in provinces of Costa Rica adjoining Nicaragua. It has received knowledge of the leading individuals in this conspiracy now in Costa Rica.

I am instructed to approach Your Excellency and to present a formal and emphatic request that, in order to preserve the peace of Central America, in which the United States is deeply interested, the following individuals be requested to leave Costa Rica to take up their residence in any other country that may seem to them desirable, namely General Julian Irias (living in Heredia), General Luis Mena, General Ygnacio Chavez, and Colonel Jose Maria Zelaya—all now in San José.

I have [etc.]

E. J. Hale.

[Inclosure 2—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Minister Hale.

Foreign Office
San Jose, December 22, 1914.

Mr. Minister: Following instructions of the President of the Republic, I have the honor to refer to the important communication which yesterday your excellency was pleased to address to that High Functionary relative to the expulsion from the country of various Nicaraguan citizens.

In this your excellency states that your Government has been informed that various Nicaraguan revolutionaries resident here are fomenting subversive movements against the Government of Nicaragua and that, with the object of preserving the peace of Central America, which so greatly Interests the United States, it presents a formal and emphatic insistence1 that Doctor Don Julian Irias, General Don Luis Mena, General Don Ignacio Chavez and Colonel Don Jose Maria Zelaya be expelled from our territory.

In reply I have the honor to express to your excellency that one of the most constant and fundamental desires of my Government has been, and is, to aid in the most efficient manner in the maintenance of the peace of Central America, and that it has never and at no time omitted any effort to that end. That, inspired by that zeal, it subscribed at Washington, together with the other four Governments of the Isthmus, the General Treaty of Peace and Amity of December 20, 1907; that in the seven years of the existence of this treaty it has been able to comply strictly with all and each one of its stipulations; and that, accordingly, it can show with all justice a clean record, which accredits it as a Government that knows how to comply well and faithfully with its international obligations.

But as with legitimate pride my Government values its exact observance of its duty toward other nations, so also it has no less satisfaction in being able to show that its proceedings in regard to its interior affairs are not other than those which the Constitution aid the laws of the Republic assign to it.

In the concrete case, the claim formulated by your excellency is found in open opposition to the constitutional articles which guarantee the free residence of foreigners in Costa Rica, a right which cannot be limited with the sole exception of the clear and specific occasions provided by law. For which reason I permit myself to state to your excellency, very respectfully, that my Government is not able to accede to your demand.1

I have the honor [etc.]

Manuel Castro Quesada.

1 “Instancia” in the original.

1 ”Demanda” in the original.

The Secretary of State to Minister Hale. File No. 817.00/2382.

[Document 199]

The Secretary of State to Minister Hale.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 29, 1914.

Answering your December 24. Our representations were not presented in the form of a demand, but merely as information conveyed to us and transmitted by us in a spirit of friendship and amity in the interest of peace and order in Central America. Having done this much, our responsibility ends.

Bryan.

Minister Hale to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.00/2388.

[Document 200]

Minister Hale to the Secretary of State.

No. 52.] American Legation,
San José, December 31, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to report as follows:

In my No. 51 of December 25 I gave the text of the communication which, in accordance with the Department’s instructions, I had presented to the President of Costa Rica; and also the text of his reply (through the Foreign Office).

On yesterday I received Department’s telegram of December 29; and herein enclose copy of my note in accordance therewith, of December 30, to the Foreign Office.

I venture to express the hope that President Gonzalez will now continue in the friendly state of mind towards Mr. Bryan and our Government with which Mr. Bryan’s letter to me of July 24 last had inspired him.2

I have [etc.]

E. J. Hale.

[Enclosure.]

Minister Hale to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

No. 62.] American Legation
San José, December 30, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s note of December 22 in reference to my communication presented to His Excellency the President of the Republic on the day before, and to say that your excellency has mistaken the word “request” (peticién), used by me, for “insistence” (instancia) and then “demand” (demanda) as used by your excellency.

I have the honor further to inform your excellency that I reported the substance of your excellency’s note to the Department of State, and have received the answer that the representations of the Government of the United States were not presented in the form of a demand, but merely as information conveyed to it and transmitted by it in a spirit “of friendship and amity in the interest of peace and order in Central America. Having done this much, my Government considers that its responsibility ends.

I avail [etc.]

E. J. Hale.

2 See Nicaragua: Proposed interoceanic canal treaty, etc.

Cuba:Cuba:

Contents

Naval station at GuantánamoNaval station at Guantánamo1

1 Continued from For. Rel. 1913, pp. 353–354.

[201] Minister Gonzales to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Habana, January 7, 1914.

File No. 811.34537/126.

[202] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy.

Department of State, Washington, January 19, 1914.

File No. 811.34537/126.

[203] The Secretary of State to Minister Gonzales.

Department of State, Washington, January 22, 1914.

File No. 811.34537/126.

Minister Gonzales to the Secretary of State. File No. 811.34537/126.

[Document 201]

Minister Gonzales to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Habana, January 7, 1914.

Referring to the treaty signed December 27, 1912, for the enlargement of the Guantanamo Naval Station,2 I hear through the Secretary of State that the Senate is now ready to ratify the treaty. Owing, however, to the expiration of the six months limit it will be necessary to draw up and sign a new treaty. Identical treaty, with change of Article V eliminating time limit, would be acceptable here. Will the Department advise me as to what action it wishes taken in this matter?

Gonzales.

2 See the text in For. Rel. 1912, pp. 295–297.

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy. File No. 811.34537/126.

[Document 202]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy.

[Extract]

Department of State,
Washington, January 19, 1914.

Sir: Referring to previous correspondence with regard to the treaty now under negotiation for the enlargement of the United States naval station at Guantanamo, I have the honor to inform you that the American Minister at Habana reports that the Cuban Senate is now believed to be ready to ratify the treaty. Owing to the expiration of the six-month period, which was stipulated in the treaty for ratification, it will be necessary to draw up and sign a new treaty. The Minister suggests the preparation of an identic treaty, with a change in Article V eliminating the time limit set in the previous treaty. He believes this change would be acceptable at Habana.

I venture to inquire whether your Department has any desire to suggest further modifications at this time. If so, I would appreciate a statement of such views at your earliest convenience. * * *

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
J. B. Moore.

The Secretary of State to Minister Gonzales. File No. 811.34537/126.

[Document 203]

The Secretary of State to Minister Gonzales.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 22, 1914.

Your January 7. Am informally advised that Navy Department has under consideration complete change of plans in regard to enlargement of naval station. Department hopes to communicate to you in the course of a few days the views of the ‘Secretary of the Navy on this subject.

Bryan.

Note.—No further correspondence on this subject appears in the files of the Department for 1914.

Cuban amnesty bill; attitude of the United StatesCuban amnesty bill; attitude of the United States3

3 Continued from For. Rel. 1913, pp. 354–365.

[204] Chargé Scholle to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Habana, October 1, 1914.

File No. 837.13/27.

[205] The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé Scholle.

Department of State, Washington, October 3, 1914.

File No. 837.13/27.

[206] Chargé Scholle to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Habana, October 4, 1914.

File No. 837.13/29.

[207] The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé Scholle.

Department of State, Washington, October 9, 1914.

File No. 837.13/29.

[208] Minister Gonzales to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Habana, November 27, 1914.

File No. 837.13/30.

[209] The Secretary of State of Minister Gonzales.

Department of State, Washing ton, December 4, 1914.

File No. 837.13/30.

[210] Minister Gonzales to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Habana, December 27, 1914.

File No. 837.13/31.

Chargé Scholle to the Secretary of State. File No. 837.13/27.

[Document 204]

Chargé Scholle to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Habana, October 1, 1914.

The House yesterday passed Amnesty Bill for all accused or convicted of murder, attempted murder or assault and battery, providing offender is a veteran of War of Cuban Independence. Further, all accomplices, and those convicted of newspaper libel whether veterans or not. The result of this law will be the liberation of Asbert and Arias: the murderers of General Rivas, Chief of Police of Habana.

It is probable that the Senate will act tomorrow.

Scholle.

The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé Scholle. File No. 837.13/27.

[Document 205]

The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé Scholle.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 3, 1914.

Your October 1. Informally discuss with the President of Cuba the proposed Amnesty Bill, and, should he seem inclined to approve the act, point out to him the view of this Government that if the act should become law it would create an unfortunate impression that crimes against person and reputation are allowed to go without adequate punishment in Cuba. Make clear to the President that the above suggestion arises from the friendly interest taken by the Government of the United States in matters affecting Cuba’s standing before the world.

See previous instructions relative to the Amnesty Bill.

Lansing.

Chargé Scholle to the Secretary of State. File No. 837.13/29.

[Document 206]

Chargé Scholle to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Habana, October 4, 1914.

Your October 3. I called upon the President this afternoon to discuss the Amnesty Bill. He said he was pleased to receive my note giving the view of the Government of the United States as it helped him to prove to the leaders of the House and Senate that the bill was bad legislation. He assured me that he would veto it on the ground of unconstitutionality and because of the bad effect upon Cuba’s reputation.

Scholle.

The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé Scholle. File No. 837.13/29.

[Document 207]

The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé Scholle.

Department of State,
Washington, October 9, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your telegram of October 4 concerning the status of the Cuban Amnesty Bill, in which you refer to the Department’s recent telegraphic instructions.

In reply the Department desires to say that it is glad to know that the President of Cuba has given assurances that he will veto the Amnesty Bill.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

Minister Gonzales to the Secretary of State. File No. 837.13/30.

[Document 208]

Minister Gonzales to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Habana, November 27, 1914.

There is a movement to secure the pardon of Asbert alone, through amnesty proceedings, the contention being that Arias admitted killing Rivas and there is no doubt of Asbert’s guilt. I assume Department is not interested.

Gonzales.

The Secretary of State of Minister Gonzales. File No. 837.13/30.

[Document 209]

The Secretary of State of Minister Gonzales.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washing ton, December 4, 1914.

Your November 27. Department has no especial interest in this case.

Bryan.

Minister Gonzales to the Secretary of State. File No. 837.13/31.

[Document 210]

Minister Gonzales to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Habana, December 27, 1914.

The President vetoed amnesty for General Asbert.

There are threats of revolution by Asbertistas if Congress fails next month to pass Amnesty Bill over veto. Distress of great numbers of unemployed encourages movement. I have some concern for the President’s personal safety.

Gonzales.

Pardon of Enrique MazaPardon of Enrique Maza4

4 Continued from For. Rel. 1912, pp. 268–276.

[211] Minister Gonzales to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Habana, June 16, 1914.

File No. 837.911/31.

[212] The Secretary of State to Minister Gonzales.

Department of State, Washington, June 23, 1914.

File No. 837.911/31

[213] Minister Gonzales to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Habana, July 11, 1914.

File No. 837. 911/32.

[214] The Secretary of State to Minister Gonzales.

Department of State, Washington, July 28, 1914.

File No. 837.911/32.

Minister Gonzales to the Secretary of State. File No. 837.911/31.

[Document 211]

Minister Gonzales to the Secretary of State.

No. 116.] American Legation,
Habana, June 16, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to request authority to ask President Menocal for the pardon of Enrique Maza.

On August 27, 1912, Maza, a young Cuban, was a reporter on the Cuban newspaper La Noche. That day, after much public agitation, Mr. H. S. Gibson, then Charge, went to the Cuban State Department with the Second Secretary of Legation and with the American contractor, and collected the Keilly claim amounting to more than $500,000. The Government’s check was declined, and the Cuban authorities were required to bring the currency and deliver it to Mr. Gibson in the State Department.

That evening Enrique Maza assaulted Mr. Gibson in the lobby of the Miramar Hotel, striking him from behind with his fists and knocking him down. Mr. Bell, the Second Secretary, interposed and knocked down Maza.

The following day Maza was indicted and placed in jail. On October 7, 1912, he was sentenced to two years and six months imprisonment. He has served more than twenty months of the sentence and has been in prison for nearly twenty-two months.

The Cuban administration at that time was pronouncedly anti-American and in speaking to reporters Secretary of State Sanguily unquestionably incited them to attacks upon the American attitude. I believe from information received here that Maza, having received a distorted idea of his country’s wrongs and having a temperament that lent itself to a morbid patriotism, imagined that he was striking a blow for his country’s honor when he assaulted Mr. Gibson. He was in reality an irresponsible instrument through which the antagonism of high Cuban officials was expressed.

The only formal appeal made to me in behalf of Maza has come from an association of working women of Cuba. President Menocal has ignored all pleas for pardon made by the Cuban press association.

I think the punishment already suffered by Maza is sufficient and the dignity of the United States fully sustained. Should Maza be permitted to serve the remaining nine months of his sentence he would emerge from prison a popular idol, hailed as a martyr for his country. On the other hand, his pardon, secured on the initiative of the United States, would not only prevent any recurrence of anti-American sentiment but would increase friendly feeling. An opportunity would be offered, also, for a statement of the true obligations of a worthy press of any country, and such an understanding is greatly needed in Cuba.

I have [etc.]

William E. Gonzales.

The Secretary of State to Minister Gonzales. File No. 837.911/31

[Document 212]

The Secretary of State to Minister Gonzales.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 23, 1914.

While the Department feels that it should not initiate a request for the pardon of Maza, you are authorized to say to the Cuban Government that the Department feels that the more than twenty months served by Maza might well be considered by the Cuban Government as a sufficient satisfaction of his sentence and that the United States will feel no pleasure at his further confinement.

Bryan.

Minister Gonzales to the Secretary of State. File No. 837. 911/32.

[Document 213]

Minister Gonzales to the Secretary of State.

No. 123.] American Legation,
Habana, July 11, 1914.

Sir: Referring to the recent correspondence in regard to the case of Enrique Maza, the Cuban newspaper reporter who was serving a jail sentence in Habana for an assault upon Mr. Gibson, then American Charge d’Affaires, in 1912, I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a letter which I addressed to President Menocal on the 2d instant, stating that the time already served by Maza might well be considered by the Cuban Government as sufficient satisfaction of his sentence, and that the United States had no desire for his further confinement.

In consequence of this letter the President has pardoned Maza. The press has expressed much satisfaction over our action in this matter. While profusely welcoming Maza’s release, I have noticed no attempt to exculpate his act or revive the feeling against our Government to which the assault upon Mr. Gibson was attributed.

I have [etc.]

William E. Gonzales.

[Inclosure.]

Minister Gonzales to the President of Cuba.

American Legation,
Habana, July 2, 1914.

My Dear Mr. President: With an understanding of that courtesy between nations that precludes the Government of one country from extending clemency to one of its nationals for an offense committed against another country without the consent of the offended country, representatives of the Asociacion de la Prensa de Cuba and the Sociedad de Bobineras have sought my intercession in behalf of Enrique Maza, who, on October 7, 1912, began serving a prison sentence of 2½ years as punishment for an assault upon Mr. Gibson, then Chargé d’Affaires of the United States in Cuba.

I am authorized to say to Your Excellency on behalf of my Government that the time already served by Maza might well be considered by the Cuban Government as sufficient satisfaction of his sentence, and that the United States has no desire for his further confinement.

This attitude of my Government must not be taken as indicating that the offense of an attack upon the person of the representative of the United States, in resentment of his official acts, is viewed in other than the most serious light.

I wish to take this opportunity to deny the assumption that because Maza had a journalistic connection his act represents the press. It is futile, as it is unreasoning and narrow, to expect that the customs and standards of one people should take the mold of another people, but the spirit of a free press is universal. It knows the boundaries of no countries. Liberty, when first given the press by the people, was for service performed and expected for the people. A free press is unknown except among self-governing people, and for such people respect for the law of the land is the surest guaranty of justice and safety for the masses.

If the press has a mission, it is to stand unfalteringly for good government, and therefore to contend always for those prime essentials of good government, honesty in the affairs of government, and obedience to the law by all classes. The true patriot is not one who loudly proclaims his patriotism and makes protest against alleged wrongs to his country by violating law and bringing reproach upon that country; it is the one who practices and preaches good citizenship.

The journalist who indulges in lawless acts debars himself from defending the law and places himself in antagonism to the spirit of that press which is worthy its constitutional liberty. Such a journalist may no more become the champion of law and order and defender of the people’s rights than the newspaper that prostitutes itself, by secretly selling its influence against public welfare, may assail dishonesty and immorality. The spirit of the press that earned a right to free speech, because its voice was raised against dishonesty, injustice and crime, and which is unbought and unpurchasable, stands unfalteringly for law and order, equality before the law and responsibility for infraction of the law.

The spirit of the press is the spirit of patriotism; it has nothing in common with unbridled passions or lawlessness—those are bred of the spirit of anarchy.

With renewed assurance [etc.]

William E. Gonzales.

The Secretary of State to Minister Gonzales. File No. 837.911/32.

[Document 214]

The Secretary of State to Minister Gonzales.

No. 98.] Department of State,
Washington, July 28, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your No. 123 of the 11th instant inclosing a copy of a letter addressed by you to President Menocal, in which you stated that the time already served by Enrique Maza might well be considered by the Cuban Government as sufficient satisfaction of his sentence, and that this Government had no desire for his longer confinement.

The Department approves your action.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
John E. Osborne.

Dominican Republic:Dominican Republic:

Contents

Political and financial affairs—revolution; resignation of Provisional President José Bordas Valdés; American commission sent to establish order and observe election. Appointment of Provisional President Ramón Báez; election and inauguration of President Juan Isidro Jiménez. Financial difficulties of the Dominican Government; attitude and measures taken by the United States; appointment of an American as Controller of FinancesPolitical and financial affairs—revolution; resignation of Provisional President José Bordas Valdés; American commission sent to establish order and observe election. Appointment of Provisional President Ramón Báez; election and inauguration of President Juan Isidro Jiménez. Financial difficulties of the Dominican Government; attitude and measures taken by the United States; appointment of an American as Controller of Finances1

1 Continued from For. Rel. 1913, pp. 418–456 and 456–467. Political and financial matters are here placed in one chronological sequence because of their intimate connection.

[215] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, December 31, 1913, 5 p.m.

File No. 839.51/1172a.

[216] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, January 5, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 839.51/1178.

[217] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, January 7, 1914, noon.

File No. 839.51/1180.

[218] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, January 7, 1914, 8 p.m.

File, No. 839.51/1180.

[219] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation Santo Domingo, January 9, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1040.

[220] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan

Department of State, Washington, January 10, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 839.51/1178.

[221] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, January 11, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 839.51/1190.

[222] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, January 12, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 839.51/1192.

[223] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation Santo Domingo, January 12, 1914.

File No. 839.011/5.

[224] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation Santo Domingo, January 12, 1914.

File No. 839.51/1205.

[225] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, January 12, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 839.51/1190.

[226] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, January 18, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 839.011/3.

[227] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, January 22, 1914, noon.

File No. 839.51/1202.

[228] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, January 26, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1043.

[229] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, January 26, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 839.51/1208b.

[230] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, January 27, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 839.011/3.

[231] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, January 27, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No 839.51/1208c.

[232] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, January 28, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 839.51/1210.

[233] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, January 29, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 839.51/1211.

[234] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, January 29, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1043.

[235] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, January 29, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 839.51/1213c.

[236] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, January 29, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1045.

[237] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, January 30, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 839.51/1211.

[238] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, January 31, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1045.

[239] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, February 1, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 839.51/1215.

[240] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, February 1, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1047.

[241] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, February 3, 1914, 12 noon.

File No. 839.00/1055.

[242] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, February 3, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 839.51/1215.

[243] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, February 5, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 839.51/1221.

[244] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, February 5, 1914, noon.

File No. 839.00/1058.

[245] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, February 12, 1914.

File No. 839.00/1058

[246] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation Santo Domingo, February 12, 1914, 9 a.m.

File No. 839.00/1065.

[247] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, February 12, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 839.51/1221.

[248] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, February 13, 1914.

File No. 839.51/1229.

[249] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, February 18, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 839.51/1232.

[250] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, February 18, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 839.51/1233.

[251] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, February 19, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1069a.

[252] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, February 19, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 839.51/1233.

[253] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, February 19, 1914, 8 p.m..

File No. 839.51/1232.

[254] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, February 21, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1070.

[255] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, February 24, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1070.

[256] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, February 25, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1071.

[257] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, February 27, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 839,00/3071.

[258] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, March 1, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1071.

[259] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santon Domingo, March 2, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1075.

[260] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy.

Department of State, Washington, March 2, 1914.

File No. 839.00/1071.

[261] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, March 4, 1914, 1 a.m.

File No. 839.00/1077.

[262] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, March 4, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1078.

[263] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, March 5, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 839.51/1258.

[264] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, March 5, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1077.

[265] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, March 7, 1914, 12 noon.

File No. 839.00/1085.

[266] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, March 9, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1085.

[267] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, March 10, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1088.

[268] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, March 14, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 839.51/1258.

[269] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, March 15, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 830.51/1266.

[270] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, March 15, 1914, 12 midnight.

File No. 839.00/1094.

[271] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, March 19, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1101.

[272] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, March 20, 1914, 1 a.m.

File No. 839.00/1102.

[273] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, March 20, 1914, 12 p.m.

File No. 839.51/1266.

[274] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation Santo Domingo, March 22, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1105.

[275] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, March 23, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 839.00/1106.

[276] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, March 23, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1105.

[277] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, March 26, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1114.

[278] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, March 30, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1122.

[279] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, March 31, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1124.

[280] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, April 2, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1124.

[281] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, April 2, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1134.

[282] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, April 3, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1136.

[283] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, April 4, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No, 839.00/1136.

[284] The Legation of the Dominican Republic to the Department of State.

Legation of the Dominican Republic, Washington , April 4, 1914.

File No. 839.00/1141.

[285] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, April 11, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 839.00/1154.

[286] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, April 14, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1154.

[287] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation Santo Domingo, April 17, 1914.

File No. 839.00/1192.

[288] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, April 21, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1172.

[289] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, April 26, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1172.

[290] Consul Henry to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Puerto Plata, April 28, 1914, 9 a.m.

File No. 839.00/1184.

[291] The Secretary of State to Consul Henry.

Department of State, Washington, April 29, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1184.

[292] Consul Henry to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Puerto Plata, April 29, 1914, noon.

File No. 839.00/1186.

[293] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation Santo Domingo, April 30, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1194.

[294] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, May 5, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1194.

[295] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, May 5, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 839.00/203.

[296] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, May 9, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1210.

[297] The Chargé d’Affaires of the Dominican Republic to the Secretary of State.

Dominican Legation, Washington, May 14, 1914.

File No. 839.00/1225.

[298] The Acting Secretary of State to the Charge d’Affaires of the Dominican Republic.

Department of State, Washington, May 16, 1914.

File No. 839.00/1225.

[299] The Chargé d’Affaires of the Dominican Republic to the Secretary of State.

Dominican Legation, Washington, May 19, 1914.

File No. 839.00/1238.

[300] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, May 20, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1230.

[301] [Untitled]

American Legation Santo Domingo, May 21, 1914.

File No. 839.51/1334.

[302] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, May 25, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 830.00/1245.

[303] The Chargé d’Affaires of the Dominican Republic to the Secretary of State.

Dominican Legation, Washington, May 26, 1914.

File No. 839.51/1342.

[304] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, May 28, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 830.00/1245.

[305] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, June 1, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1279.

[306] The Secretary of State to the Charge d’Affaires of the Dominican Republic.

Department of State, Washington, June 1, 1914.

File No. 839.51/1342.

[307] The Secretary of State to Mr. Charles M. Johnston.

Department of State, Washington, June 1, 1914.

File No. 819.51/1342.

[308] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, June 6, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1288.

[309] The Chargé d’Affaires of the Dominican Republic to the Secretary of State.

Dominican Legation, Washington, June 9, 1914.

File No. 839.51/1344.

[310] Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, June 12, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 829.00/1310.

[311] [Untitled]

American Legation, Port au Prince, June 16, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1324.

[312] The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

Department of State, Washington, June 18, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1324.

[313] The Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State.

Navy Department, Washington, June 19, 1914.

File No. 839.00/1337.

[314] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, June 19, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 839.51/1360.

[315] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, June 20, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1334.

[316] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, June 20, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1335.

[317] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, June 24, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1334.

[318] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, June 24, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1335.

[319] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, June 29, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1352a.

[320] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, June 29, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1352b.

[321] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, June 29, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1355.

[322] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, July 1, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1363.

[323] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, July 1, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1362.

[324] Chargé White to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, July 3, 1914.

File No. 839.00/1416.

[325] The Minister of the Dominican Republic to the Secretary of State.

Legation of the Dominican Republic, Washington, July 8, 1914.

File No. 839.00/1390.

[326] Chargé White to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, July 14, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1404.

[327] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, July 16, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1410.

[328] The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé White.

Department of State, Washington, July 17, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1404.

[329] The Secretary of State to Chargé White.

Department of State, Washington, July 23, 1914.

File No. 839.00/1410.

[330] The Secretary of State to Chargé White.

Department of State, Washington, July 29, 1914.

File No. 839.00/1451a.

[331] Consul Henry to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Puerto Plata, August 6, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1460.

[332] The Secretary of State to Minister Gonzales.

Department of State, Washington, August 13, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1476a.

[333] Plan of President Wilson, handed to Commissioners Fort and Smith, August, 1914.

August 1914

File No. 839.00/1582.

[334] The Secretary of State to Chargé White.

Department of State, Washington, August 15, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1479a.

[335] Commissioner Fort to the Secretary of State.

Santo Domingo, August 21, 1914.

File No. 839.00/1488.

[336] [Untitled]

Santo Domingo, August 25, 1914.

File No. 839.00/1490.

[337] Chargé White to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, August 28, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 839.001/17.

[338] The Secretary of State to Chargé White.

Department of State, Washington, August 28, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1498a.

[339] The Secretary of State to the United States Peace Commission.

Department of State, Washington, August 31, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1497.

[340] Commissioner Fort to the Secretary of State.

Santo Domingo [undated ; received September 3, 1914, 4 p.m.]

File No. 839.00/1503.

[341] Agreement between the U. S. Peace Commission and the Provisional President of the Dominican Republic relating to the election of a regular President and Congress.

Santo Domingo, D. R., September 8, 1914.

File No. 839.00/1548.

[342] Commissioner Smith to the Secretary of State.

Santo Domingo, September 12, 1914.

File No. 839.00/1507.

[343] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, September 19, 1914.

File No. 839.00/1507.

[344] Commissioner Smith to the Secretary of State.

Santo Domingo, September 29, 1914.

File No. 839.00/1560.

[345] The Minister of the Dominican Republic to the Secretary of State.

Dominican Legation, Washington, October 1, 1914.

File No. 701.3911/37.

[346] Commissioner Smith to the Secretary of State.

Santo Domingo, [undated ; received October 1, 1914.]

File No. 839.00/1533.

[347] [Untitled]

Santo Domingo, October 5, 1914.

File No. 839.00/1557.

[348] The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé White.

Department of State, Washington, October 8, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1557.

[349] The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé White.

Department of State, Washington, October 24, 1914.

File No. 839.001B14.

[350] Chargé White to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, November 11, 1914, 9 a.m.

File No. 839.00/1608.

[351] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, November 14, 1914, 9 a.m.

File No. 839.51/1447.

[352] The Secretary of State to Chargé White.

Department of State, Washing ton, November 14, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1608.

[353] The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé White.

Department of State, Washington, November 18, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 839.51/1447.

[354] Chargá White to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, November 18, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1616.

[355] [Untitled]

American Legation, Santo Domingo, November 24, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 839L00/1623.

[356] The Secretary of State to Chargé White.

Department of State, Washington, November 25, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1628a.

[357] Chargé White to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, December 1, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1631.

[358] The Secretary of State to Chargé White.

Department of State, Washington, December 4, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1631.

[359] Chargé White to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, [undated , received December 5, 1914, 3 p.m.].

File No. 839.00/1639.

[360] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, December 5, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1641.

[361] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, December 5, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1641.

[362] President Wilson to Ex-President Ramón Báez.

The White House, Washington, December 8, 1914.

File No. 839.001B14.

[363] President Wilson to President Juan Isidro Jiménez.

The White House, Washington, December 8, 1914.

File No. 839.001J56/a.

[364] President Jiménez to President Wilson.

Santo Domingo, December 9, 1914.

File No. 839.001J56.

[365] Ex-President Báez to President Wilson.

Santo Domingo, December 10, 1914.

File No. 839.001B14/1.

[366] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, December 12, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 839.51/1460.

[367] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, December 14, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 839.51/1460.

[368] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, December 14, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 839.00/1652a.

[369] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, December 17, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 839.00/1653.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.51/1172a.

[Document 215]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 31, 1913, 5 p.m.

Your December 18, 2 p.m.2 In view of experience the $1,500,000 loan it would seem impractical to contemplate any loan that did not at least comprehend liquidating back salaries to date; possibly even such settlement would serve as only a partial remedy, resulting in a repetition of suspending payments of future salaries to meet other budget obligations.

Forward by mail a list of unpaid salaries to January 1, list of legitimate creditors now crowding Government for payment, and list of other unpaid items provided by budget. Department desires to make comprehensive study of financial situation and desires that you make specific recommendations regarding what you think necessary to put that Government on a basis where its budget can be actually met by the country’s revenues.

If the necessity for $1,500,000 loan was caused by eleven months’ revolution and not by the Government’s ordinary expenditures for maintenance exceeding its income, the question arises as to how the Government’s necessity to borrow $350,000, as stated in the memorandum of Savinon dated November 28, was caused. Since January 1913 the Government’s income has been reduced one thousand dollars a day which goes as interest and amortization for million and a half loan. Peace reigned until September 1, 1913. Is Department to understand that during this period of peace the Government accommodated its expenses to its income, and that the present shortage is occasioned by diverting salaries since September 1 to the uses of war which existed only during September and October?

If figures prove the reduction by one thousand dollars per day of Government’s income was met by a corresponding reduction in Government’s expenditures, it might seem that the additional ten thousand dollars per month offered as a monthly payment (Peynado suggests this be taken from customs collections) to return the desired loan could be separated without seriously affecting the Government’s meeting its budget; otherwise some further guaranty might be required. As approval of Dominican Congress would be necessary you will please rush the information asked for, so the Department may promptly consider some practical remedy.

Peynado assures Department that his Government will be glad to afford this information. As the Department desires to give most sympathetic consideration to needs of Dominican Government it would be glad to receive a statement of that Government’s views on the various points here indicated and an expression of its opinion as to practical remedies for the present situation. Furnish also a copy of its last approved budget and any new budget under consideration.

Bryan.

2  For. Rel. 1913, p. 448.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.51/1178.

[Document 216]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, January 5, 1914, 11 a.m.

Your December 31, 5 p.m. Total amount of immediate pressing worthy claims approximately $741,800. Total amount back salaries from June to October $386,535. Mailing itemized statement memorials and recommendations as instructed.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.51/1180.

[Document 217]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, January 7, 1914, noon.

Government in good faith after much trouble has assembled Congress to hear protests as promised and for serious financial legislation. Members threaten to cause chaos unless December salaries are paid them. Situation menacing governmental order and I urge at request of Dominican Government that within the day Department orders Receivership to advance $20,000 of Dominican Government money to Minister of Finance. I deem this action imperative as Government has reached end of resources and this action in my opinion will continue the orderly condition which obtains here until permanent relief is devised. Delegates and I insisted upon calling this Congress and the Government yielded notwithstanding hostile majority. This advance would be used to pay senators, deputies and important civil employees under the budget. Situation depending upon speedy action.

Sullivan.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File, No. 839.51/1180.

[Document 218]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 7, 1914, 8 p.m.

Insular Bureau of War Department will tonight telegraph Receivership to advance to Minister of Finance $20,000 account Government’s portion January customs.

Moore.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1040.

[Document 219]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation
Santo Domingo, January 9, 1914, 9 p.m.

Dominican Government has met requirements insisted upon by Legation and has placed all political prisoners under jurisdiction of courts, conceding rights to trial not before enjoyed here. Congress proceeded in orderly manner with business in hand; The country enjoying unusual tranquillity and the only danger lies in the crying need for financial relief. Dominican Government meeting its current expenses by borrowing small amounts from day to day securing all sums with the greatest difficulty. The danger of this Government falling, which is serious, should be avoided until elections are held and it should be financed in some way during the interval. Any succeeding provisional government would be compelled to sacrifice every source of revenue to keep alive. Mailing financial data requested.

Sullivan.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan File No. 839.51/1178.

[Document 220]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 10, 1914, 7 p.m.

Is amount Santo Domingo owes Banco Nacional included in first amount mentioned in your January 5, 11 a.m.?

Have salaries October to January been paid? If not, telegraph their approximate total.

What practical assurances can Santo Domingo, if relieved of its present financial difficulties, give that it will thereafter live within its net income?

Moore.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.51/1190.

[Document 221]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, January 11, 1914, 10 a.m.

Dominican Government desires to pledge alcohol tax, an internal revenue, to secure from Royal Bank of Canada $30,000 loan for three months. The bank wants my approval. Government claims it must fall unless current expenses are met. The advanced $20,000 authorized by you from customs give Government only ninety-five hundred dollars by Dominican Minister’s blunder in depositing same in national bank “to credit” of the Dominican Republic. No question of Government’s financial difficulty. I believe that now is the time to demand reforms. Government never so reasonable. Constitutional Convention meets next week. We will endeavor to insert habeas corpus. Please suggest further reforms that Department may desire in organic law. Telegraph instructions as to the loan not later than Monday. No funds for Tuesday’s needs.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.51/1192.

[Document 222]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, January 12, 1914, 10 a.m.

Your January 10, 7 p.m. First inquiry, yes. Second inquiry, yes. Third, Dominican Government agrees and proposes consolidated guaranty asked for that the American Minister shall in the future supervise the daily expenditures of the Dominican Republic that the same may always be kept within budget. Objects to an open comptroller. I believe with this power vested in Department our ability to defeat revolutions and blackmail will be ample and that Dominican Government can be kept solvent. If this seems the solution would earnestly request immediate appointment of commercial attaché to assume the duties which such an arrangement would impose. It seems to me an opportune time to demand increased powers for the Receivership in the collection of customs.

Please send instructions.

Sullivan.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.011/5.

[Document 223]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

No. 43.] American Legation
Santo Domingo, January 12, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to herewith enclose a copy and translation of a letter from the Minister for Foreign Affairs in which the Dominican Government pledges itself to abandon its old vicious system of imprisoning people without submitting same prisoners to any tribunal. The Legation has earnestly labored to secure this reform, the meaning of which need not be dwelt upon. In this connection I desire to inform the Department that the Constitutional Convention will be urged to incorporate in the organic law of its country the right of habeas corpus.

I have [etc.]

James M. Sullivan.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Minister Sullivan.

Foreign Office,
Santo Domingo, January 12, 1914.

In addition to what I told your excellency in our recent interview, I am pleased to inform your excellency that the political prisoners to which we referred have all been placed under the jurisdiction of the tribunals of justice to the end that their respective cases may be decided in accordance with the penal laws of the Republic.

This Government wishes to fix a new precedent in the history of the country, at the same time giving a proof of the respect which the independence of the judicial power merits.

I take [etc.]

Eliseo Gruixon.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.51/1205.

[Document 224]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

No. 46.] American Legation
Santo Domingo, January 12, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to submit herewith a translation of the Dominican Government’s letter whereby that Government pledges itself to place the control of its expenditures under the supervision of the American Legation. As I have pointed out in my cable of January 12, 10 a.m., there will be need, if this plan is adopted, of a commercial attaché who can devote his time to this work. Minister Saviñon has informed me that he at last realizes the value of having an American who can say No when unreasonable demands are made upon him for money. While this state of mind may be created by the dire necessities of the situation, there is no doubt that they are willing to give the power to the Department. That it will be useful in establishing good Government here seems to me to be obvious.

I have [etc.].

James M. Sullivan.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Minister Sullivan.

Foreign Office,
Santo Domingo, January 12, 1914.

Sir: With reference to the question that your excellency put to me on the part of your Government, in regard to the manner in which the Dominican Government intends in the future to carry out the budget law, I have the honor to inform your excellency that my Government agrees that the Minister of the United States in Santo Domingo be allowed to control the daily expenses that are made in order to assure himself that they are in accord with the law referred to and so to give witness in respect to the way it is carried out.

I take [etc.].

Eliseo Grullon.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.51/1190.

[Document 225]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 12, 1914, 8 p.m.

Your January 9, 9 p.m. and January 11, 10 a.m. Insular Bureau will today instruct Receiver General to place additional $20,000 of Dominican Government’s percentage of customs collections at its disposal. This should render momentarily unnecessary loan from Royal Bank of Canada. John Gray, attorney of Banco Nacional de San Domingo, assured Department Saturday that bank would today complete payment first $20,000 and not withhold its percentage from second advance of like amount. Discreetly endeavor to procure itemized list of small loans already made with statement as to terms upon which each was negotiated and discourage further loans on disadvantageous terms. It is expected forty thousand dollars already advanced will cover Dominican Government’s daily needs including the 15th instant.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.011/3.

[Document 226]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, January 18, 1914, 11 a.m.

Your January 11, 10 a.m. The Department believes that with the object of assuring honest elections for the future not only should the Constitution, be amended but that several of the organic laws should be reformed in order to establish a real civil government. Among these reforms should be included establishment of habeas corpus, bail, military, conscription, an electoral law and a law of government for the provinces. Electoral law should make definite provision of adequate representation of opposition parties on electoral boards. Law for government of provinces should aim to relieve provincial governors of exaggerated powers, they now wield. The enactment of this law should not be made the occasion for increasing the provincial governmental machinery and payrolls, but rather should be calculated with a view to material reduction in expenditures. The Department feels confident that by guarded and friendly suggestions you can be of real service in securing needed reforms; whenever in doubt consult Department before taking action. Keep us informed as to important issues raised between parties. It would seem desirable following our plan to have the governors elected by the people rather than appointed by the Central Government.

Bryan.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.51/1202.

[Document 227]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, January 22, 1914, noon.

Dominican Government informs me it is becoming impossible to exist and unless a definite financial relief is obtained the members of the Government will abandon struggle. They urge me to say that they have done best to carry out reform program but that financial situation, not of their making, is overwhelming. Many civil employees, including postal carriers, have quit. Dominican Government asserts that present debt is the result of Nouel mis-administration, revolution forced upon them, and a blockade in which Department participated.

Banco Nacional claims further allowances by Department of Dominican’s share of customs results in forcing Banco Nacional unwillingly to increase its loan to Dominican Government. Bank insists that it will go no further with Dominican Government unless Washington acts. I believe that as it is necessary to finance whatever Government exists. Department should endeavor to avoid chaos likely to occur if present Government resigns. Irresponsible Government succeeding might prove difficult and reckless disregarding necessity for honest presidential election which present men understand.

Answering your January 12, 8 p.m. Dominican Government has made no short time loan.

Referring to your January 18, 11 a.m. Grullon has promised constitutional reforms suggested by you will be made. Organic law, constitutional privileges. Constitutional Convention under way. Under Velasquez and Horacio influences, lower House hostile to Bordas, passing accusing resolutions. Senate throws same out. With present Government adopting our reforms and with elections only weeks away, avoidance of confusing changes seems to me highly desirable, as making probable stable, permanent Government. Can Dominican Government as administrative measure arrange with Department some plan releasing Dominican share of customs receipts from its present application to current needs of Government? Respectfully request immediate instructions. Something must be done at once.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1043.

[Document 228]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, January 26, 1914, 7 p.m.

Important convention of prominent leaders will be held at Sanchez to choose presidential election candidates shortly. Believe it advisable that Legation should have trusted man present. I have available man if authorized by Department to incur necessary expenses. Please instruct at once.

Sullivan.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.51/1208b.

[Document 229]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 26, 1914, 3 p.m.

The Department learns from all sources, official and unofficial, that the present financial distress in Santo Domingo threatens to bring about a virtual suspension of government before the close of the Constitutional Convention to which delegates were chosen at the recent election. The freedom of this election is attested by the fact that the results were favorable to the opponents of the present officials in control whose disposition to deal fairly with all parties was thus effectively shown.

The practical breaking down of government at this time would tend to defeat the objects of the Constitutional Convention and prevent the proper consideration of the important constitutional provisions with which the Convention is to deal.

The United States desires to do everything in its power to avert such a disaster and hope that both Houses of the Dominican Congress will cooperate with the existing Government in carrying out in a spirit of common patriotism a plan of relief. To this end it is hoped that the President of the Dominican Republic will be immediately authorized to adopt the following measures: 1. To negotiate Dominican bonds now in the hands of the Guaranty Trust Company so as to produce, approximately, $1,200,000, to be expended under supervision and approval of a financial expert hereinafter mentioned, in payment of immediately pressing claims aggregating $742,000 and overdue salaries from June to October, about $400,000. It is understood that this would practically liquidate all current outstanding obligations of the Dominican Government.

2. To double or at least increase alcohol and tobacco tax and to pay monthly $20,000 thereof to the Guaranty Trust Company, so that the proceeds of the bonds negotiated under clause one will have been returned within five years, or prior to the time when these funds would probably be required for public works. If the Dominican Government would so request, this Department is disposed to arrange that the Receivership collect the alcohol and tobacco tax without any additional expense whatever to the Dominican Government, thus saving costs of collection and increasing the revenues collected. This suggestion emanates solely from a desire to extend all possible aid to the Dominican Government. It must be clearly understood, however, that if the Dominican Government while collecting taxes pledged should default in any two or more consecutive monthly payments it agrees to turn over to the Receiver General of Customs, on request of the State Department, the collection and administration of the alcohol and tobacco taxes, to be administered by the Receivership only until the amounts used from the public works funds shall have been returned.

3. To invite an American financial expert to come to Santo Domingo to aid the proper officials of that Government in paying outstanding claims, in devising a proper system of public accounting, and in devising and putting into effect additional means of increasing revenues and adjusting expenditures to them with the object of assuring financial order and stability and preventing deficits. Such a measure seems to be necessary to enable the Dominican Government to fulfill the Convention of 1907, which forbids that Government to contract new debts without the approval of the United States. This requirement has been repeatedly disregarded. The salary of the financial expert may be determined at a later date by mutual agreement.

Confer with the President and leading members of the Congress as to the immediate acceptance of this plan.

Moore.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.011/3.

[Document 230]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 27, 1914, 6 p.m.

Department’s January 18, 11 a.m. Suggest you emphasize need for proper provision regarding registration of voters as protection against fraud at the polls. Measures should be adopted to preclude governors from coercing voters. Limitations applied to authority of governors in this and other matters should also apply to authority of President.

Department will gladly consider any suggestions you have to make.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No 839.51/1208c.

[Document 231]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, January 27, 1914, 8 p.m.

After sending Department’s January 26, 3 p.m., Dominican Legation advises total debt, according to mail despatches received yesterday, is $1,342,385. Substitute this amount in paragraph numbered 1 for $1,200,000; and change “favorable “in second sentence to “unfavorable.”

Department notes Grullon’s letter transmitted with your No. 46 saying Dominican Government agreed that United States Minister may control daily expenses. If Minister of Foreign Affairs will so request, Department will probably after consulting President designate a commercial attaché to Legation to do this and to perform the duties outlined in yesterday’s telegram. Perhaps this would render submission of paragraph numbered 3, to Congress unnecessary.

Bryan.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.51/1210.

[Document 232]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, January 28, 1914, 2 p.m.

The Dominican Government accepts the principle contained in your January 26, 3 p.m., but asks to discuss three modifications. The Senate also in favor plan. The House of Deputies hoping to starve the Government from office desire to defer action until the Government falls. No doubt but that your plan will be eventually accepted. The shortest route of approval requires six readings which will take nearly a month. In the meantime the Government has not one dollar. What immediate relief can you devise that can be applied within twenty-four hours and that will carry the Government over waiting period?

Banco Nacional offers to supply funds if the Receivership and the Department will make necessary withdrawals so as to accommodate bank. Dominican Government must have funds without delay. Please answer by telegraph without delay.

Dominican Government requests that the loan be increased to $1,650,000 so as to embrace a fund to meet certain claims. It asks us retain the collection of the alcohol and tobacco tax unless it defaults in payment. Government requests that the financial expert assume the role of commercial attaché or other suitable name under control of State Department. I am satisfied that the modifications asked for will be waived if Department insists upon its program as first outlined.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.51/1211.

[Document 233]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, January 29, 1914, 3 p.m.

Referring to your January 27, 8 p.m. Your information about amount of debt is incorrect; $1,200,000 will pay worthy debts now pressing the Government, including salaries. This estimate never included claims of various kinds and Dominican Government asks for additional sum to dispose of the latter. To avoid any mistake I suggest that the amount be left indefinite until ascertained to the satisfaction of Department. Minister for Foreign Affairs expresses the hope that a commercial attaché as suggested by you will be named instead of financial expert.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.00/1043.

[Document 234]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 29, 1914, 8 p.m.

Your January 26, 7 p.m. No objection to American going as a casual observer if meetings are public but it might be resented if meetings are secret. Do nothing in this matter which is not entirely agreeable to Government. Expense should be small and can be paid out of contingent fund.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.51/1213c.

[Document 235]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, January 29, 1914, 11 p.m.

You may inform Minister for Foreign Affairs that Department has consulted President and will send commercial attaché on receipt of written request expressed as required in Department’s telegram of January 27, 8 p.m. Your January 28, 2 p.m., just received, will consider relief measures tomorrow.

Bryan.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1045.

[Document 236]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, January 29, 1914, 5 p.m.

Legation has induced Dominican Government to release all political prisoners including Velásquez who enters his candidacy for the presidency in coming election.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.51/1211.

[Document 237]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 30, 1914, 7 p.m.

Your January 28, 2 p.m., and January 29, 3 p.m. Since you state a month may elapse pending approval by both Houses of Congress of plan suggested, immediate relief will be supplied by having Bureau of Insular Affairs direct the General Receiver of Dominican Customs to pay the Government five thousand dollars per day, this amount not to be exceeded until the General Receiver has segregated the amount which he is required to transmit to New York for the month of February. Is Department correct in considering this amount sufficient to care for temporary daily requirements?

This Department does not look with favor upon the suggestion of the Banco Nacional that it be provided with Dominican Government’s funds to lend to that Government.

Dominican Congress might recommend negotiating bonds so as to produce $1,650,000, but this Department cannot undertake in advance to approve payments therefrom except upon duly proved obligations in which claims for arms, ammunition or supplies to revolutionists are not to be included.

The title commercial attaché is accepted subject to understanding that Government’s letter of request shall unmistakably embrace all the duties he is to perform as indicated in Department’s January 26, 3 p.m.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1045.

[Document 238]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, January 31, 1914, 6 p.m.

Represent to Minister for Foreign Affairs that the Department has received the news contained in your January 29, 5 p.m. with gratification.

Bryan.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.51/1215.

[Document 239]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, February 1, 1914, 3 p.m.

Answering several matters in your January 30, 7 p.m. Five thousand dollars per diem will keep Government alive if Vick can provide same. No danger of revolutionists being paid but we must watch bad paper held by military blackmailers of Arias stripe. The commercial attaché with power of comptroller is ample safeguard, however. Can have powers of commercial attaché well defined in letter of request for his appointment. I have on foot already a letter which gives him “control of” daily expenditures. See despatch No. 46 and cable January 22, noon. On foot also a [letter] requesting that such a commercial attaché be named. Will have letter written by Dominican Government as you instruct but I venture to ask if language of January 26, 3 p.m. instruction concerning commercial attaché duties, is sufficiently certain and definite? If Department desires any change please wire text of clause to be inserted in said letter.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1047.

[Document 240]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, February 1, 1914, 3 p.m.

Bitter differences in Government party which will result in attempt to put Bordas out by pushing an unjust impeachment through Senate. The trouble grows over the nomination of Bordas successor. I still hope for law and order. Situation full of possibilities.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1055.

[Document 241]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, February 3, 1914, 12 noon.

Senate this morning defeated resolution of Deputies attempting to impeach President Bordas.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.51/1215.

[Document 242]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 3, 1914, 7 p.m.

Your February 1, 3 p.m. Insular Bureau believes Vick will be able to provide five thousand dollars daily.

Department desires commercial attaché to be in effect a financial expert and virtual comptroller, but gives him title and attachés him to Legation in deference to Dominican susceptibilities. Department intended its January 26, 3 p.m. to embrace necessary powers, but if you think additional powers important cable what they are.

Bryan.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.51/1221.

[Document 243]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, February 5, 1914, 10 a.m.

Your February 3, 7 p.m. Respectfully suggest in addition to language in your January 26, 3 p.m., the following: To pass on and determine the validity of every debt, charge or claim of any kind whatsoever; to countersign all checks, drafts or orders for the payment of Dominican funds to every and all creditors; to decide whether any particular debt about to be incurred is in violation of the treaty 1907 and to exercise all the powers and rights that usually attach to the office of comptroller.

I may be wrong but I fear that when Dominican Government feels strong enough financial expert would be given short shrift unless we are clear and definite in defining his duties and standing.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1058.

[Document 244]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, February 5, 1914, noon.

Political conditions growing more tense. Combination within combination being formed, as politicians realize that Washington will stand behind the next elected Government against the old system that made government a farce in the past. Government party is divided. Bordas, Lovaton, Saviñon, want Bordas reelected. They are resisting invitation to Sanchez convention which is dominated by Brache, Vidal, and Arias. The latter combination is now very strong and is constantly harassing Provisional Government for money and other favors. Brache, their spokesman in cabinet, Bordas and Lovaton, attempting to effect an arrangement with Vásquez element, their enemies of yesterday. Velasquez and Jimenez also active, each in his own behalf. Every faction is working underground to effect winning combination. On account of our attitude success means everything to them, and the situation grows difficult with a multitude of cross purposes. Congress is willing to authorize the loan but each faction, hoping to be in power, wants the loan deferred till after elections. Every statesman here without exception desires to handle the distribution, and no one seems to realize that the Department intends to prevent the wholesale stealing of the past. I succeeded in preventing impeachment of Bordas, which would have caused civil war or his declaration of dictatorship. Last night I used your argument of no money and no power with Brache, thus preventing his group from taking field.

I believe at least one war vessel should be sent to the north at once to remain there until after election. Constitutional convention peacefully pursuing its labors.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.00/1058

[Document 245]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State,
Washington, February 12, 1914.

Sir: In reply to the last paragraph of your cable of February 5, noon, in reference to a United States war vessel being stationed off the north coast of Santo Domingo until after the election, the Department informs you that it is not deemed expedient that a vessel be now sent for duty at any one point on the north coast of that republic.

The U. S. S. Wheeling will be stationed at Cape Haitien for some weeks, and may be ordered to proceed to Puerto Plata should the situation there demand her presence.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
J. B. Moore.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1065.

[Document 246]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation
Santo Domingo, February 12, 1914, 9 a.m.

After the closest study of Dominican situation I am impelled to believe the country approaching bitter conflict. Arias, surrounded by several chiefs, is openly aspiring to Presidency. His success would be a disaster immeasurable. With him are associated Vidal, who aided in assassination of Cáceres; Victoria, with whose reign of terror you are familiar; Epñanio, a man of blood; and Brache, an American baiter. Arias has blackmailed all governments. He plays no favorites—all must pay. On indisputable authority he openly declares for plunder. At present he has great notoriety as smuggler, using two hundred mules bringing contraband from Haiti; avowed enemy of law and order. He and Vidal control constitutional convention and have great influence in Congress. Arias’ representatives tell me they will not accept any loan until they themselves distribute same. They hold several points of military advantage and insist that Bordas shall retire. Bordas decided today to refuse any alliance with above faction and will launch his own candidacy this week with two thousand signatures. Oratorical candidates of the respectable type will be Jiménez and Velásquez. I am convinced that it would be deplorable if Department does not take action that will eliminate Arias and his gang. There has never been a more evil combination in the history of this country. I earnestly urge that the present Government be encouraged to proclaim Arias an outlaw and pursue him that he be brought to the court. This is the alternative to having him appear soon as the leader of a revolution. I would precipitate action so that there may be a [?] of criminals rather than that his movements may take on the dignity of revolution. I learn that Vidal in his section has been busy with revolution in Haiti. There is no question but that all parties are playing politics with the loan, and Congress up to the present refuses to act. If the Provisional Government secures the distribution it will be strengthened thereby with the people of this country groaning for their wages. It is for the Department to decide whether this advantage will be given Provisional Government. Government’s personnel leaves much to be desired but they measure as high if not higher than any other group that might succeed them. Bordas is most friendly to our Government and I am disposed to believe is the best possible agency for implanting American ideas of good government in this country. His Government asks me whether the loan can be secured by administrative act. If this be done it will bear out almost to a certainty his reelection and it will also make the Provisional Government strong enough to deal with Arias. The idea of strengthening Bordas so that he may crush the smugglers and bandits who seek to control seems to me the most reasonable course to pursue. To remain passive seems to me to be almost shirking our responsibility. I deem the situation so grave that I believe a personal immediate report by myself would assist the Department in deciding upon a course of action. Knowing the delicate intricacy of Latin American affairs I hesitate to act without your instructions which I should have immediately. I am in touch with all leaders so that I will be able to follow any course you may outline.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.51/1221.

[Document 247]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 12, 1914, 6 p.m.

Your February 5, 10 a.m. Department suggests the following as suitable text of a note which the Dominican Minister of Foreign Relations might send to the Legation: In order to enable this Government more closely to observe the provisions of the Convention of 1907, you are requested to say to your Government that the President of this Republic desires that the President of the United States appoint a competent financial expert to come to Santo Domingo to aid the proper officials of this Government in paying outstanding claims, in devising a proper system of public accounting, and in devising and putting into effect additional means of increasing revenues and adjusting expenditures to them, with the object of assuring financial order and stability and preventing deficits. In the performance of this task it will be his duty, particularly, to pass upon and determine the validity of every debt charged or claim [debt, charge, or claim?] of any kind whatsoever, to countersign checks, drafts, or orders for the payment of Dominican funds to any and all creditors, to advise both Governments as to whether any particular debt proposed to be incurred is in violation of the Convention of 1907, and to exercise all the powers and rights which usually attach to the office of Controller.

It is hoped that your Government may see fit to attach this financial expert to the Legation, giving him the title of Commercial Attaché; but it is the opinion of this Government that the salary and incidental expenses of the commercial attaché should be paid by the Receivership from the five per cent set aside to cover the cost of collecting customs revenues.

On receipt of information that the commercial attaché has been appointed, the President of Santo Domingo will give orders to the end that the Receiver ship shall make regular monthly payments of the salary and incidental expenses of such attaché” to the amount determined by the President of the United States to be just.

Insular Bureau will explain to Receiver how such payment shall be accomplished.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.51/1229.

[Document 248]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Extract.]

No. 31.] Department of State,
Washington, February 13, 1914.

Sir: The Department encloses herewith three forms3 marked 1, 2 and 3. Immediately after the Dominican Congress shall have formally authorized the President of the Dominican Republic to negotiate bonds now in the depository account with the Guaranty Trust Company of New York to produce approximately $1,600,000 for certain purposes, orders corresponding to these forms should be executed by the Minister of Finance and forwarded by you to the Department. When approved by the Department and forwarded to the Guaranty Trust Company the effect of the orders as per forms 1 and 2 will be to convert bonds into cash to the extent of approximately $1,600,000. The order as per form No. 3 will result in transferring from the depository account $1,600,000 of cash to the credit of an account entitled “Dominican Government Special Account” subject to disbursement on drafts of the Minister of Finance to be approved by the Department of State under such regulations as may hereafter be determined and prescribed.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
J. B. Moore.

3 Not printed.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.51/1232.

[Document 249]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, February 18, 1914, 3 p.m.

Minister for Foreign Affairs Grullon, despite all I can say, refuses to continue in the Cabinet unless the consular and diplomatic corps are paid at once. These men are in distress in foreign countries. Thirty-five thousand dollars is involved and the Minister insists he can not continue suffering pleadings for assistance from the corps any longer. I have asked him to defer resigning for forty-eight hours. Please instruct within that time if he can negotiate short loan. Grullon has been very useful in putting through our policy.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.51/1233.

[Document 250]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, February 18, 1914, 10 p.m.

Dominican Government again in peril by General Receiver stopping the five thousand dollars daily advance. No payment for two clays. I am apprehensive of trouble unless the Provisional Government is helped out in some way within twenty-four hours. Dominican Government can not get money here and the army restless to the revolting point. Banco Nacional offers to advance money for from thirty to sixty days without interest if the Department will either have public works money on deposit here to cover loan or placed to bank’s credit in New York City. This is the only plan 1 have heard suggested. Please instruct by wire at once. Of course Government can not live without funds. Quick action absolutely necessary.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.00/1069a.

[Document 251]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 19, 1914, 1 p.m.

Department is impressed that the basis of permanent improvement in Dominican affairs depends upon the Constitutional Convention and Congress adopting its recent suggestions for reforms.

Personally interview President Bordas privately. Ascertain if he considers elimination of Arias and Vidal wall enable Convention and Congress to complete suggested reforms, and whether the position of Delegate in the Cibao, held by Arias, is constitutional, how many soldiers he has, whether his salary and sustenance and salaries of his soldiers are provided by the budget and paid by the Government, and, finally, how President Bordas plans to eliminate Arias and whether a serious revolution might not result in case Arias is dismissed and proclaimed an outlaw, as suggested in your February 12, 9 a.m.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.51/1233.

[Document 252]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, February 19, 1914, 7 p.m.

Your February 18, 10 p.m. Insular Bureau will call Vick’s attention to previous orders to grant five thousand a day. Department assumes this will insure advance of this amount temporarily.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.51/1232.

[Document 253]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, February 19, 1914, 8 p.m..

Your February 18, 3 p.m. Insular Bureau will request Vick to make advance of $35,000 as available in fractional amounts if necessary for express purpose of paying consular and diplomtic corps. Such advance to be deducted from Dominican portion of customs.

Bryan.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1070.

[Document 254]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, February 21, 1914, 3 p.m.

Your February 19, 1 p.m. In two hour interview with Bordas today he declared that his attitude toward Arias could not be decided by him but must be determined by you. He could conceive of no more patriotic service than to wipe out the brigand and his followers, but that such an undertaking was too serious to attempt without the moral support and material assistance of American Government. Arias offers himself to presidential candidate willing to accept his terms. These are absolute domination and a free hand at looting and smuggling. Arias reluctantly persuaded that he cannot get presidency. President Bordas is sending commission next week to temporize with Arias hoping to avert revolution. Men going realize the danger and bid good bye to [?]. Bordas deplores this temporizing policy and says the man is growing [?] eating the heart of the country, making decent government impossible. His position as delegate of the North is not constitutional and is outside of the budget. Though soldiers under his control belong to and are paid by Government, Bordas has been gradually interfering with Arias’ ascendancy over these men so that Arias cannot by himself muster more than one thousand men. Dangerous element in the situation is that the Zamor brothers now govern Haiti, and they are willing to furnish Arias with munitions of war in return for favors rendered by Arias and Vidal in the recent Haitian revolution. Bordas found Arias appointed delegate to the North and to pacify him did not remove him but accepted his assistance in the recent revolution. This gave Arias opportunity to secure control of large supplies of arms and ammunition. Bordas says that revolution is inevitable and the time when it will take place will be named by Arias unless he is permitted to subvert Government to his personal desires unless Bordas proclaims him in his true color an outlaw. Bordas believes that the trouble should be faced at once by removing Arias and apprehending him. This will mean loss of life and a struggle but it is his idea not to dignify said trouble with name of revolution. Dominican Government believes that this aggressive course would drive Arias to the bush in a week. He could continue guerrilla warfare for some time but his hold which he now has upon functions of Government would be instantly broken and then Constitutional Convention would put your reforms into effect. Bordas says that you must decide upon Dominican Government’s attitude in this matter—whether Arias should be placated or proclaimed. If proclaimed, provision for campaign against him must be made; if placated, President Bordas asks that the Petrel carry his commission to Puerto Plata to deter Arias from inflicting violence to their persons. He asks me to say that he hoped you would appreciate the crucial character of the situation and determine at once upon such advice as you deem best.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.00/1070.

[Document 255]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 24, 1914, 11 p.m.

Your February 21, 3 p.m. Your telegram will be laid before the President.

To what extent have the alleged irregularities of Arias and Vidal interfered with the fulfilment of the terms of the Convention? If evidence is such as to cause Dominican Government to proclaim Arias or Vidal or both as offenders against the law, how soon after such proclamation does Bordas believe constitutional amendments and legislative reforms could be enacted and what would be the character and extent of material assistance required by Constituted Government?

Bryan.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1071.

[Document 256]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, February 25, 1914, 11 p.m.

Your February 24, 11 p.m. Bordas answers that if you permit Dominican Government to pay back salaries followers of Arias will be few and easily overcome. If Provisional Government has to continue hand to mouth policy with civil employees demanding payment and enraged at the Government for its failure to respond Arias becomes a more serious factor. If the proposed loan or some other similar relief is not forthcoming immediately Bordas desires to temporize with Arias and desires immediate information about your attitude. He asks for answer to following questions: Can the loan be made by Executive order? If not, is there any way of immediately paying back salaries? If not, will you protect the commission sent to deal with Arias? Bordas will refuse Arias’ irreducible demand for Vice Presidential nomination. Vidal with more intelligence and education seeking Vice Presidential nomination also and willing to break with Arias. I have had interview with Vidal and believe that as result he will side with law and order. Bordas claims that with salaries paid and with funds to support campaign for two months Arias would be for ever eliminated and that all constitutional reforms asked for can be assured. It will be observed Congress has not quorum in the capital and Constitutional Convention is beating time waiting to see whether it is best to refuse Government demand your suggested reforms. Bordas will call election shortly so that successor may be elected in time assume office at end of constituted term of office; by new law if Constitutional Convention makes one and by old law if it fails to act. Smuggling by Arias violates 1907 convention so seriously as to depress all business in the north and cause marked losses in customs receipts. Vick is reporting to me in detail on this subject. I earnestly recommend prompt and decided action which will mean the triumph of Government’s Latin American policy. Arias with Zamor in Monte Cristi today and sends news of fact to the capital to intimidate. Bordas pleads that you inform him before the twenty-eighth whether you will supply means so that he may proclaim Arias. He cannot delay longer responding to the demands of Arias for meeting and destitute of funds his position is untenable.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839,00/3071.

[Document 257]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 27, 1914, 10 p.m.

Your February 25, 11 p.m. You will present in person to all factional leaders and if you think advisable make public the following: That the Department of State favors the present Government because it is the constitutional government and because it continues to favor constitutional and legislative reforms which all leaders a few months ago claimed to desire. Department considers these reforms indispensable to the establishment of permanent liberty and order and it will not sympathize with or help any faction opposing these reforms so greatly desired by a vast majority of the people. Therefore, it is hoped that all political leaders will see it to the advantage of their country as well as to themselves to urge prompt enactment of constitutional amendments and legislative reforms as the time for holding elections is approaching and it is desirable that elections be not held under present laws.

Department can not at this time contemplate negotiating sufficient bonds in New York to produce $1,600,000 without approval of Dominican Congress. Since Bordas claims if he can pay civil employees and support campaign for two months that Arias will be forever eliminated and constitutional reforms needed can be assured, Department suggests that you interview the local banks regarding a loan to Dominican Government of amount sufficient to cover back salaries. This loan is to be repaid from the proceeds resulting from the negotiation of bonds. Department understands Bordas practically assures this Government that the Dominican Congress will ultimately approve negotiation of these bonds, as the result of paying civil salaries under the supervision of commercial attaché. Department under such assurances awaits terms on which Dominicans can secure loan up to $500,000, and is disposed to consider extending authorization, made necessary under Convention of 1907, to increase Dominican debt. Department recommends that as your interview with Vidal resulted favorably you accompany commission and personally impress Arias with the necessity of peaceable arrangement. He should be informed that revolutionary methods will not be permitted. If this procedure will enlist his support of constitutional and legislative reforms, the country will have opportunity to consider calmly the contemplated constitutional amendments and legislative enactments.

If he refuses we will study the means of helping you to carry out the reforms without him.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1071.

[Document 258]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, March 1, 1914, 4 p.m.

The Department’s February 27, 10 p m. Upon further consideration the Department is of the opinion that it would be unwise for you to accompany any commission sent by Bordas to treat with Arias. Therefore you are instructed not to accompany commission but to lend it all aid looking to its proceeding to Puerto Plata, and you are furthermore instructed to confer with the commander of the Petrel who will have received orders to convey the commission to the north should such a course be considered necessary.

If the commission is not successful in its mission to arrive at an agreement with Arias, have Commander of the Petrel before returning notify him that you desire his presence in the capital to confer with him upon important matters and that if he should refuse to come at the request of the Government of the United States that that Government will, if necessary, have to consider him as unfriendly to it and will take such appropriate action as is deemed expedient by the President of the United States of America. Arrange with Bordas for safe conduct of Arias in case he visits you.

Bryan.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1075.

[Document 259]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Santon Domingo, March 2, 1914, 3 p.m.

Your February 27, 10 p.m. Bordas intends going to Puerto Plata. He knows Arias wants Vice Presidency and heavy tribute from Government receipts. Bordas asserts that tentative nature and uncertainty of your proposition for funds leaves him without strength he needs. With positive assurance of financial support Arias could be obliterated without serious consequences; that to accede to him terms which is the alternative without certainty of the Department’s position means fastening him upon country as a leech. Impossible for provisional Government to resist Arias in present bankruptcy. What offer would be justifiable to placate Arias? State how far Department thinks Government should go and consider whether Arias should be permitted to regulate elections in the north. An immediate answer will save all interested from vacillation which in my opinion would be most unfortunate in a situation demanding firmness and instant definite plan of procedure if, which is likely, Arias is not placated; funds are needed not for the future but at once.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy. File No. 839.00/1071.

[Document 260]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy.

Department of State,
Washington, March 2, 1914.

Sir: The Department requests that you kindly send to the United States war vessel now stationed in Dominican waters, orders to convey a commission of Dominican officials, who are to be sent by the President of the Republic of Santo Domingo, to confer with Mr. Desiderio Arias on the north coast of the republic. It is also requested that the commander of this vessel be instructed to convey this commission back to Santo Domingo City after the conference.

Should Mr. Arias desire to proceed to Santo Domingo City it is also requested that you authorize the commander of the vessel to accede to Mr. Arias’ wishes in regard to such transportation.

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
J. B. Moore.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1077.

[Document 261]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, March 4, 1914, 1 a.m.

Provisional Government in direful dilemma. Arias sends Bordas final demand for Vice President and three hundred thousand dollars. Provisional Government knows he is preparing for revolution. Provisional Government will decide at eleven this morning whether to precipitate the inevitable or meet him in Puerto Plata. Bordas will absolutely refuse both money and office. Banks will not loan on your proposition. With funds Government can maintain law and order; without funds chaos will reign. Jimenezistas seize opportunity to start anti-American campaign calling Bordas the pro-American candidate. I recommend instant substantial support of Provisional Government.

Provisional Government asks for sale of half million bonds immediately.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1078.

[Document 262]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, March 4, 1914, 2 p.m.

Have persuaded President Bordas to make last appeal to Arias. Petrel sails tonight with Bordas and Lovaton. I believe surpassing effrontery and egotism of Arias makes agreement out of the question. Bordas will not permit Horacio Vasquez to return under tense circumstances fearing further revolutionary activities on his part. Claimed country must be handled firmly else anarchy will follow. Provisional Government can subdue sanguinary element if you give it means.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.51/1258.

[Document 263]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, March 5, 1914, 10 a.m.

In considering solution of financial problem can you loan money against alcohol and tobacco taxes on condition that said taxes shall be collected by Receivership? With the right to collect this tax General Receiver’s hands would be strengthened to the extent that he could aid materially in maintaining law and order by practically policing the country. Vick and I agree that this advantage would be most important in the work of establishing orderly government.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.00/1077.

[Document 264]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 5, 1914, 10 p.m.

Your March 2, 3 p.m. and March 4, 1 a.m. Communicate with President Bordas on board Petrel and inform him that this Department advises him to point out to Arias (1) that the Government of the United States will not permit revolutionary methods to be employed in Santo Domingo, (2) that no money will be paid to him by the Dominican Government unless there is just claim for services actually rendered, (3) that patriotic services rendered to the people are the only bases upon which to seek public honors, (4) and that the influence of the United States Government will be used to reward those who show themselves deserving and will be used against those who attempt to misuse governmental power for personal ambition or private gain, and that (5) the only methods through which public office should be sought are those upon which the Constitutional Assembly is now at work in perfecting. You should further inform Bordas that in his interview with Arias he should assume that Arias is sincerely interested in his country’s welfare and should talk to him as one patriotic citizen would talk to another. This attempt should be made to secure his support before forcible means are resorted to. The Department does not feel even in this emergency that it would be expedient to authorize executive order for negotiation of bonds. Department is now advising with American bankers as to temporary advance of five hundred thousand dollars and proceeds on the assurance that if this advance is arranged that Government will secure approval of Congress to Department’s plan of acquiring funds through negotiation of bonds to produce $1,600,000, before expiration of Bordas’ term.

You may say to the Minister of Foreign Affairs that the funds so advanced will be expended under the supervision of the commercial attaché.

Bryan.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1085.

[Document 265]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, March 7, 1914, 12 noon.

If money for back salaries is not forthcoming at once Provisional Government will go under. If you delay, our hold on the situation will be lost. Prompt relief means keeping all our ground we have gained.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.00/1085.

[Document 266]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 9, 1914, 7 p.m.

Your March 7th, 12 noon. Department will at once endeavor to arrange advance if you are sure that the payment of $500,000 on back salaries will enable the Government to continue and enact the reforms suggested.

Bryan.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1088.

[Document 267]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, March 10, 1914, 1 p.m.

There is no question in my judgment but that the $500,000 will enable Dominican Government to live and enact the reforms suggested by you. Hasten appointment of commercial attaché.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.51/1258.

[Document 268]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 14, 1914, 8 p.m.

Your March 5, 10 a.m. and March 10, 1 p.m. Department encounters difficulty in arranging temporary advance of $500,000 to Dominican Government without definite guaranty and is willing to endeavor to arrange the advance provided the Dominican Government will pledge and turn over the collection of alcohol and tobacco taxes to the Receivership.

Do you intend to convey by your use of word tobacco tax that it is the tax based solely on tobacco, or is it the tax on stamps which, it is understood, embodies tax on tobacco.

We are still looking for a commercial attaché.

Bryan.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 830.51/1266.

[Document 269]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, March 15, 1914, 10 p.m.

Your March 14, 8 p.m. Minister of Finance, Saviñon, agrees to pledge alcohol and tobacco taxes but believes collection of same should not be surrendered at this time to the Receivership. He believes two radical governmental innovations should not be looked for at one time and that the country should digest financial expert proposition before Receivership assume control internal reorganization. He gave me to understand that he believed in said control ultimately but not now and urged that Department stand by original program for control by Receivership on failure to make payments. The money is needed at once. The news, carefully spread, that Washington would finance Provisional Government has had most salutary effect. Tobacco tax is really a stamp tax which includes tobacco.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1094.

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, March 15, 1914, 12 midnight.

[Document 270]

[Untitled]

I am informed Bordas’ mission results in peaceable understanding with Arias which means that constitutional convention will proceed to enact your reforms including new election law. Governmental program includes an election of president to succeed Bordas on June 30th, the real date when the Caceres term ended, instead of April 13th. I understand this is constitutional and not inconsistent with congressional decree which pronounced choice of Bordas. President returns early this week when I can give Department details of situation. Believe revolution again averted.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1101.

[Document 271]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, March 19, 1914, 11 p.m.

Bordas has published April 1 and 2 as election days for Presidency, twelve members of Lower House and four [omission in transmission]. Constitutional Convention’s failure to act compels procedure under old law unless meantime convention furnishes new one. Bordas will volunteer safeguards at polls in harmony with reforms suggested even should no provision by law be made for such or nothing in present law prohibit this course. Government says that elections cannot be deferred longer without violating Constitution. Caceres’ term ends June 3 [30]; new President must be voted for in primary elections three months previous. The only question raised is whether a Provisional President will be named to succeed Bordas for the period between April 13th and inauguration of the President-elect. Best legal opinion is that Bordas will complete Caceres’ term of June 3 [30], Little likelihood of contest on this point. In any event the election will be practically decided in the primaries before April 13th. Will you send observers at once or shall I avail myself of Americans and Porto Ricans in this country.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1102.

[Document 272]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, March 20, 1914, 1 a.m.

After serious deliberation in which commission to Cibao stated that no agreement with Arias was possible upon any honest proceeding Dominican Cabinet tonight voted to no longer submit to his domination. This decision was predicated by General Receiver’s emphatic protest that the governors of the north were either unwilling or unable to prevent the wholesale smuggling resulting in heavy losses in customs receipts and general depreciation in business. Government responds by removing governors of Monte Christi, Puerto Plata, Santiago, Seibo, and La Vega. Governor of La Vega will be sent to Monte Christi. Governors of first four places are Arias’s men. Vick has evidence against Franco, Governor of Santiago. Provisional Government asks that I transmit their urgent appeal for funds so long promised to pay back salaries. If you can pay these salaries the situation remains in our hands while delayed financial relief emboldens the bush element. Provisional Government points out that course decided upon is the only one which promises maintenance of law and order, for an election held under irresponsible governors, heeding only the commands of Arias, would be worse than a farce. Otherwise Government notwithstanding custom frauds could temporize with these men. To hesitate longer under all the circumstances would invite anarchy. I recommend support of this Government to the end that we establish eventually three fundamental reforms, namely: first, collection of all governmental revenues by the Receivership; second, the entire control of public works; third, establishment of a financial expert. The last of these reforms is conceded and the other two are promised and I believe the Bordas party if maintained in power will fulfill all their promises to us. Once again and more urgently than on other occasions I ask the Department for instant action that its policy may prevail.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.51/1266.

[Document 273]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 20, 1914, 12 p.m.

Cable immediately if there appears to be any apparent evidence on the part of Congress to change its position as to authorization of loan or if its position could be changed in reference to authorization of means for the payment of back salaries only. The payment of back salaries might be arrived at by a temporary advance of $500,000 from public works funds on deposit in New York if Congress would authorize the pledging of alcohol and stamp taxes to repay this loan. If this is not possible request Minister of Finance to prepare plan for efficacious repayment.

Bryan.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1105.

[Document 274]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation
Santo Domingo, March 22, 1914, 2 p.m.

As elections approach country in feverish state. Arias uniting with various opposition groups. All outs now assailing Bordas party. Much hostility towards American Government and myself. We are accused of failing in our promises. Arias published my request contained in your instruction of March 1, 4 p.m., with defiant refusal. Systematic press attacks upon Legation are, I believe, inspired by old grafting ring taking advantage of excitement. Provisional Government has insisted as result of rumored plot upon placing guards day and night around Legation. All parties preparing for polls. Bitter protests from Arias’ faction on removal of Arias’ Governors in [north?]. Arias unquestionably intends to be President of the Republic but is now ostensibly supporting Jimenez. His success would mean chaos and plunder. On the other hand Provisional Government chafes at reprisals and is eager to employ boot and spur policy. I am insisting upon Provisional Government’s obligation to give country decent election.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1106.

[Document 275]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, March 23, 1914, 11 a.m.

Your March 20, 12 midnight. Held a conference tonight with Provisional Government Cabinet and was informed that there is no hope present Congress will approve financial relief of any kind, its hope being to defeat Government by starvation; neither has Minister of Finance any further plan to advance unless you decide to place funds already appropriated for Public Works in this country. Government is proceeding with rigor against Arias which may result in outbreak in the north. Arias resorting with Rosselean, Haitian brigand. I fear that our failure to furnish financial assistance now will permit reform in financial comptroller to slip from our hands. This expectation relief is absolutely essential to our maintaining a consistent successful policy and without same the Government faces supreme difficulties in maintaining orderly procedure on election days. I am promised at tonight’s meeting the Government will exert every effort for honest poll.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.00/1105.

[Document 276]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 23, 1914, 8 p.m.

Your March 22, 2 p.m. Department desires to he informed as to manner of removal of Governors, whether much or little opposition resulted, names of Governors removed and their successors. Can authority of new Governors be maintained by Bordas and can he cope with any revolution which may result from removal of Governors?

When Department suggested plan of financing Santo Domingo to extent of $1,600,000 its object was to obtain constitutional amendments, congressional reforms and to enable Santo Domingo to liquidate past due obligations under the practical supervision of a controller so that through this official that Republic should undertake the reform of her whole financial dilemma.

Pending Bordas efforts to accomplish the above Department was induced to consider how some $500,000 might be supplied to repay back salaries, this to facilitate Bordas endeavors to effect reforms. Finally just before Bordas interview with Arias and so he need not submit to latter’s usual ruinous demands you were instructed to assure Bordas the Department would aid in every proper way to arrange funds with which to repay back salaries.

You have spoken against revolutionary and in favor of constitutional methods and free and fair elections. Since interview with Arias failed, resulting in removal of Governors under his control and in his uniting with opposing factions against President and in view of fact that elections have been called for on such very short notice, do you consider Department lays itself open to criticism by putting funds into Bordas hands so same may be used just prior to or during elections?

Department hesitates to provide funds to be hastily paid out prior to election. Have back salaries been discounted to any large amount to banks or money lenders if so would it not seem that by providing such a large sum as requested these parties would be more benefited than government employees? If you consider it expedient, proper and necessary that an amount be advanced to the Government of Santo Domingo and if it is decided to advance same Department would insist that funds be dispensed only through a temporary controller who will be replaced by permanent controller who shall in advance sign contract for no less than three years, his attention to be exclusively devoted to institute desired financial reforms.

Report as to whether banks in the Republic have sufficient actual cash to be transferred to the Government on telegraphic order if through negotiation of bonds the equivalent should be available in New York.

Bryan.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1114.

[Document 277]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, March 26, 1914, 5 p.m.

Your March 23, 8 p.m. Answering inquiries therein in order; at Seibo Andreas Beras deposed, General Neftali Hernandez succeeds to governorship peaceably; at Puerto Plata, deposed as governor, Cristobal Perello; General Quirieo Feliu assumes governorship without trouble; La Vega, General Tanco Savinon will succeed Manrico Jiminez, left on the 25th for post; at Santiago General Manuel Sanchez, commander of fort, will be named to-morrow to succeed Manuel Franco of whom Vick complains.

Dominican Government points out that new governors are chosen from various parties but without doubt they are now loyal to Provisional Government. I believe authority of new governors will be maintained and Bordas can cope with situation, as he controls dominating military strongholds in San Francisco de Macoris, Moca, Puerto Plata, Santo Domingo, San Pedro de Macoris, Samana, Seibo, Santiago, La Vega, and Barahona. Arias dominates Monte Christi, and Vidal, who is on the fence, is in power at Azua. Arias’ power to start any serious trouble has been materially minimized and he has withdrawn from Santiago to Guayubin, small village near Monte Christi. Bordas seems to he master of situation although political opposition aside from military tactics is pronounced and active. There is no conceivable attitude, whether affirmative or negative, that can prevent criticism here. If Bordas is given money prior to election I believe it means his reelection. I believe we should consider any advantage to him in the light of an incident and keep in mind supreme importance of forcing Arias out of Dominican affairs for ever. It is my opinion that it is proper, necessary and expedient that the interests of decency should be permitted to enjoy incidental benefit that can be hoped for through the proper distribution of funds prior to and during election time. Arias has forced the issue upon this country and upon us through our economic interests in this country as to whether he shall continue to stand between the people angle their hopes for law, order and solvency in Government. Failure of Bordas’ Government at coming elections would mean the rehabilitation of Arias, as the one or two other candidates who might have a chance are willing to wear his collar. The only way to take issue with Arias and other grafters here is by supporting the group that is pledged to dispose of them. I am looking forward to more peaceable and orderly election than the one held on December 15th.

A large minority percentage of the salaries has been pledged to banks and business men for credit whereby employees might live. The effect of payment of salaries will be beneficial to the people generally.

Dominican Government to-day, after a conference between President and Cabinet Ministers, agrees without reservation to temporary comptroller, to be followed by permanent comptroller with three years contract. I have on file practically in the language of your February 12, 6 p.m., request from Dominican Government for appointment of such comptroller to be designated as commercial attaché.

Following funds available on telegraphic notice: Royal Bank of Canada, $50,000,; Banco National, $150,000; Michelena, $25,000. First two institutions can advance any amount from New York City by notice. Royal Bank of Canada report that New York City office acquainted with details of the situation and able to act. Dominican Government has now 2,500 soldiers in the country which can be increased three times, I am informed, in twenty-four hours. Government should be in position sanctioning this if necessary. Hasten instructions about observers.

Unsigned. [ Sullivan.]

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1122.

[Document 278]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, March 30, 1914, 6 p.m.

Revolution breaking out at La Vega, Santiago. If we strengthen the Provisional Government’s arms with funds the outbreak can be suppressed in its inception. Important that Arias should not be permitted to get a start.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1124.

[Document 279]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, March 31, 1914, 11 p.m.

Lower House of Congress filibustering against passage of legislation attempt to control apportionment of representation in electoral college, no election being possible until such apportionment. The filibustering is intended to prevent election before April 30th. Parties opposed to Government proposing to claim office of President vacant after 30th, however. Government reports serious fighting begun at La Vega and Santiago.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.00/1124.

[Document 280]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 2, 1914, 7 p.m.

Your March 31, 11 p.m. Give what dates in your opinion primary and general elections will be held. Is Constitutional Congress still in session? If so, when will it finish its labors?

In your utterances you will use caution when speaking of the coming elections and the candidates. The United States has no interest except to aid in the election of the candidate desired by the voters through the medium of free and fair means.

Bryan.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1134.

[Document 281]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, April 2, 1914, 10 p.m.

Provisional Government has requested me to transmit following message: President Bordas respectfully begs to inform President Wilson that fighting began yesterday between the Government forces and those of General Arias who is resisting substitution of governors hostile to the smuggling interests in lieu of Arias governors. My Government can control the situation if it can obtain the necessary funds. Otherwise state of anarchy likely to ensue. I appeal to the high sense of justice of the American Government to consider our situation.

Provisional Government is about to ask Congress to suspend constitutional guaranties but believe Congress will refuse.

Bordas leaves here to-morrow with troops to take the field in person against Arias rebellion.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1136.

[Document 282]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, April 3, 1914, 1 p.m.

Your April 2, 7 p.m. Anticipating confidential instruction, have made no statement on the situation except enclosed, quotation from your own declaration presented to local paper in a communication by Blount. I have had some copies in every leading newspaper in the country: All believers in a republic accept the doctrine that the Government must derive its just powers from the consent of the governed and the President gives every legitimate encouragement to those who represent this idea of government, while he discourages those who attempt to overthrow or ignore the principles of popular government. He (President Wilson) is not concerned as to the personnel of government—all he desires is that the people shall have such officers as they desire.

I refrained from publishing your instruction of February 27, 10 p.m. fearing that politicians would wilfully misconstrue.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No, 839.00/1136.

[Document 283]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 4, 1914, 5 p.m.

Your April 3, 1 p.m. Department approves publication of extract quoted. Too much emphasis cannot be placed on these two points: (1) that the President of the United States feels strongly that the best results will be accomplished only by officers of the Government who are chosen by the people. (2) that changes in laws and in personnel of the Government should be by constitutional methods and not by revolution. The professional revolutionist enriching himself at the cost of his country is a curse and there can be no permanent prosperity while he is allowed to practice his profession. Arias is a smuggler and revolutionist and as such has been hampering the Government of the United States in the fullfillment of its obligations under the Convention of 1907. It is for these reasons that this Government desires that his activities along these lines be definitely stopped.

Inquire at once how many soldiers Bordas will use and how much they will cost per day and report by cable.

Request Peynado to give you an unofficial estimate as to number of soldiers he thinks necessary to subdue rebellion and secure his opinion as to estimate of moneys to be devoted to this cause.

The situation will be laid before the President at once.

Bryan.

The Legation of the Dominican Republic to the Department of State. File No. 839.00/1141.

[Document 284]

The Legation of the Dominican Republic to the Department of State.

[Memorandum—Translation.]

In confirmation of our conversation of this afternoon, I have the honor to advise you that my Government in a cablegram of to-day’s date, informs me that it has declared General Desiderio Arias an outlaw, charging him with being a smuggler.

My Government also informs me that President Bordas will leave with the troops in order to attack General Arias for the purpose of bringing him to order; that the Dominican Government, in this campaign, counts upon the Department (of State) to lend it its moral support, facilitating the means through which President Bordas may obtain the necessary resources.

The Government is confident that if these funds are obtained in time, it will easily control the situation, and if it does not obtain them the country will be threatened by anarchy.

Legation of the Dominican Republic,
Washington , April 4, 1914.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1154.

[Document 285]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, April 11, 1914, 11 a.m.

Minister for Foreign Affairs asks that you increase at once the amount advanced to at least $5,000 a day. The sum of $2,000 can not maintain the number of men needed to crush out the insurrection, and a long-drawn-out campaign would be undesirable and disastrous to the country. The fixed charges for Government will leave less than $3,000 of the $7,000 for the field, and the Dominican Government fears you underestimate what it will mean if Arias is crushed immediately. Such a result, among other things, would convince the people that there was truth in the promise that revolutions in the future would be futile. Vidal is quiet, but anxious to throw his fortunes on the winning side. Up to the present time Arias has been kept on the run, and his activities are confined to district of Monte Christi, with peace in every other part of the country. A proper campaign against him here can not be maintained for the money allowed.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.00/1154.

[Document 286]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, April 14, 1914, 4 p.m.

Your April 11, 11 a.m. The Receivership has been instructed to advance $3,500 per diem instead of the $2,000 already arranged for. This sum will be advanced for a period of fifteen days. It is expected from your reports that a longer campaign will not be necessary. Unless Congress approves proposition for loan before period of fifteen days is passed all available funds will be exhausted.

Bryan.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1192.

[Document 287]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

No. 84.] American Legation
Santo Domingo, April 17, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to report as follows upon the present political situation in the Republic:

The Provisional Government seems at present to be the only strong unit in the political field. The Government is being opposed by Arias, leading an insurrection in the Cibao, and by three other factions in Congress, namely, the Jimenistas, Horacistas, and Velasquistas. Bordas has taken the field against Arias with a force of 1,500 men, and without doubt will succeed in breaking up the insurrectionary force into groups.

At the capital the opposition groups in Congress have made common cause against the Bordas Government, but, unfortunately, these groups have no constructive policy and could not agree upon a successor to Bordas if they succeeded in removing him from the Provisional Presidency, which up to the 13th of April they ardently desired and planned to do.

The two great questions of importance to this country are, first, the loan, to settle the economic difficulties of the country; and, second, the election of a President to succeed the present incumbent.

As I have indicated in my cable despatches, the Congress is not willing to authorize the loan because the Congress is filled with men each of whom hopes that the party to which he belongs will have the pleasant task of distributing the funds, and each is willing to take a patriotic part in the work of distribution.

It was believed that on April 13 Congress would raise a constitutional question as to whether Bordas should be succeeded by another ad interim President between the periods of April 1? and July 1, 1914. On April 13, 1913, Bordas was elected for the term of one year, within which period he should call for the election of a successor. The best information I can receive supports the Government’s position that Bordas holds until a successor is elected by the people, and that Congress had no right to declare the Presidency vacant, as it intended to do on April 13 of this year. There was great excitement as this date approached, with rumors of uprising and riots and general disorder against the further life of the Provisional Government. The Government made great preparations in this city to suppress any attempt at its overthrow.

April 13 arrived and passed without any untoward event, and a discussion was prevented on the question of the right of Bordas to remain by the action of a minority of the House of Deputies remaining away and preventing a quorum from being present. The Government has a majority in the Senate, and since April 13 there has not been a session of either branch of the legislature.

In the meantime there is promise of a compromise between the Government and the Jimenista party which may result in a final adjustment of the constitutional deadlock.

Notwithstanding the bitterness of the constitutional elements, the first impulse of some of the opposition constitutional elements to take advantage of the Arias rebellion has passed and all factions are bitterly denouncing this leader. There is a suspicion abroad that Luis Vidal would like to join him, but he has not done so to date. There are many Horacista and Jimenista leaders siding with the Government, and these men are moved to this course by what they deemed to be the chaotic condition of the opposition, which simply aims to tear down without having any alternative government to replace Bordas and his friends.

All parties agree that this is so and that there is no hope of any concert of action beyond the work of removing the Provisional Government.

An election is now a certainty as soon as the Government can establish itself at Monte Christi and Dajabon, because the lower house has at last passed the election law that Bordas wanted in time to hold elections on April 1 and 2. I desire to call attention, in passing, to the fact that in many towns in the North, where the news had not reached that the elections of April 1 and 2 were abandoned, quiet and orderly elections were held. In Puerto Plata, Bordas assemblymen were elected; in Monte Christi, Arias proclaimed that he would prove that he was in favor of free elections. He permitted the Jimenista party to put a ticket in the field in opposition to his ticket. There was one day of quiet voting, which resulted as follows: Jimenez, 109; Arias, 9. On learning this result Arias gave a peremptory order that there should be no more voting in Monte Christi.

I desire to call the attention of the Department to conditions here which have resulted from the application of Wilson Latin-American policy.

Notwithstanding the present trouble those who are willing and eager to criticize the efforts of the Department here frankly admit the following, which it is impossible to deny: that there has been a wonderful improvement in matters governmental here; that never before, in the history of the country, has there been such liberality of Government; that at a time of the keenest political interest, with excitement at a feverish pitch and with the politicians passionately in earnest, the Government has not made a single arrest and there has not been one execution. Mr. McLean, whose report I shall annex3 and who has lived here six years, and whose report breathes hostility to the Provisional Government, says that it is almost unbelievable that in this situation there are neither arrests nor executions.

Again, the lesson that the Department has taught by the President’s and your pronouncements against revolutions is being learned to the dismay and chagrin of the band of generals who have lived in the past upon revolutions.

Captain McLean is again surprised in his talk with me, and so reports in the letter annexed,3 that the people are weary and tired of resort to arms and will have any government rather than fight over the question as to who shall have power. I am convinced that things are so shaping themselves here that the election coming—and it will come in a short time—will be a reasonably free, fair, and orderly one. The freedom of press that the country has enjoyed since the December elections is now being exercised with attention to the decencies of life and with a decreasing disposition to indulge in license. When one of the papers attacked me the Government was disposed to interfere, but I urged upon the Government that such interference would place me in a false and inconsistent position.

I am sorry to have to report that some Americans here, for no better reason than a desire to see a chaotic condition exist, have assumed an attitude of covert opposition to every effort for law, order, and peace. These efforts on their part, however, are not retarding the progress of the Department’s policy.

The people of the country are in a state of anxiety to pursue the peaceful occupations of life, and with the present spirit continuing to grow, and with the lesson being learned that revolution does not point out the way to profit and power, there is hope for tranquility here, and I believe that in a year the professional revolutionist will have neither a home nor a habitation in the land.

During the trying times that we have been passing through here I have been able to meet the situation by reason of the moral support and counsel given me by the Department’s representatives, Messrs. Blount and Dickey. These gentlemen have been untiring in their efforts to bring order and peace to the country, and they have fortified me in many difficult situations to maintain an attitude of discretion in representing my Government and of helpfulness in my dealings with the Government to which I am accredited. I would be doing less than my duty if I did not call the Department’s attention to this patriotic attitude on the part of these gentlemen, who felt free to consult with me on my invitation, supported by your appointment of them as advisers in the coming elections, which election embraces, incidentally, all the matters of government that have come to the Legation for attention.

I have [etc.,]

James M. Sullivan.

3 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1172.

[Document 288]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, April 21, 1914, 10 p.m.

News just received that Puerto Plata revolted yesterday, new governor named by the Bordas Government joining rebels. Arias was being reduced to insignificance when this new trouble arises to make new difficulties. Bordas holds ‘Santiago, and will proceed at once upon Puerto Plata. I attribute most of trouble to the dire need for economic adjustments. New uneasiness felt throughout the country. Bordas is reported to have 2,000 men. Velasquez is believed to have corrupted Puerto Plata governor. The whole revolutionary activity is intended to prevent the election which the Provisional Government expected to hold May twentieth. If Bordas’ Puerto Plata constitutional program will go on, the friends of Constitutional Government hope for this result.

While a gunboat ought to be at Puerto Plata, I advise against Wheeling leaving here, as the situation is full of possibilities here and in Vidal’s territory.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.00/1172.

[Document 289]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 26, 1914, 4 p.m.

Your April 21, 10 p.m. Owing to representations made to the Department that vessel was necessary at Puerto Plata for protection of American and other interests on account of bombardment of city, Wheeling has been ordered to proceed to that port. In case of absolute necessity Petrel may be ordered to Santo Domingo. She is now at Port au Prince.

Bryan.

Consul Henry to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1184.

[Document 290]

Consul Henry to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Puerto Plata, April 28, 1914, 9 a.m.

American steamer Algonquin failed to enter port. De facto blockade existing. Is it possible to send war ship? Town is being shelled.

Henry.

The Secretary of State to Consul Henry. File No. 839.00/1184.

[Document 291]

The Secretary of State to Consul Henry.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 29, 1914, 7 p.m.

Your April 28, 9 a.m. Petrel has been ordered proceed immediately from Guantanamo to Puerto Plata. Wheeling reports no orders received from Navy due to interruption of cable. She will remain Santo Domingo.

Bryan.

Consul Henry to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1186.

[Document 292]

Consul Henry to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Puerto Plata, April 29, 1914, noon.

I had an interview with Bordas this morning. He declares that Puerto Plata is blockaded, he will continue to use cannon against the town but promises care. Do not believe Government has much more than thousand soldiers Cibao and four hundred attacking here. The situation unchanged. Gunboat is essential for the protection of foreigners. English have requested one.

Henry.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1194.

[Document 293]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation
Santo Domingo, April 30, 1914, 7 p.m.

Revolutionists by resistance have caused closing of Puerto Plata customhouses and interference with American Government’s rights under the convention, which provides that we may protest the same. I earnestly recommend Department’s serious consideration of this phase of present insurrection.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.00/1194.

[Document 294]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 5, 1914, 2 p.m.

Your April 30, 7 p.m.

Department requested Navy May 2nd to instruct Commander of Petrel to request the opening of customhouse, Puerto Plata, and continuance of proper collection of customs. He has further been instructed to advise this Department should this request not be complied with, and to inform it of what action will be necessary to bring compliance by authorities. He will see that all American and foreign interests are given proper protection.

Bryan.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/203.

[Document 295]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, May 5, 1914, 5 p.m.

The following telegram has been received from Henry, Puerto Plata: Nautilus has ordered discontinuance artillery by both sides. The situation outwardly same but Bordas probably weakening.

Henry also wires Arias is in Puerto Plata with several hundred soldiers. Reenforcements for Bordas leaving here to-morrow night.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1210.

[Document 296]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, May 9, 1914, 5 p.m.

Disturbing rumors Santo Domingo to be attacked. Small revolutionary group operating within a few miles from city. Jose Perez, one of the men who killed Caceres, led an attack last night near Haina bridge, ten miles from here. Perez’ presence gives color to the constant claim that Vidal will rise. I believe Vidal waits to be sure American Government will not interfere.

Sullivan.

The Chargé d’Affaires of the Dominican Republic to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1225.

[Document 297]

The Chargé d’Affaires of the Dominican Republic to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

No. 39.] Dominican Legation,
Washington, May 14, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: I have the honor to inform you that by a cablegram dated yesterday and received to-day my Government informs me that because of the state of rebellion existing in the cities of Puerto Plata and Monte Cristi and as a measure tending to restore peace, the ports of Puerto Plata and Monte Cristi have been declared closed to commerce and blockaded.

I avail [etc.],

I. A. Cernuda.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Charge d’Affaires of the Dominican Republic. File No. 839.00/1225.

[Document 298]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Charge d’Affaires of the Dominican Republic.

Department of State,
Washington, May 16, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Chargé d’Affaires: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of May 14th, in which you inform this Government that a telegram on the date of May 13th has been received by the Legation, stating that on account of the rebellion which exists in the cities of Puerto Plata and Monte Christi and for the purpose of establishing peace, these ports have been declared closed to commerce and under blockade.

In reply thereto I desire to inform you that as this Government has been informed that the blockade at Puerto Plata is maintained effectively, the blockade of that port is recognized by this Government. As this Government is not in receipt of advices that the blockade of Monte Christi is effective, it will be impossible for it to recognize it until such a time as it is informed that this blockade is made effective.

I am [etc.],

Robert Lansing.

The Chargé d’Affaires of the Dominican Republic to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1238.

[Document 299]

The Chargé d’Affaires of the Dominican Republic to the Secretary of State.

[Translation—Extract.]

No. 44.] Dominican Legation,
Washington, May 19, 1914.

Mr. Secretary:

I again refer to the subject of my note of the 14th instant to the Department and have the honor to acknowledge receipt of the Hon. Mr. Lansing’s courteous note dated the 16th, informing me that the Government of the United States recognizes the blockade of Puerto Plata and refrains from doing so in the case of Monte Christi until it hears that that blockade is effective.

I have fresh instructions in this respect pursuant to which I have the honor to inform you that my Government has decided for the present to confine the blockade to the port of Puerto Plata thus leaving that of Monte Christi open to commerce.

I avail myself of this opportunity to express to the Department the thanks of the Dominican Republic for the attitude maintained by the Government of the United States.

I renew [etc.]

I. A. Cernuda.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1230.

[Document 300]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, May 20, 1914, 1 p.m.

The Dominican Government will issue today decree for elections as follows: for members of Electoral College, June 7 and 8; Electoral College to meet for work of electing President, Vice President, Deputies and Senators, June 15. Newly elected Congress to assemble June 25. Inauguration of the President, July 1, which is the date of the expiration of Caceres term. This proclamation if complied with will preserve constitutional government unbroken. I am assured by the Government that this program meets constitutional requirements. Instruct if interrupted plans for observation shall proceed.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.51/1334.

[Document 301]

[Untitled]

[Extract.]

No. 99.] American Legation
Santo Domingo, May 21, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose you herewith the original note of May 15th, sent to this Legation as the final expression of the Dominican Government concerning the appointment of the financial controller for the Dominican Republic.4

I desire to call the Department’s attention to the fact that I began work for this reform the first of this year, and I have steadily labored to convince the Dominican Government that such an official was necessary to establish stability and solvency in this country’s financial affairs.

The Dominican officials have had to overcome a strong prejudice against the introduction of the proposed innovation. I believe, however, now that the step has been taken, there will be cheerful acquiescence to the financial expert’s authority.

It was with no small difficulty that the Dominican Government was induced to abandon the idea that they only needed a financial expert when a loan was negotiated for the Dominican Government to meet all its obligations.

I have [etc.]

James M. Sullivan.

4 Not printed. See note from the Dominican Minister of May 26, 1914, below, which is substantially the same.

[Untitled] File No. 830.00/1245.

[Document 302]

[Untitled]

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, May 25, 1914, 6 p.m.

The Dominican Government to-day requested me to ask the American Government’s cooperation in protecting the treaty of 1907 so that the obligations of both countries under the same may be fulfilled.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs desires me to state that the country is being ruined by an insurrection; that the revenues of the Government will not permit the use of sufficient force to end the struggle and that the country is accumulating a debt which destroys every hope for the future. The present Government is alarmed at the disastrous consequence of a prolonged conflict. The success of the revolutionists would mean either anarchy or the domination of Arias and would mean the defeat of the ballot and triumph of the professional revolutionist. He further pointed out that the revenues of the customs were decreasing at such an alarming rate that there is danger of not being able to meet the payments imposed by the convention. In fact this condition now threatens, to say nothing of the current obligations of the Dominican Government. In these circumstances the Dominican Government proposes that on the precedent established in the Morales rebellion when an American officer prevented fighting in Puerto Plata and by the greater right and obligation established under the convention that the American Government take the necessary steps to prevent any and all insurrectionary activities in port and customs towns and to lend protection to the constitutional election now called, that the Dominican Government, freed from the tyranny of their revolutionary chiefs, may proceed with the peaceful and honorable work of meeting its responsibilities at home and abroad. The Dominican Government asks that the American Government make such further suggestions as may relieve this unhappy country.

Sullivan.

The Chargé d’Affaires of the Dominican Republic to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.51/1342.

[Document 303]

The Chargé d’Affaires of the Dominican Republic to the Secretary of State.

[Translation—Extract.]

No. 46.] Dominican Legation,
Washington, May 26, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: Under date of March 20, 1914, the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Eliseo Grullon, addressed to the Honorable James M. Sullivan, Minister of the United States in Santo Domingo, a note5 with reference to the acceptance by the Dominican Government of a financial expert who will go to Santo Domingo under the conditions and with the object in view which are set forth in the above-mentioned note. The original text of the said note—a copy of the English translation of which has been given to me in the Department—has been the subject of discussion between Secretary Grullon and Minister Sullivan, the latter acting in virtue of instructions from the Department transmitted by cable.

I have the honor to inform you that I have received authority from my Government to substitute for the above-mentioned note another note; the English text of the note which takes the place of the note of March 20, 1914, is as follows: The Government of the Dominican Republic, desirous of preserving its regard for the international obligations of the Republic relative to the demands of national sovereignty, suggests, with the purpose of rendering effective the clauses of the Convention of 1907 that the President of the United States designate a competent financial expert to come to Santo Domingo to aid the proper officials of this Government to settle debts, to devise an adequate system of public accountability and to conserve and put into execution the original agreement of increasing the revenues and to adjust them to the expenses, all this with the view of assuring order and stability over our finances, and to prevent deficits. In the fulfillment of this task it will be his duty especially to inquire into the validity of any charge or claim which may be presented, to countersign checks, drafts, and orders of payment from the Dominican funds in favor of a third party, to enlighten both Governments with reference to any eventual debt, determine if such debt is or is not in conformity with the Convention of 1907, and to exercise all the powers of a comptroller.

The financial expert shall be employed in connection with the Receivership by virtue of the terms of the Convention of 1907 but he shall not be subordinate thereto. His salary and expenses shall be paid by the Receivership.

The duties which are assigned to the financial expert shall be effective over the Receivership, the Department of Public Works, and any department or bureau of public accounts.

In case of disagreement between the Receivership and the Department of Treasury and Commerce, and when it affects a matter the solution of which does not require the intervention of both Governments, the financial expert shall have authority to use his good offices to compose their differences.

When notice is received by the Dominican Government that the financial expert has been designated, it will forthwith notify the Receiver General of such designation, who will thereupon be authorized to make monthly payments and arrange for all other expenses out of the five per cent, mentioned on Clause one of the Convention of 1907, as determined by the President of the United States and the President of the Dominican Republic.

I avail [etc.]

I. A. Cernuda.

5 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 830.00/1245.

[Document 304]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 28, 1914, 11 p.m.

You are instructed to immediately send a copy of the following to Commander of U. S. S. Washington via radio on U. S. S. stationed at Santo Domingo City in Navy code, requesting Commander Washington to first present his proposition verbally to President Bordas and if he accedes to it to then present it verbally to leaders of all factions: The Government of the United States finds itself in the position that it can not remain passive any longer in the face of the unsettled state of affairs which is devastating the Republic of Santo Domingo and impeding the fulfillment of the Convention of 1907 and it will be obliged to take the most effective steps to restore order in those sections of the Republic where the operations of the customs houses are being affected and where the lives and property of foreigners are in danger.

But the United States being desirous to avoid the necessity of taking these steps appeals to the patriotism of the contending leaders in order that they may through their own high-minded motives put an end to this state of unrest which now prevails.

United States suggests as a means to effect this end that any candidate who has announced his candidacy and any leader of any political faction who intends to announce his candidacy for the presidency shall publicaly withdraw his name and give his support to an honest and upright citizen of Santo Domingo who has no connection with politics or with the present situation and one who should be able to give to the country civil and legislative reforms which are necessary.

The United States will use all means in its power to aid in the holding of free and fair elections and will support the constitutionally elected president.

Bryan.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1279.

[Document 305]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, June 1, 1914, 8 p.m.

Government reports that revolution is practically broken outside of Puerto Plata and is reduced to several detached bands of guerillas. Dominican Government claims that Vidal has been secretly assisting revolutionists but that he is reduced so as no longer to be a dangerous factor. Government repulsed revolutionists at San Cristobal and Seibo today and claims to have possession of following provinces: Barahona, Santo Domingo, San Pedro de Macorís, Seibo, Samana, San Francisco de Macorís, Santiago, La Vega. Dominican Government disinclined to treat with Arias or to consider any payment to revolutionists, claiming that such action would be an inducement for future uprising and making advice given by you [?]. The Government has under advisement my suggestion for a settlement that will avoid further bloodshed. The Minister for Foreign Affairs answers proposals for mediation by pointing out danger of failing to make this present insurrection barren of any advantage or profit to revolutionists, claiming that if this revolution fails, it is unlikely there will be another uprising in years. On the other hand, Dominican Government will entertain suggestions tending to protect the liberty of elections. The Minister for Foreign Affairs says that the President Bordas administration is anxious to prove its loyalty to constitutional government but cannot do so by a policy of weakness in dealing with those who would establish themselves in power by the old method of force.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to the Charge d’Affaires of the Dominican Republic. File No. 839.51/1342.

[Document 306]

The Secretary of State to the Charge d’Affaires of the Dominican Republic.

No. 109.] Department of State,
Washington, June 1, 1914.

Sir: The Department acknowledges the receipt of your note of May 26, 1914, with which you enclosed the English text of a note which substitutes the one dated March 20, 1914, addressed by his excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Santo Domingo to the American Minister at Santo Domingo, in reference to the suggestion of the Dominican Government that a financial expert be designated by the United States to go to Santo Domingo.

In reply, the Department is pleased to inform you that the President of the United States has accepted, with pleasure, the suggestion that he designate a competent financial expert to go to Santo Domingo to aid the proper officials of your Government to settle debts, to devise an adequate system of public accountability, and to conserve and put into execution the original agreement of increasing the revenues and to adjust them to the expenses, all this with the view of assuring order and stability over the finances and to prevent deficits.

In this connection, the Department desires to point out that it understands the statement, “to conserve and put into execution the original agreement of increasing the revenues “to mean, in part, that the financial expert is thereby given the right to conceive and put into effect additional means for increasing public revenues.

Furthermore, the Department desires to inform you that in accordance with your note, the President of the United States has deemed it desirable to designate Mr. Charles M. Johnston as Financial Expert, who will exercise all the powers of Comptroller. This Department feels confident that Mr. Johnston will execute his trust in a manner most acceptable to the Dominican Government, and he is recommended to it as a gentleman in whom may be imposed all confidence.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Mr. Charles M. Johnston. File No. 819.51/1342.

[Document 307]

The Secretary of State to Mr. Charles M. Johnston.

Department of State,
Washington, June 1, 1914.

Sir: In accordance with the suggestion of His Excellency, the Provisional President of the Dominican Republic, General Jose Bordas Valdes, transmitted to the Department of State by the Dominican Charge d’Affaires at this capital, under date of May 26, 1914, you are informed that you have been designated by the President of the United States, under Article I of the Convention of February 8, 1907, to assume the duties of Financial Expert to the Dominican Republic. You are specifically charged with the following duties: (1) To render effective the clauses of the Convention of 1907, by aiding the proper officials of the Dominican Government in the adjudication and settlement of all its outstanding indebtedness;

(2) To devise and inaugurate an adequate system of public accountability;

(3) To investigate proper means of increasing the public revenues and of so adjusting the public disbursements thereto that deficits may be avoided;

(4) To inquire into the validity of any and all claims which may be presented against the Dominican Government;

(5) To countersign all checks, drafts, warrants or orders for the payment of Dominican funds.

(6) To enlighten both Governments with reference to any eventual debt and to determine if such debt is or is not in conformity with the Convention of 1907;

(7) To exercise all the powers of a Comptroller over the Receivership, the Department of Public Works and all other departments or bureaus of public accounts;

(8) To compose whatever differences may arise between the Receivership and the Department of Treasury and Commerce, in which matters not requiring the intervention of both Governments are involved;

(9) To assist the proper officials of the Dominican Government in the preparation of the annual budget and to aid them in correlating the governmental expenditures thereto.

It is understood that while your designation is made under Article I of the Convention, relating to the appointment of the Receiver General of Customs and other employees of the Receivership, you will not be under the jurisdiction of the aforesaid Receivership or subservient thereto.

Your compensation as agreed upon between the Presidents of the United States and the Dominican Republic will be eight thousand dollars ($8,000) per annum in United States currency, payable monthly in New York exchange. The Dominican Government will also allow you all necessary traveling expenses while in the discharge of your official functions, including also necessary clerical, office and miscellaneous expenses incurred in the orderly prosecution of your duties. The aforesaid compensation and expenses shall be defrayed by the Receivership from the five per cent (5%) allotted under the Convention of 1907.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1288.

[Document 308]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, June 6, 1914, 6 p.m.

Government preparing for election on 7th and 8th and claims will proceed without inconvenience in eight of twelve provinces. Minister for Foreign Affairs says that supplementary election will be held when insurrection is subdued. I have made preparations for observation of elections. Government asserts it can not be held responsible for non-participation in the elections by opposing elements who have preferred to seek success by force of arms.

Sullivan.

The Chargé d’Affaires of the Dominican Republic to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.51/1344.

[Document 309]

The Chargé d’Affaires of the Dominican Republic to the Secretary of State.

No. 50.] Dominican Legation,
Washington, June 9, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your very kind note dated the 1st instant and referring to that of May 26 last from the Legation. I am informed thereby that President Wilson has designated Mr. Charles M. Johnston as Financial Expert, in accordance with the said note of May 26.

With regard to the interpretation put by the Department on the phrase “to conserve and put into execution the original agreement of increasing the revenues,” it is proper to declare that the Dominican Government’s understanding is that the financial expert may devise and put into operation additional measures for increasing the revenues, but that those measures can not be put into execution without the sanction of the Dominican authorities in cases where that sanction is required by our Constitution and laws.

I renew [etc.]

I. A. Cernuda.

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State. File No. 829.00/1310.

[Document 310]

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, June 12, 1914, 6 p.m.

Consul Livingston reports that he has trustworthy information that Desiderio Arias has secured in New York City one million cartridges and is endeavoring to have them passed through Haiti. He has a scheme for getting the Government of the United States to accept a junta, partly recommended by himself, as a provisional government to conduct elections. During the delay he will order three million cartridges from Europe and when received will revolt.

Inspector of Customs Norris in the Dominican Republic reports to the Legation that armed conflict is imminent on border with Dominicans attempting to bring in arms from Haiti for Vidal. He says he is outnumbered but will resist them. He is unable to communicate with Receiver General in Santo Domingo City.

Smith.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1324.

[Document 311]

[Untitled]

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, June 16, 1914, 6 p.m.

Proof appears conclusive that Haitian Government is supplying arms and ammunition to agents of Vidal and assisting passing munitions of war across the border although President Zamor vigorously denies such action. * * *

Two emissaries of Desiderio Arias arrived in Port au Prince from Monte Cristi yesterday afternoon aboard the Haitian gunboat Pacific and went directly to the Palace. The purpose of their mission has not yet been ascertained.

Smith.

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith. File No. 839.00/1324.

[Document 312]

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 18, 1914, 2 p.m.

Your June 12, 6 p.m. and June 16, 6 p.m., and in view of cable-graphic advices received by Department from the American Legation, Santo Domingo, in the premises, you are instructed to call immediately upon the Minister for Foreign Affairs and present to him the following statement, leaving with him a paraphrase thereof.

The Government of the United States is convinced from evidence received by the Department of State that the Haitian authorities are aiding the revolutionists in the Dominican Republic by sending across the Dominican-Haitian frontier quantities of arms and ammunition destined for the use of those in revolt against the Government of Santo Domingo. This action on the part of the authorities of the Haitian Government is considered by the Department of State as an unfriendly act toward the constituted government of Santo Domingo, and as exceedingly Offensive to the Government of the United States, in view of the interest which that Government has in aiding in the proper collection of the customs in Santo Domingo since these munitions of war have been smuggled across the frontier in violation of the customs regulations of Santo Domingo.

The Department is very much surprised at this attitude of the Haitian authorities, particularly on account of the protestations made by President Zamor to the American representative at Port au Prince on May 9th last.

The Government of the United States, in order that there may be no misconception of its attitude by the Government of Haiti in this matter, desires to state that unless the Haitian authorities immediately desist from the shipment across the frontier of munitions of war for the use of Dominican revolutionists or from aiding and abetting these revolutionists or their agents in sending such shipments across the border, the Government of the United States will be forced to consider what steps it will be necessary for it to take for the prevention of further infringement upon the customs regulations above mentioned.

Bryan.

The Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1337.

[Document 313]

The Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State.

Navy Department,
Washington, June 19, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to forward herewith, for the information of the Department of State, copies of telegrams received by this Department relative to conditions in Santo Domingo. Sincerely yours,

Josephus Daniels.

[Inclosure 1—Telegram—Extract.]

Captain Russell, U. S. Navy, to the Secretary of the Navy.

Puerto Plata,
June 17, 1914, 7 p.m.

To-day notified Bordas and his General Rubiosa that the United States will not permit any bombardment of Puerto Plata. Have not yet received acknowledgment from them.* * * The Consular Corps of Puerto Plata are to hold a meeting with me on the South Carolina to-morrow to discuss measure of safety. Preventing bombardment will practically assure the safety of foreigners who remain indoors. The political situation has apparently reduced itself to this: Bordas is determined to hold on to the Presidency for himself and the Legalistas are determined that he shall not keep the Presidency.

Russell.

[Inclosure 2—Telegram—Extract.]

Captain Russell, U. S. Navy, to the Secretary of the Navy.

Puerto Plata,
June 19, 1914, 9 p.m.

Have not yet received from Borclas or Rubiosa any acknowledgment of my letter forbidding the bombardment of Puerto Plata. Consular Corps in conference to-day unanimously opposed bombardment, * * *

Russell.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.51/1360.

[Document 314]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, June 19, 1914, 4 p.m.

Charles M. Johnston installed as Dominican Government Financial Expert June 17th.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1334.

[Document 315]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, June 20, 1914, 3 p.m.

Dominican Government to-day requests that the Department take some action to prevent the smuggling of arms and ammunition into Monte Cristi by the Haitian gunboat which scarcely takes the trouble to conceal its operations. This conduct on the part of the Haitian Government is conducive to prolonged revolutionary activities. Receivership has reports indicating that the Haitian gunboat is operating from Monte Cristi to some point along the border and that the Receivership forces are not strong enough to prevent the Haitian gunboat from smuggling and interfering with the United States rights under the Treaty of 1907. If the Haitian Government cannot be brought to realize its obligations it is likely that the Dominican Government will declare war against Haiti.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1335.

[Document 316]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, June 20, 1914, 8 p.m.

Dominican Government asks immediate explanation of the threat which Bordas claims Commander of South Atlantic Squadron has made to fire upon the Government troops commanded by President Bordas unless Bordas refrains from using artillery at Puerto Plata. Minister of Foreign Affairs intensely excited declaring Commander’s conduct unjustified and a violation of neutrality as well as a menace to Dominican Nation’s sovereignty. The Dominican Government claims the alleged threat was for the purpose of preventing the reduction of besieged town by Government troops which would end revolution.

Fearing hasty and ill-considered action that might be embarrassing to Administration I have requested that the incident may be not considered until I have time to receive your instructions. Without questioning the necessity of the Commander’s action I regret to report that I believe said action menaces influence the Department has been gradually securing for the good of this country.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.00/1334.

[Document 317]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 24, 1914, 7 p.m.

Your June 20, 3 p.m. Department has made representations to Government of Haiti regarding alleged smuggling of arms and ammunition into Dominican Republic. So inform Government of Santo Domingo. Mail instructions follow.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1335.

[Document 318]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, June 24, 1914, 8 p.m.

Your June 20, 8 p.m. Department informed by Dominican Chargé that he will present formal protest against action of Commander of South Carolina in preventing bombardment of Puerto Plata. Department will reply formally to Dominican Government’s protest. So advise Dominican Government.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1352a.

[Document 319]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, June 29, 1914, 3 p.m.

Bombardment of Puerto Plata not permissible, because it would do great damage to foreigners and their property—damage that would severely tax the resources of the country. Blockade shuts off imports and lessens revenue thus crippling Government. It is therefore inconsistent with convention that blockade should continue. Please inform Government that when blockade is raised we shall notify insurgents that collection of customs must not be interfered with. We are considering what other action can be taken that will aid in the restoration of order.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1352b.

[Document 320]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, June 29, 1914, 8 p.m.

Please explain to the Minister for Foreign Affairs that the action taken by the Machias should not be regarded as indicative of any hostility towards the Bordas Government much less of favor to the revolutionists, but that it was considered by this Government as a step necessary for the protection of non-combatants in Puerto Plata.

Bryan.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1355.

[Document 321]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, June 29, 1914, 9 p.m.

In answer to my inquiry Dominican Government states that elections are complete in five provinces. In four provinces primary elections are complete but not secondary. No elections in three provinces. Government admits probability of postponement in elections of the President and convening Congress. Dominican Government asserts that supplementary elections will bring proceedings into conformity with constitutional rights. Opposition maintains that Government loses mandate after July 1st. Foreign representatives asking what attitude American Government will take. Please instruct. No immediate probability of Government losing de facto power.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1363.

[Document 322]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, July 1, 1914, 7 p.m.

Dominican Government does not agree to raising blockade, as such course, without helping customs receipts, in fact derived from interior towns reached by rail from Puerto Plata, would rehabilitate insurrectionists so that end of war, which they claim is now in sight, would be indefinitely prolonged.

Minister for Foreign Affairs asks you to consider evil consequences that must ensue if insurrectionists are encouraged by such action which, whatever the intention of American Government, in fact amounts to material aid to insurrectionists. Minister for Foreign Affairs asked if it is intention of American Government to prevent Bordas from either blockading, besieging or bombarding rebels in Puerto Plata. He adds if this is intention of American Government Dominican Government despairs of dealing with situation and American Government must take responsibility openly.

Sullivan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1362.

[Document 323]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, July 1, 1914, 5 p.m.

Purport of your June 29, 8 p.m. explained. Dominican Government replies that firing upon Constitutional Government is violation of international law and, while it is [willing] to believe friendly assurances of American Government, can only be satisfied that act is not unfriendly when the order to Commander of Machias has been countermanded. Dominican Government claims that order has effect of relieving revolutionists from effect of Government successes which now promise speedy termination of insurrection. Dominican Government states its conviction that action of administration is due to propaganda of Washington Lithgow and other American sympathizers of revolution whom Dominican Government credits with having created rebellion.

Sullivan.

Chargé White to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1416.

[Document 324]

Chargé White to the Secretary of State.

No. 115.] American Legation,
Santo Domingo, July 3, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith copy of communication from the Minister for Foreign Affairs, together with translation, setting forth the exact status of the Bordas Government under the present Constitution of the Dominican Republic.

I have [etc.]

John Campbell White.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Relations to Chargé White.

Office of Fobeign Relations,
Santo Domingo, June 27, 1914.

Mr. Minister: In continuation of our last interview I have the honor to confirm to your excellency what was said therein, viz, that within our constitutional system the legal status of President Bordas is as follows:

Appointed by Congress on April 13, 1913, “to fill ad interim the office of President of the Republic and to call elections for a permanent president within a period not exceeding one year,” he performed this mandate by calling in due time the primaries for the selection of electors who were to choose the new Senators and Deputies as well as the new President.

Abnormal causes, completely beyond the control of President Bordas, of which your excellency is aware, prevented the holding of said elections in five of the twelve provinces into which the Republic is divided, they having been held only in nine provinces, and four of them were incomplete; notwithstanding this, however, as soon as normal conditions prevail again the constitutional precept will be carried out by holding supplementary elections in the provinces in question, and this Government hopes that this will occur within a short period.

President Bordas, in conformity with article 34 of the Constitution, issued another decree convoking the National Assembly, “which is to examine the electoral returns as appearing from the general ballot count, proclaim the newly elected candidate, swear him in, and if necessary accept his resignation.”

This National Assembly, which is to meet on the 30th of this month unless prevented by fresh obstacles, will be called upon to decide as to the validity or invalidity of the election.

President Bordas, on his part, is fulfilling an unavoidable duty by adhering strictly to the wording of Article 49 of the Constitution, which article governs and defines his present situation by providing that “when the case occurs of inability, resignation, removal, or death of the President of the Republic, Congress shall, by means of a law, designate [as it has already done by virtue of the aforementioned law of April 13] what person is to discharge the duties of President until the inability ceases or a new President is elected.”

Consequently President Bordas is indisputably acting within the letter and spirit of the Constitution pending the fulfillment of the above-mentioned formality, that is, the election of a new President.

From the foregoing it appears clearly and conclusively that President Bordas does not cease to hold the office intrusted to him by said law of April 13, 1913, except by virtue of the following two circumstances: That the new President shall be elected by the electoral colleges, as plainly stipulated in Article 85 of the Constitution, for President Bordas does not come within any of the four cases contemplated in Article 49, viz, inability, resignation, removal, or death, which are the only ones in which Congress may designate the person who is to hold the Provisional Presidency of the Republic; or that the National Assembly should have decided with regard to the validity or invalidity of the election for Permanent President, this being a condition sine qua non and an indispensable adjunct to the election.

And that July 1 next is not to be regarded as the date of expiration, as supposed by some, is shown by the provisions of Article 51 of the Constitution, to the effect that “in ordinary elections the President elect of the Republic shall take possession on the day ending the term of the retiring President [that is, July 1] in case of a normal transmission of power, and in extraordinary cases eight days after being officially notified of the election, if he is at the capital, and thirty days if he should be in any other part of the Republic.”

I avail [etc.]

Eliseo Gkullón.

The Minister of the Dominican Republic to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1390.

[Document 325]

The Minister of the Dominican Republic to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

No. 55.] Legation of the Dominican Republic,
Washington, July 8, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: Complying with instructions which I have received from my Government, I herewith file a protest of imperative opposition to the unusual action which has just taken place in Puerto Plata, Dominican Republic, and of which the Commander of the Naval forces of North America now in that port is the author, in directing the guns of the warship Machias upon the camp of the Government forces besieging the rebel town of Puerto Plata.

But before proceeding with the protest, permit me, Mr. Secretary, to relate the causes of the incidents which culminated in the deplorable affair of the 26th of June last.

On the 17th of that month, Commander Russell, of the cruiser South Carolina notified the Commander of the Dominican gunboat Independencia that firing by the latter upon the city of Puerto Plata, or upon the fortress, or upon any point comprised within the city limits would be answered by the forces under his command; and on the same day Commander Russell communicated to the chief of operations of the besieging troops before that stronghold that the beginning of a bombardment would entail the useless and unnecessary destruction of the gunboats of the Dominicans, Independencia and Jacagua, as well as endanger the lives of the forces who employed artillery.

On the same day, the said Commander Russell made identic notification to the President of the Republic, General José Bordas Valdes, adding that if in spite of such warning the latter persisted in his purpose of bombarding the stronghold of Puerto Plata, this bombardment could not begin without giving to the inhabitants of the city a period of not less than 24 hours, after a notification signed by him personally, in order that they might place themselves out of danger.

Finally, in the evening of the 26th of June, last, President Bordas began the bombardment of the fortified positions of the revolutionists, taking care to amply satisfy humanitarian sentiments in the critical stress of the moment.

It was then that through order of Commander Russell, the North American warship Machias opened fire with its batteries upon the camp of the Government forces.

This unnecessary and obstructive outrage on the part of Commander Russell, which finds no justification in the principles of the law of nations nor in the remotest degree in the precise regulations of the Dominican-American Convention of 1907, is in contradiction to the goodly program in which President Wilson has announced to the world his policy of respect and rapprochement towards the Latin American Republics, possibly further entailing as an immediate consequence—which the Dominican Government would deeply lament—the arousing in our people sentiments of distrust and antagonism which would impede the success of the well-intentioned policy initiated By President Wilson.

Therefore, Mr. Secretary, I wish to state in an unequivocal manner that I protest formally against the attack which the arms of your nation have just made in disregard of the respect due to the sovereignty of a friendly State, as is that of the Dominican Republic.

And inasmuch as this attack constitutes a grave offense implied to that nation, my Government has given me instructions to request of you, Mr. Secretary, that the North American warships anchored in the Dominican waters of Puerto Plata and which effected this action be replaced by others, since the presence of these ships may cause an ill effect among the Dominican people which my Government desires to avoid at all hazards.

I avail [etc.]

Eduardo Soler.

Chargé White to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1404.

[Document 326]

Chargé White to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, July 14, 1914, 4 p.m.

Dominican Government summoned me this morning to state that the revolutionists are also in possession of Jaina. Dominican Government stated that its national line of defense in extremities was city walls but that in view of safety of suburban foreign population it desired to confer with me re restriction of area. I had told them that without instructions I did not propose to submit matter to action Diplomatic Corps. I advised them that Castine would permit no firing by Government or revolutionary forces within the limits of the city and that should they be unable to stave off rebels unaided they had better request good offices of American Government for the solution of whole question. Dominican Government replied that they would rather resign than do this but were willing to ask assistance from Washington for overcoming rebels and were also agreeable to establishment of neutral zone, quoting Puerto Plata as a precedent. Pending instructions from Washington Castine will enforce neutral zone but I would respectfully suggest to Department that the situation lends itself to comprehensive treatment. Savinon has postponed trip to Puerto Plata. Another war vessel and particularly marines would be appreciated.

[Not signed.] [ White.]

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1410.

[Document 327]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, July 16, 1914, 10 p.m.

Saw Vidal this morning. He expressed eagerness to attack but succeeded in securing truce till tomorrow. Vidal expressed willingness to receive good offices of the United States for ad interim President and promised obey genuinely elected candidate. This afternoon Government agreed to request me transmit message to Bordas signed Grullon in accordance with his colleagues: We desire to know your opinion on the possibility of a general agreement with revolutionary leaders looking towards suitable conditions to require peace to Republic.

Commander of Castine transmitted message this evening requesting that Bordas be informed perilous condition of affairs here and urging him to ask good offices American Government towards solution. Tomorrow will make arrangements Vidal looking towards permanent truce. Situation looks better but consider it highly important American Government should be party to solution so as to secure necessary reforms otherwise military element with its allies, the various financiers, will continue to oppress plain people.

White.

The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé White. File No. 839.00/1404.

[Document 328]

The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé White.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 17, 1914, 5 p.m.

Your July 14th, 4 p.m. Your action regarding “statement reference firing and fighting within city limits approved. Navy Department instructing Commander Castine in premises.

Phillips.

The Secretary of State to Chargé White. File No. 839.00/1410.

[Document 329]

The Secretary of State to Chargé White.

No. 81.] Department of State,
Washington, July 23, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your telegram of July 16, 10 p.m., reporting your interviews with Vidal and your efforts to bring about a truce in the Dominican Republic. Your action is approved.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
William Phillips.

The Secretary of State to Chargé White. File No. 839.00/1451a.

[Document 330]

The Secretary of State to Chargé White. 6

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 29, 1914.

The President will shortly propose a plan for the restoration of peace and establishment of order in Santo Domingo. Meantime he asks that hostilities be suspended until the proposition can be laid before Santo Domingo.

Please communicate this to the Foreign Office and to all participants who can be reached directly or indirectly.

Bryan.

6 Same to American Consul at Puerto Plata.

Consul Henry to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1460.

[Document 331]

Consul Henry to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Puerto Plata, August 6, 1914, 1 p.m.

General armistice for fifteen days just signed, taking effect six tonight.

Henry.

The Secretary of State to Minister Gonzales. File No. 839.00/1476a.

[Document 332]

The Secretary of State to Minister Gonzales.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 13, 1914, 6 p.m.

For Commission proceeding to Santo Domingo: You are instructed to observe and follow out with utmost care plan which has been presented you by the Secretary of State. No opportunity for argument should be given to any person or faction. It is desired that you present plan and see that it is complied with.

Bryan.

Plan of President Wilson, handed to Commissioners Fort and Smith, August, 1914. File No. 839.00/1582.

[Document 333]

Plan of President Wilson, handed to Commissioners Fort and Smith, August, 1914.

August 1914

The Government of the United States desires nothing for itself from the Dominican Republic and no concessions or advantages for its citizens which are not accorded citizens of other countries. It desires only to prove its sincere and disinterested friendship for the republic and its people and to fulfill its responsibilities as the friend to whom in such crises as the present all the world looks to guide Santo Domingo out of its difficulties.

It, therefore, makes the following earnest representations not only to the existing de facto Government of the Dominican Republic, but also to all who are in any way responsibly for the present posture of affairs there: I. It warns everyone concerned that it is absolutely imperative that the present hostilities should cease and that all who are concerned in them should disperse to their several homes, disbanding the existing armed forces and returning to the peaceful occupations upon which the welfare of the people of the republic depends. This is necessary, and necessary at once. Nothing can be successfully accomplished until this is done.

II. It is also necessary that there should be an immediate reconstitution of political authority in the republic. To this end the Government of the United States very solemnly advises all concerned with the public affairs of the republic to adopt the following plan: (1) Let all those who have any pretensions to be chosen President of the Republic and who can make any sufficient show of exercising a recognized leadership and having an acknowledged following agree upon some responsible and representative man to act as Provisional President of the Republic, it being understood that Mr. Bordas will relinquish his present position and authority. If these candidates can agree in this matter, the Government of the United States will recognize and support the man of their choice as Provisional President. If they cannot agree, the Government of the United States will itself name a Provisional President, sustain him in the assumption of office, and support him in the exercise of his temporary authority. The Provisional President will not be a candidate for President.

(2) At the earliest feasible date after the establishment and recognition of the Provisional Government thus established let elections for a regular President and Congress be held under the authority and direction of the Provisional President, who will, it must of course be understood, exercise during his tenure of office the full powers of President of the Republic; but let it be understood that the Government of the United States will send representatives of its own choosing to observe the election throughout the republic and that it will expect those observers not only to be accorded a courteous welcome but also to be accorded the freest opportunities to observe the circumstances and processes of the election.

(3) Let it be understood that if the United States Government is satisfied that these elections have been free and fair and carried out under conditions which enable the people of the republic to express their real choice, it will recognize the President and Congress thus chosen as the legitimate and constitutional Government of the Republic and will support them in the exercise of their functions and authority in every way it can. If it should not be satisfied that elections of the right kind have been held, let it be understood that another election will be held at which the mistakes observed will be corrected.

III. A regular and constitutional government having thus been set up, the Government of the United States would feel at liberty thereafter to insist that revolutionary movements cease and that all subsequent changes in the Government of the Republic be effected by the peaceful processes provided in the Dominican Constitution. By no other course can the Government of the United States fulfill its treaty obligations with Santo Domingo or its tacitly conceded obligations as the nearest friend of Santo Domingo in her relations with the rest of the world.

The Secretary of State to Chargé White. File No. 839.00/1479a.

[Document 334]

The Secretary of State to Chargé White.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 15, 1914, 4 p.m.

A commission composed of the American Minister, Mr. Sullivan, Ex-Governor Fort of New Jersey and Mr. Charles Cogswell Smith, attorney-at-law, of New Hampshire, left Santiago, Cuba, today proceeding on board U. S. S. Prairie first to Puerto Plata and thence to Santo Domingo City. Arrange for customs facilities for commission, requesting such in the name of the Government of the United States.

Bryan.

Commissioner Fort to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1488.

[Document 335]

Commissioner Fort to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

Santo Domingo,
August 21, 1914.

Conference tomorrow for selection of Provisional President with Bordas, Vasquez, Jiménez, Vidal and Velásquez represented. Small leaders will speak through them. All armed activities have ceased. The outlook for agreement tomorrow good. Expect to wire name of Provisional President for your advice tomorrow and if approved induct him into office on Monday if possible.

Fort.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1490.

[Document 336]

[Untitled]

Santo Domingo,
August 25, 1914.

Conference yesterday and today with Bordas and his Minister. Have obtained full acceptance of President Wilson’s plan. Proclamation of resignation by Bordas being prepared to be issued to Dominican people on our order. Expect to settle on name of Provisional President tomorrow and if possible induct him into office by Thursday at three o’clock.

Fort.

Chargé White to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.001/17.

[Document 337]

Chargé White to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, August 28, 1914, 1 p.m.

Doctor Ramón Báez inaugurated as Provisional President yesterday after being agreed upon by leaders of all parties. He asks for recognition by United States Government.

White.

The Secretary of State to Chargé White. File No. 839.00/1498a.

[Document 338]

The Secretary of State to Chargé White.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 28, 1914, 10 p.m.

You will call upon the new Provisional President installed yesterday and present the compliments and good wishes of this Government and enter into diplomatic relations with him as Chief Executive of the Dominican Republic.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the United States Peace Commission. File No. 839.00/1497.

[Document 339]

The Secretary of State to the United States Peace Commission.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 31, 1914, 4 p.m.

You are hereby instructed to immediately send word to Arias giving him a definite time within which to suspend his military operations at Santiago and any other part of the Republic in which he may be active and to come to Santo Domingo City to lay down his arms and give his allegiance to the Provisional President. Immediately inform the Provisional President of this instruction and obtain from him a written request that American marines be ordered to cooperate with the Customs Guard for the arrest of Arias, basing such action upon the obligation of the United States under the Convention, and arresting him for his complication in smuggling operations in north and seizure of Cutter No. 4 at Monte Cristi. Department considers elimination of Arias necessary to the settlement of conditions in Santo Domingo.

Bryan.

Commissioner Fort to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1503.

[Document 340]

Commissioner Fort to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Santo Domingo [undated ; received September 3, 1914, 4 p.m.]

Yesterday we took up the Arias situation with Provisional President. He asked that he be granted a few days to handle it himself. Today he advised he had word from Arias agreeing to acknowledge his authority and to disband at once. Everything is getting so much better here advise letting Provisional President handle it at present. Commission is in daily touch with situation. We get many inaccurate reports from those who send them from various motives. Arias can be gotten much more surely and easily after Báez arranges than now. Advise awaiting action by Báez, we keeping in touch with situation. President Báez swore in his Cabinet today and presented them to us.

Tomorrow we get committee of Cabinet to discuss election plans.

Fort.

Agreement between the U. S. Peace Commission and the Provisional President of the Dominican Republic relating to the election of a regular President and Congress. File No. 839.00/1548.

[Document 341]

Agreement between the U. S. Peace Commission and the Provisional President of the Dominican Republic relating to the election of a regular President and Congress.

Santo Domingo, D. R.,
September 8, 1914.

At an interview held today on board the Prairie between the Commission appointed by the President of the United States and Dr. Ramón Báez, Provisional President of the Dominican Republic, it was agreed— 1. That the election of a regular President and Congress shall be held throughout the Dominican Republic on Sunday and Monday, October 18th and 19th, 1914, and that such an election shall be called forthwith by the Provisional President and proper notice thereof given.

2. That at said election the office of Vice-President shall not be mentioned or voted for.

3. That at said election there shall be observers at all the voting places of the primary assemblies, who shall be designated by the U. S. Commission and be allowed free access to all said voting places and full opportunity to observe the casting, counting and return of said vote. Representatives of its own choosing may be used by the United States for this purpose in accordance with the Wilson plan, in such numbers as in the judgment of the United States Commission may be deemed requisite and necessary.

4. That the Constitution of 1908 shall be observed in all particulars in connection with said election and that the election law now existing, except as the same may be modified by a decree of the Provisional President, is to stand. But no change in the election law is to be made that will be in conflict with the Constitution nor unless approved by the Commission.

John Franklin Fort,
President U. S. Peace Commission.

Dr. Báez,
Presidente de la República Dominicana.

Witnesses:
Ch. Cogswell Smith,
Sec. U. S. Peace Commission.

Enrique Jiménez,
Secretary of Interior.

Commissioner Smith to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1507.

[Document 342]

Commissioner Smith to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Santo Domingo,
September 12, 1914.

President Báez today urgently requested conference with Commission for approval of peremptory orders which he was about to have his representative deliver to Arias and others for the pacification of the Cibao. His plans were approved. If pacification not speedily effected President Báez will himself go there and expressed wish to have one of the American Commissioners accompany him. We advised him to press for early settlement of affairs through his representatives.

Smith.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 839.00/1507.

[Document 343]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

No. 10.] Department of State,
Washington, September 19, 1914.

Sir: The Department of State has been reliably informed that the smuggling of arms and ammunition between Haiti and Santo Domingo continues unchecked. It is more than probable that this traffic in contraband takes place with the knowledge of the Zamor Brothers, who are assisting Desiderio Arias with war-like supplies in his resistance to the Government at Santo Domingo City.

It is reported to the Department that 30,000 rounds of ammunition were located at Rochambeau village, on the Haitian border, on September 15, awaiting final arrangements between Charles Zamor and Arias.

On account of the control by Desiderio Arias of the Province of Monte Cristi the majority of the contraband passes into this province either by sea or through the land port of Dajabon.

The U. S. S. Machias has received orders to seize arms and ammunition intended for any parties within the Dominican Republic and to give support to Receivership guards at points on the coast, when needed.

In view of the situation herein described, you are instructed to bring this matter to the attention of the Haitian Government and say that the Government of the United States desires Haiti to take effective means for the termination of this traffic.

You will report fully to the Department your action and the result of your investigations.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

Commissioner Smith to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1560.

[Document 344]

Commissioner Smith to the Secretary of State.

[Extract]

Santo Domingo,
September 29, 1914.

Sir: I send you herewith an English translation of the election decree and electoral law, which has only just now been completed. Furthermore, copies of the English translation will be mailed to you when ready. I am having them printed for the convenience and instruction of the observers and others who may require them.

I am writing this letter in the first person, as you doubtless know that Mr. White is still in the Cibao, where, judging from his movements so far and his plans so far as known, he is likely to remain for a considerable time, unless previously recalled by you.

Respectfully [etc.]

For the Commission:
Ch. Cogswell Smith.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

[Untitled]

whereas: Owing to the way in which the present Executive Power was constituted in accordance with the political agreement which put an end to the warfare, the Legislative Power was virtually ignored, and the former was clothed with the faculties indispensable for the formation of a regular Congress which would scrutinize, sanction, and conclude the next election by which the definite Government of the Republic is to replace the present ad interim administration.

In virtue of the faculties with which I am invested I have issued the following

decree.

Chapter I. Call for meeting of the primary assemblies.

Article 1. Meetings are called of the primary assemblies of all the communes of the Republic, to be held on the 18th and 19th of next October for the purpose of electing the electoral colleges.

Article 2. The primary assemblies are composed of the male Dominicans more than eighteen years of age and those who are married or have been married, even though they have not reached said age. There are barred those mentally unsound, or legally or judicially incapacitated. There are likewise barred persons belonging to the active army or to any body organized on military lines, or to the police.

Article 3. The number of electors who shall form the electoral college in each province, in accordance with the distribution established by the Constitution of 1907, adopted in that of 1908, shall be as follows:

[Here follow tabulated statement of number of electors for the several provinces; regulations concerning qualifications of electors; registers of voting ballots; election boards; electoral college; etc.]

The Minister of the Dominican Republic to the Secretary of State. File No. 701.3911/37.

[Document 345]

The Minister of the Dominican Republic to the Secretary of State.

[Translation—Extract.]

No. 71.] Dominican Legation,
Washington, October 1, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: I take pleasure in enclosing herein copies of the autograph letter by which Dr. Ramon Báez announces his elevation to the Chief Magistracy of the Republic to His Excellency President Wilson.

I avail [etc.]

Eduardo Soler.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

Dr. Ramón Báez, Provisional President of the Dominican Republic, to His Excellency the President of the United States of America.

Great and Good Friend: I take pleasure in informing Your Excellency that, by virtue of the resignation of General José Bordas Valdés, I have been designated to hold provisionally the office of Chief Magistrate of the Republic, of which high office I took possession on this date.

I am also pleased to state to you that, during the course of my provisional incumbency, all my efforts will be directed toward preserving and strengthening the good relations of friendship which happily exist between our two Republics.

Please accept my wishes for the prosperity of your Nation and for Your Excellency’s personal happiness.

Your true and good friend,

Dr. Báez.

Ignacio M. Gonzalez,
Secretary of Foreign Affairs.

Santo Domingo, August 27, 1914.

Commissioner Smith to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1533.

[Document 346]

Commissioner Smith to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

Santo Domingo, [undated ; received October 1, 1914.]

Presidential candidates will be Jiménez, Vásquez, Velásquez and Vidal. General pacification is advancing. Commission constantly watchful. Apparently good feeling prevails at present.

Smith.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1557.

[Document 347]

[Untitled]

Santo Domingo,
October 5, 1914.

All four presidential candidates unanimously and earnestly request one week postponement of election because the printers here cannot possibly get out the required printed matter in time to be prepared and distributed by the 18th. President Báez joins in request. He is specially so arranging the requested court procedure that election violation complaints can be readily disposed of so that inauguration may be on December 1st as was previously planned. Commission believes in the good faith of request and concurs in reasonableness if not absolute necessity of extension and believes that the added time for pacification will be useful and worth while. They also request three days for balloting instead of two as they claim otherwise large factions will be unable to vote and the Commission recommends it. Will Department please instruct Commission at the very earliest moment as time presses extremely. Báez wishes to have Public Works begin on the projected road to La Vega and built now fifteen kilometers from here using three hundred La Vega discharged soldiers, to help pacify. Bordas Government authorized it and Public Works planned its immediate undertaking but Department has never authorized it. Commission after inquiry can find no reason to suppose the work objectionable in any quarter and it would seem to be a salutary measure at this juncture. Your early instructions would be vitally opportune. White in Cibao.

Smith.

The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé White. File No. 839.00/1557.

[Document 348]

The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé White.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 8, 1914, 5 p.m.

The Department approves postponement of elections for one week and allowance of three instead of two days for voting.

Lansing.

The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé White. File No. 839.001B14.

[Document 349]

The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé White.

No. 92.] Department of State,
Washington, October 24, 1914.

Sir: I enclose, with office copy, a letter addressed by the President to His Excellency Dr. Ramón Báez,7 acknowledging the receipt of his letter of August 27 last in which he announced his assumption of the Presidency of the Dominican Republic and his entrance upon the duties of that office.

You will forward the copy to the Foreign Office and deliver the original in the manner most agreeable to His Excellency.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

7 Not printed.

Chargé White to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1608.

[Document 350]

Chargé White to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, November 11, 1914, 9 a.m.

Horacista party reported not voting Santiago; unless the court again annuls proceedings, Jiménez national majority assured. Horacista tactics are to cavil at elections and to scare people with revolutionary propaganda. Influential Jiménez party are anxious that United States should recognize the validity of elections at once and declare openly they will not tolerate revolutionary activity. This course beneficial if Department is prepared promptly to make good its threats. But I think it would also be well for such declaration to be preceded by formal promise from Jiménez and Velásquez to support financial control. Am credibly informed Arias loyal to Jiménez and not likely to join trouble makers.

White.

[Untitled] File No. 839.51/1447.

[Document 351]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, November 14, 1914, 9 a.m.

President Báez desires more money, as he told Controller, in order to leave office without adding to debt. Jimenistas desirous United States should place itself on record acknowledging elections as soon as possible, so as to abate pretensions Horacistas. If Provisional President should promulgate law establishing functions financial expert and accepting Controller’s new budget, then if Jiménez and Velásquez were to be pledged in writing to support as condition precedent to recognition Controller legislation and turn over collection of internal revenue to Receivership, all Dominican receipts and disbursements would be controlled. Johnston’s new budget will provide for repayment $250,000 yearly public works money, and $500,000 which fully redeems internal revenue taxes. To retire Báez December 1st, without giving administration additional floating debt, would cost, says Johnston, $70,000 extra; Johnston and myself consider outlay was already worth while. President seemed receptive to idea.

White.

The Secretary of State to Chargé White. File No. 839.00/1608.

[Document 352]

The Secretary of State to Chargé White.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washing ton, November 14, 1914, 10 p.m.

Your November 11, 9 a.m. Please report at once on following: 1. Majority for Jiménez, including popular vote; also number of provinces for him and relative strength of Jiménez party and opposition in Parliament.

2. Does Provisional Government recognize validity of the elections and is it prepared to surrender the Government to the newly elected President?

3. Will the new President approve and carry out the arrangements made for financial supervision as contemplated in the appointment of Johnston?

You may say that this Government, fulfilling its promise, will actively support the President elected by the people whenever satisfied of people’s choice, and will not tolerate further insurrections. The period of revolutions is past; law and order will be supported; necessary reforms will be urged through legislation. It is believed that under such a policy peace will be followed by prosperity and progress.

W. J. Bryan.

The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé White. File No. 839.51/1447.

[Document 353]

The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé White.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 18, 1914, 2 p.m.

Your November 14, 9 a.m. It is impossible for Receivership to make advances for a greater sum than $5,000 daily.

Department expects Jiménez and Velásquez to pledge themselves in writing to recognize position of Comptroller and to turn over to Receivership collection of internal revenues. In this way receipts and disbursements will be controlled.

Department regards it as essential that Johnston’s new budget shall not exceed income.

Lansing.

Chargá White to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1616.

[Document 354]

Chargá White to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, November 18, 1914, 6 p.m.

Your telegram of November 14, 10 p.m. Popular vote Jiménez 40,076; Vasquez Vidal 39,632; votes electoral college Jiménez 300 out of 632. For Jiménez seven provinces out of twelve; Senators 7; Deputies 14. [Báez] has often expressed his satisfaction with elections and while he is surrounded by people who are urging him to stay in power will resign if United States takes firm stand. Have secured signed confidential letter from Jiménez, Velásquez thoroughly satisfactory as to financial control.

White.

[Untitled] File No. 839L00/1623.

[Document 355]

[Untitled]

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, November 24, 1914, 6 p.m.

Article 86, Constitution, and Articles 27 and 36 of Báez electoral law prescribe absolute majority, that is, 317 electors. Jiménez has secured 337. Article 34 of Constitution in regard to congressional power of proclaiming elections should be complied with November 30th if expected quorum meets. Jiménez regarded as next President.

White.

The Secretary of State to Chargé White. File No. 839.00/1628a.

[Document 356]

The Secretary of State to Chargé White.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 25, 1914, 5 p.m.

Please advise President Báez to proceed on the theory that Congress will assemble and permit the election of President Jiménez to be proclaimed and let him accept the oath of office in the presence of the National Assembly. It would be well for him in conversation to avoid expressing any doubt as to the willingness of the opposition to join in putting the election into effect. If when the time comes the opposition refuses to attend and this refusal continues for several days, that is, long enough to make it certain that the opposition is trying to obstruct the will of the people as expressed by the popular election in the electoral college and in the Assembly, this Government will advise further in regard to the steps necessary to be taken. You may assure President Báez of this Government’s intention of keeping its promise to furnish such assistance as may be necessary to maintain an orderly Government now that the will of the people has been freely and clearly expressed.

W. J. Bryan.

Chargé White to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1631.

[Document 357]

Chargé White to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, December 1, 1914, 1 p.m.

Provisional President expresses unwillingness to issue decree declaring majority of National Assembly a quorum, on grounds of unconstitutionality, contravention of Wilson plan, and existence of bicameral legislature which relieves him of his legislative power. He prefers that solution of crisis shall come from Washington. Respectfully suggest that Department name date on which it will recognize Jiménez as President, turning over funds to him. Consider any further delay conducive to disorders.

White.

The Secretary of State to Chargé White. File No. 839.00/1631.

[Document 358]

The Secretary of State to Chargé White.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 4, 1914, 6 p.m.

Your December 1, 1 p.m., and previous relevant correspondence. The opposition, by absenting itself for the purpose of preventing a constitutional quorum, has manifested its purpose to obstruct the will of the majority expressed at a free and fair election. This being the case, the Provisional President, in the exercise of his constitutional powers, should issue a decree declaring that a majority of the National Assembly is a quorum, to enable the oath of office to be administered at once. If Provisional President is unwilling to assume this responsibility, you will confer with the Provisional President and President-elect Jiménez, and if they approve, you may fix a day and hour in the near future when the new President will be recognized by this Government and full authority turned over to him, with the understanding that he will before that time take the oath of office in the presence of the National Assembly, provided a majority of both houses is present. Notify the leaders of the opposition that while their cooperation is desirable and should be given, from patriotic motives, still, if they withhold their cooperation this Government will give all necessary support to Jiménez and his Government with the view to the establishment of order and the promotion of peace and prosperity. It is hoped that the minority will appreciate this opportunity of giving hearty support to the new Government. Insurrection and revolutionary opposition will not be tolerated and if any such obstruction is attempted the leaders will be held personally responsible. Commander Willard of the Hancock will be instructed in the same sense.

Five thousand dollars per day will be allowed for the present but inform Jiménez that as soon as order is restored and the Government fully established it is expected that the expenses of the army will be largely reduced, so that education and public works may receive their just proportion of public revenues. Report attitude of the Provisional President and President-elect Jiménez.

Bryan.

Chargé White to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1639.

[Document 359]

Chargé White to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, [undated , received December 5, 1914, 3 p.m.].

The National Assembly with constitutional quorum proclaimed Jiménez President this afternoon. Official oath tomorrow morning.

White.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1641.

[Document 360]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, December 5, 1914, 5 p.m.

President Jiménez was sworn in this morning.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.00/1641.

[Document 361]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 5, 1914, 6 p.m.

Present this Government’s congratulations to the new President of whose inauguration we have just learned. We wish for Jiménez and his country undisturbed peace, great prosperity and continued progress. We hope that all factions will unite in patriotic support of the Government and enter into friendly rivalry for the promotion of the common good. The Commander of the vessels there will receive from the Navy Department instructions for the maintenance of order and the proper administration of the Government.

Bryan.

President Wilson to Ex-President Ramón Báez. File No. 839.001B14.

[Document 362]

President Wilson to Ex-President Ramón Báez.

[Telegram.]

The White House,
Washington, December 8, 1914.

At the moment when you relinquish the executive power I desire to express my great appreciation of your unselfish and patriotic conduct during a most trying time and to convey to you my personal good wishes.

Woodrow Wilson.

President Wilson to President Juan Isidro Jiménez. File No. 839.001J56/a.

[Document 363]

President Wilson to President Juan Isidro Jiménez.

[Telegram.]

The White House,
Washington, December 8, 1914.

I most heartily congratulate you upon your inauguration into office and extend to you my most sincere wishes for the peace and prosperity of the Dominican Republic.

Woodrow Wilson.

President Jiménez to President Wilson. File No. 839.001J56.

[Document 364]

President Jiménez to President Wilson.

[Telegram—Translation.]

Santo Domingo,
December 9, 1914.

I acknowledge with profound thanks your felicitations on the occasion of the inauguration of my administration and reciprocate your wishes for the Republic by formulating a very sincere one for the great American people and X our Excellency’s personal happiness.

Juan I. Jiménez.

Ex-President Báez to President Wilson. File No. 839.001B14/1.

[Document 365]

Ex-President Báez to President Wilson.

[Telegram—Translation.]

Santo Domingo,
December 10, 1914.

My patriotic aspiration was fulfilled with free suffrage and lawful transfer of power. I thankfully acknowledge your honoring congratulations and take pleasure in offering to you the assurance of my highest personal esteem.

Doctor Báez.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.51/1460.

[Document 366]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, December 12, 1914, 3 p.m.

Receivership still needs instructions to advance Government $5,000 daily.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 839.51/1460.

[Document 367]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 14, 1914, 4 p.m.

Your December 12, 3 p.m. Telegraphic instructions have been sent today to Receivership to continue $5,000 daily until further notice. This is to be made continuous so that there shall be no deduction on account of change of administration.

You are instructed to inform President Jiménez that on no account must this amount be exceeded.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 839.00/1652a.

[Document 368]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, December 14, 1914, 5 p.m.

Dr. Jiménez having been inaugurated President, it is, in the opinion of the Department, very desirable that certain vital reforms be instituted with the least possible delay. You are instructed therefore to inform President Jiménez that, having in view the peace and future prosperity of the Dominican Republic, he is respectfully urged to issue decrees putting into effect the following: 1. A decree placing the collection of internal revenue under the Receivership.

2. Official recognition of Charles M. Johnston as Comptroller of Finances of the Dominican Republic, whose duties shall be: (a), to prepare a budget for the Dominican Republic based upon his knowledge of income and probable expenditures, this budget to be rigidly adhered to; (b) to approve and countersign any payments made by the Dominican Government, it being understood that no payments shall be valid unless countersigned by the Comptroller.

3. Refer to the Department’s unnumbered instruction dated January 27, 1914,8 regarding the status of Collet. Department desires that President Jiménez issue a decree amending clauses three and five of Collet’s contract as follows: Clause 3. The Director General of Public Works shall be removed only for cause, satisfactory proof of which shall be first submitted by the Dominican Government to the Department.

Clause 5. The Director General shall be given authority to hire and discharge his subordinates.

4. As the Dominican Republic is threatened by no external enemies, the presence of a Dominican army is regarded as an incentive to ambitious political leaders to start internal revolution, and that as the expenditures for the military establishment amount to at least fifty per cent of the total budget, you are instructed to urge that President Jiménez issue a decree largely reducing expenses, having in view the ultimate disbanding of all military forces in the Dominican Republic, so that education and public works may receive their just proportion of the public revenues. This Government will be pleased to give him any assistance he may desire and which may be found necessary in reorganizing the police forces of the Republic or the creation of a constabulary, to take the place of the army and rural guards as now constituted.

Bryan.

8 Transmitting contract of A. J. Collet with the Dominican Government as Director of Public Works. Not printed.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/1653.

[Document 369]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, December 17, 1914, 11 a.m.

Have urged upon Dominican Government all reforms suggested by you and the same are now under consideration. Dominican Government shows timidity of local criticism rather than [?] to grant reforms. I recommend patience and tact for a few weeks when I believe all said reforms will be substantially accorded.

Sullivan.

Protection of British interestsProtection of British interests

[370] The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, April 28, 1914.

File No. 339.41/1.

[371] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, May 13, 1914.

File No. 339.41/3.

[372] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, May 16, 1914.

File No. 339.41/3.

[373] The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, May 27, 1914.

File No. 339.41/4.

[374] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, June 2, 1914.

File No. 339.41/4.

[375] The British Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, June 17, 1914.

File No. 339.41/5.

[376] The Secretary of State to the British Chargé d’Affaires.

Department of State, Washington, July 13, 1914.

File No. 339.41/5.

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 339.41/1.

[Document 370]

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, April 28, 1914.

My dear Mr. Secretary: I have received a telegram from Sir Edward Grey instructing me to convey the thanks of His Majesty’s Government to the United States Government for the courtesy and good will displayed by them in issuing orders9 to the United States ship Wheeling, proceeding to Santo Domingo, to protect British subjects as well as American citizens.

It gives me much pleasure to be the bearer of this message.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice.

P. S. April 29. I have just heard from your Department that owing to interruption of the cable the Petrel has been sent to Santo Domingo instead of the Wheeling. I have informed Sir E. Grey accordingly.

C. S. R.

9 In pursuance of a telephonic request made by the British Embassy on April 25.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 339.41/3.

[Document 371]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Santo Domingo, May 13, 1914.

British Chargé d’Affaires received cable that British railroad property is being injured and asks protection by ship at Sanchez.

Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 339.41/3.

[Document 372]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 16, 1914.

Inform British Chargé d’Affaires that U. S. S. Washington will be ordered to proceed to Sanchez to report on conditions and to protect foreign interests.

Bryan.

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 339.41/4.

[Document 373]

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, May 27, 1914.

Dear Mr. Secretary: Sir E. Grey telegraphs to me that the Samana and Santiago Railway Company (of Santo Domingo) are in some anxiety as to the position of their employees. His Majesty’s Representative in San Domingo does not believe that British life and property is at present in actual danger in the ports of Samana Bay, but he says that damage has been inflicted on the railway in the interior and that the district is very unsettled. He adds that the United States ship Castine has probably arrived by now in Samana Bay for the protection of life and property and that men may be landed from her if necessary.

In view of the above Sir E. Grey desires me to say that His Majesty’s Government would much appreciate the kindness of the United States Government if they could be so good as to instruct the Castine to afford protection to British life and property, should the necessity arise.

As the matter is of some urgency, I should be very grateful if you could let me know at your earliest convenience whether it would be possible to send instructions in this sense to the Castine.

Believe me [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice.

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador. File No. 339.41/4.

[Document 374]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, June 2, 1914.

Dear Mr. Ambassador: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your note dated May 27, in regard to the protection of British life and property at Sanchez and vicinity, Dominican Republic.

In view of a cablegram received by this Department from the American Minister at Santo Domingo, stating that the British Chargé d’Affaires at that capital had requested that British interests at Sanchez be afforded protection, the Department of State took up the matter with the Navy Department, which issued instructions to the U. S. S. Castine to proceed from Puerto Plata to Sanchez for the purpose of giving adequate protection, in the event of necessity, to foreign lives and properties. The Castine arrived there May 22 and remained until May 29, reporting that everything at that place was quiet.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The British Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State. File No. 339.41/5.

[Document 375]

The British Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy,
Washington, June 17, 1914.

Dear Mr. Secretary: I beg to thank you on Sir Cecil Spring Rice’s behalf for your letter to him of June 2, in which you are good enough to communicate the substance of instructions issued to the U. S. S. Castine for the protection of foreign life and property in the Dominican Republic.* * *

Sir Edward Grey desires me to say that His Majesty’s Government trust that instructions to protect British life and property in case of need may be given to whatever vessel of war the United States Government may decide to send to Samana Bay. You will greatly oblige me if with your usual courtesy you could communicate in this sense with the Navy Department.

I am [etc.]

Colville Barclay.

The Secretary of State to the British Chargé d’Affaires. File No. 339.41/5.

[Document 376]

The Secretary of State to the British Chargé d’Affaires.

Department of State,
Washington, July 13, 1914.

My dear Mr. Chargé d’affaires: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your personal note of the 17th ultimo, in further relation to the protection of foreign life and property in the Dominican Republic.

In reply I beg to advise you that, on June 24 last, the U. S. S. Marietta arrived at Sanchez, and that she has instructions to report on conditions in the Dominican Republic, with special reference to the protection of foreign lives and property.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

Protection of Porto Rican citizens of the United States drafted into the Dominican armyProtection of Porto Rican citizens of the United States drafted into the Dominican army

[377] Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santo Domingo, June 3, 1914.

File No. 339.11/16.

[378] The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

Department of State, Washington, June 22, 1914.

File No. 339.11/16.

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State. File No. 339.11/16.

[Document 377]

Minister Sullivan to the Secretary of State.

No. 103.] American Legation,
Santo Domingo, June 3, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to report that the Legation is constantly called upon to protect Porto Rican citizens who are drafted from time to time by the Dominican Government. In every instance the Legation acts with promptness to secure the release of said Porto Ricans, but the Government seems to disregard our objections, and when the occasion offers repeats the offense.

Will you please instruct as to whether, as a preventive measure, the Dominican Government may be warned that the American Government will ask that the Porto Ricans so taken be indemnified in money damages.

I desire to point out that the Dominican Government is very careful not to draft the natives of other islands, under British rule. I recommend that such action be taken as will impress the Dominican Government that this abuse will not be tolerated.

I have [etc.]

James M. Sullivan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan. File No. 339.11/16.

[Document 378]

The Secretary of State to Minister Sullivan.

No. 69.] Department of State,
Washington, June 22, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your No. 103 of the 3d instant, reporting that your Legation [etc.]

In reply the Department desires to say that you will endeavor to come to an understanding with the Dominican Government along the lines of the following directions in regard to the drafting of persons claiming to be Porto Ricans:

The Dominican Government should notify you promptly of any person drafted who claims to be a Porto Rican entitled to American nationality and protection. If it appears, prima facie, that his claim of nationality is well founded, you will request his suspension from service until the question of nationality can be determined by the Department, and to this end you will send to the Department all the evidence obtainable bearing on the matter.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Ecuador:Ecuador:

Contents

Message of the President, General Leónidas Plaza G., to the CongressMessage of the President, General Leónidas Plaza G., to the Congress

[379] Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Quito, August 12, 1914.

File No. 822.032/14.

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State. File No. 822.032/14.

[Document 379]

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 74.] American Legation,
Quito, August 12, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor of enclosing herewith for the information of the Department copies of the Message of President Plaza to the Congress which assembled on August 10, 1914.

I have [etc.]

Chas. S. Hartman.

[Inclosure—Extracts—Translation.]

[Untitled]

All peoples of Latin America should feel satisfied with and proud of the high diplomatic position attained by the South American A. B. C, that is, the joint action of Argentina, Brazil and Chile in the matters that may affect the common interests of our America. The significant fact that the United States of North America has accepted the mediation of the A. B. O. in its armed conflict with the Government of Mexico connotes the formal recognition of a new international force that will greatly influence the honorable and pacific settlement of such future conflicts as might threaten the Latin American Republics, a force that must certainly be taken into consideration by European nations in their relations with those of this continent. Even if the A. B. O. mediation should yield no fruit in the conflict mentioned, its importance and significance are bound to be recognized, for it is an event of extraordinary import in the history and destiny of America.

In accordance with this view, the Government hastened to instruct our representative in Washington unconditionally to support the action taken by the representatives of Argentina, Brazil and Chile; and I am glad to inform you that Doctor Gonzalo S. C6rdova has worthily complied with those instructions, since he obtained from the Pan American representatives at the capital of the United States of North America the approval of his suggestion of the united support by the American peoples of the joint action of the three Governments, and they have courteously thanked the Government of Ecuador for the action of our representative.

Our earnest wish for the reestablishment of the international and domestic peace of Mexico, our fellowship with all the peoples of the continent and our admiration for the great Republic of the North, makes us desire that the A. B. C. mediation may result in an honorable and final solution that will fill a fair page of American history.

The Government of the United States of North America has suggested to us the possibility of concluding an arbitration treaty contemplating the pacific settlement of international conflicts that may arise; and our Government, desirous of assuring to the Republic the incalculable benefit of external peace, is earnestly considering this noble invitation and will respond to it in terms in keeping with the permanent interests of the country.

It was the intention of the Government that our country should, with all its industrial energies, participate in the Exposition at San Francisco, to which we were invited and which takes place in 1915. Unfortunately, it appears that this can not be done on account of the great outlays necessary for the support of the Army and Navy, engaged in defending constitutional order against the revolutionary action of the factions in arms.

The Government vigorously began the work of sanitation of Guayaquil and the water system of Quito as soon as the supervision thereof was placed in its hands, formerly being exclusively directed by the respective boards.

For the sanitation of Guayaquil a contract has been made with J. G. White & Co. Limited, an English concern; this contract comprises the introduction of potable water service, drains, sewerage and paving, which works will be done on the Government’s account under the technical direction of the company, for a remuneration of 12½ % of the total cost of the works.

The relations of the State with the Guayaquil & Quito Railway Company are developing in the direction given them by my administration since the first day of its existence, namely, such relations as should be had by the State with a private concessionary.

The contracts between this company and the Government have not been characterized by clear and simple stipulations; their terms have been semi-ambiguous and vague. Thus in the simplest matters relating to the rights of the Government and the unquestionable obligations of the company, there has always arisen some point for discussion, some unexpected allegation of rights, some unforeseen denial of obligation. There has therefore resulted a semi-permanent and vexatious misunderstanding, which keeps accumulating, and which will be submitted to the arbitral tribunal that is to consider all the controversies between the State and the Company.

Unfortunately, we cannot be sure when this arbitral tribunal will be constituted, since in spite of all our hopes the second attempt to set up the tribunal failed at the outset.

I informed you in my message of last year of the sudden termination of the mission of the Hon. Henry Janes, the Arbitrator appointed by the then President of the United States of North America, Mr. Taft. There were difficulties in the way of constituting a tribunal having as members Messrs. Janes and Dr. Alfredo Baquerizo Moreno, our Arbitrator; and when it was sought to clear away these difficulties, the new administration of the American Union, that of Mr. Wilson, recalled Mr. Janes and notified us of sending in his place Mr. Miller, a judge of high repute in his country.

Mr. Miller arrived at this capital in January, 1913, and some days afterward began the preliminary conferences with Dr. Baquerizo Moreno; there was but one official conference, at which the question arose of the manner of constituting the tribunal and the nature of the rules that should limit its deliberations. No agreement was reached, for although our Arbitrator went as far as possible to meet the proposals of Mr. Miller, he felt it his patriotic duty not to accept those that contravened the laws of Ecuador or substantially affected the equities and rights of the parties.

These conferences were going on when Mr. Miller unexpectedly left the country, thereby terminating the proceedings.

Our Arbitrator, Dr. Baquerizo Moreno, held that, in the matter of an arbitral tribunal relating to a contract concluded in Ecuador and having to decide a purely civil controversy arising from that contract, the arbitration must, first of all, be subject to the laws of Ecuador and to the jurisdiction which, by virtue of such laws and of the contract, the arbitrators should exercise., without regard to the persons to whom had been given the right to appoint the arbitrators, on the presumption that the authority of the appointing persons ceased with the appointment. Our representative therefore said that “there is no international law to be observed; there is only the law of the place of contract, of the execution of the work and of the judgment entered.”

Mr. Miller, from the first, took the opposite position, involving a secondary place for Ecuadorian law and a fundamental alteration of the nature of the arbitration agreed upon. It is probable that this sharply defined difference of opinion determined the unexpected retirement of the American Arbitrator.

We are therefore in a more unsatisfactory position than before the coming of Mr. Janes, since there is a certain justification for pessimism in view of the Arbitrator’s opinion on the point mentioned.

Meantime the formation of the arbitral tribunal is postponed, and the dispute between the Government and railroad company is not only vexatiously suspended but must, in the nature of the relations of the two parties, continue to be aggravated.

In any event, the Government will inflexibly maintain its policy of energetic protection of the interests, privileges and laws of the State while treating the rights and interests of the company with the greatest respect.

A troublesome controversy with the Railroad Company has arisen from the carrying of postal packages from Guayaquil to Quito. The company, making its own interpretation of article 23 of the contract of 1897, holds that it is not obliged to carry packages as an integral part of the mails, which are carried free of charge. But the Government contends that the company is explicitly and clearly charged with that obligation. In view of this disagreement it has been thought prudent to arrange an agreement between the two parties for continuing the service as to packages without prejudice to the submission of the controversy to the Arbitral Tribunal, on the understanding that if the tribunal decide in favor of the Government the company will return the sums which it is receiving for this service.

Political affairs—revolution at Esmeraldas; refuge at the American Legation granted to the family of President PlazaPolitical affairs—revolution at Esmeraldas; refuge at the American Legation granted to the family of President Plaza1

1 Continued from Foreign Relations 1913, pp. 472–473.

[380] Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Quito, January 24, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 822.00/332.

[381] Consular Agent Hedian to the Secretary of State.

Esmeraldas, [undated ; received February 10, 1914].

File No. 822.00/336.

[382] The Secretary of State to Consul General Goding.

Department of State, Washington, February 12, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 822.00/336.

[383] Consul General Goding to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Guayaquil, February 12, 1914 4 p.m.

File No. 822.00/338.

[384] [Untitled]

American Consulate General, Guayaquil, February 12, 1914.

File No. 822.00/374.

[385] [Untitled]

American Consulate General, Guayaquil, February 13, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 822.00/340.

[386] The Acting Secretary of State to Consul General Goding.

Department of State, Washington, February 14, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 822.00/340.

[387] Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Quito, February 14, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 822.00/346.

[388] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

Department of State, Washington, February 14, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 822.00/351a.

[389] Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Quito, February 16, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 822.00/353.

[390] The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

Department of State, Washington, February 16, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 822.00/346.

[391] Consular Agent Hedian to the Secretary of State.

Esmeraldas, [Undated ; received February 17, 1914]

File No. 822.00/355.

[392] Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Quito, February 19, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 822.00/360.

[393] [Untitled]

American Legation, Quito, February 26, 1914, 9 a.m.

File No. 822.00/362.

[394] [Untitled]

American Legation, Quito, February 26, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 822.00/363.

[395] [Untitled]

American Legation, Quito, February 26, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 822.00/364.

[396] [Untitled]

American Legation, Quito, February 28, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 822.00/365.

[397] Consular Agent Hedian to the Secretary of State.

Esmeraldas [Undated ; Received March 5, 1914].

File No. 822.00/369.

[398] Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Quito, March 17, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 822.00/377.

[399] The Secretary of State to Consul General Goding.

Department of State, Washington, March 23, 1914.

File No. 822.00/374.

[400] Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Quito, April 16, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 822.00/378.

[401] [Untitled]

American Legation, Quito, June 2, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 822.00/383.

[402] [Untitled]

American Legation, Quito, August 14, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 822.00/386.

[403] [Untitled]

American Legation, Quito, August 22, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 822.00/387.

[404] The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

Department of State, Washington, August 25, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 822.00/387.

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State. File No. 822.00/332.

[Document 380]

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Quito, January 24, 1914, 11 a.m.

American Consul General at Guayaquil informs me that he has not heard from American Consular Agent at Esmeraldas for several weeks. Revolutionists still control Esmeraldas. Conditions politically have been less serious for the last two weeks, but many persons here anticipate an attack on the Government forces here on January 28, the anniversary of the assassination of former President Alfaro.

Hartman.

Consular Agent Hedian to the Secretary of State. File No. 822.00/336.

[Document 381]

Consular Agent Hedian to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Esmeraldas, [undated ; received February 10, 1914].

Commander Government forces notifies Consul Esmeraldas will bombard city to-day 5.50. If not prevented suffering noncombatants will be horrible. No facilities available to leave. Useless destruction property will cause destitution which will require outside help. Warship desirable.

Hedian.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Goding. File No. 822.00/336.

[Document 382]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Goding.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 12, 1914, 11 a.m.

Forward following to Agent, Esmeraldas: Your undated telegram. Report briefly by cable effects of bombardment if such has occurred. You will use your good offices between the two combatant forces to endeavor to secure establishment of a neutral zone where non-combatants may be out of danger.

No warship available at present.

Bryan.

Consul General Goding to the Secretary of State. File No. 822.00/338.

[Document 383]

Consul General Goding to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate General,
Guayaquil, February 12, 1914 4 p.m.

Cable office Esmeraldas destroyed by fire yesterday. No communications. When communications established I will report.

Goding.

[Untitled] File No. 822.00/374.

[Document 384]

[Untitled]

No. 17.] American Consulate General,
Guayaquil, February 12, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor of calling your attention to repeated newspaper statements to the effect that the officers of the Department of State, at Washington, are not aware of the fact that a revolution is in progress in the Province of Esmeraldas. While I cannot believe this statement correct, as I have kept the American Minister in Quito well informed so far as possible of the revolutionary movement, I am writing to say that a revolution has continued for two or more months.

About 2000 national troops have been sent to the disaffected district to cope with about 400 rebels under Colonel Concha, who was able early in the campaign to flank the national troops, defeating them and capturing the entire body of troops, also taking possession of the city of Esmeraldas which they have occupied ever since.

A cable from American Consular Agent Hedian dated January 31, 1914, states he was safe, and the people very anxiously waiting the arrival of the Government troops; also that the rebels were without funds.

The authorities today announce the burning of a portion of the city of Esmeraldas, including the Central and South American Telegraph Company office, whether due to the cannonading by the national war vessels or to Concha’s troops was not known. We hope to get definite news when the cable has been repaired.

The revolutionary movement is not popular in this city, as the people believe the expense will delay the sanitation of Guayaquil; but, should the revolutionary forces appear here, my opinion is the people would deliver the city to them, as a very active propaganda is being made among the friends of the late murdered General Alfaro to revenge his death.

I have [etc.]

Frederic W. Goding.

[Untitled] File No. 822.00/340.

[Document 385]

[Untitled]

[Telegram.]

American Consulate General,
Guayaquil, February 13, 1914, 10 a.m.

Official report dated February 10, 10 p.m., says consular officers unable to secure zone for the protection of noncombatants. Consulates and neutral property will be respected as asylum by the combatants. Shall I further report?

Goding.

The Acting Secretary of State to Consul General Goding. File No. 822.00/340.

[Document 386]

The Acting Secretary of State to Consul General Goding.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 14, 1914, 5 p.m.

Your February 13, 10 a.m. Department desires reports regarding revolution in the north or possible revolutionary movement in Guayaquil when, in your judgment, these are important. Press reports defeat of two thousand Government troops in Manabi. Do you confirm this?

Moore.

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State. File No. 822.00/346.

[Document 387]

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Quito, February 14, 1914, 6 p.m.

Government officers report bombardment and burning of Esmeraldas on February 11th. American Minister at Lima inquires by cable whether the Department will send cruiser to Esmeraldas and if so, when. He expresses anxiety for cable operatives. Matters are evidently in bad condition there. My inability to hear from our Consul makes me fear for his safety. I think cruiser should be sent there immediately.

Hartman.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Hartman. File No. 822.00/351a.

[Document 388]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 14, 1914, 6 p.m.

Press reports revolutionary troops occupy Tulcan. Report briefly by telegraph revolutionary situation and strength of Plaza’s Government.

Moore.

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State. File No. 822.00/353.

[Document 389]

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Quito, February 16, 1914, 6 p.m.

Answering your February 14, 6 p.m. The report that Tulcan is occupied by the revolutionists is not true. The Minister for Foreign Affairs informed me today that the Government has 10,000 soldiers and 5,000 police under arms and that it is in control of all the Republic except a portion of Esmeraldas. He also said that the plans of the Government at Esmeraldas are to surround the revolutionary forces and capture them without bloodshed if possible. I have no way of ascertaining the number of revolutionary soldiers. At present the situation is favorable to the Government.

Hartman.

The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman. File No. 822.00/346.

[Document 390]

The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 16, 1914, 6 p.m.

Your February 14, 6 p.m. Report by cable what American interests are in danger by revolution which, in your opinion, would receive protection from presence of warship in Ecuadorian waters.

On account of yellow fever and the unfortunate deaths of Captain Bertolette and two seamen in December, 1911, Department does not desire to send ship unless absolutely necessary. Nearest vessel is Denver in Nicaragua.

Bryan.

Consular Agent Hedian to the Secretary of State. File No. 822.00/355.

[Document 391]

Consular Agent Hedian to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Esmeraldas, [Undated ; received February 17, 1914]

Bombardment ceased with destruction three houses. Others damaged, no lives lost. Rebel forces intrenched sand beach Coquito. Few troops in city. Believe intelligent attack several points would be success. Inhabitants neutral zone mile distant exposed to rain. Many returning.

[Unsigned.] [ Hedian.]

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State. File No. 822.00/360.

[Document 392]

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Quito, February 19, 1914, 1 p.m.

Answering your February 14, 6 p.m. I have diligently endeavored to obtain a statement of American interests at Esmeraldas in danger from revolution which a war vessel would protect but without results. I based my recommendation for a war vessel largely upon a telegram from American Minister at Lima dated February 13, 3 p.m., which stated: “Immediate steps should be taken at Esmeraldas. Will the Department send a cruiser there, and when? Anxious about cable operatives.” Lima has better telegraphic communication with Esmeraldas than Quito.

Hartman.

[Untitled] File No. 822.00/362.

[Document 393]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Quito, February 26, 1914, 9 a.m.

President Plaza left here Sunday night ostensibly to take command of army at Esmeraldas. Mr. Pallares, President of the Chamber of Deputies, is acting as President.

Hartman.

[Untitled] File No. 822.00/363.

[Document 394]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Quito, February 26, 1914, 2 p.m.

After an hour’s fighting the prisoners at the penitentiary overcame the guards this morning at 10 o’clock, took their arms and are now in control. It is expected that the Government soldiers will attack them this afternoon or to-morrow. The people of Quito are greatly excited and it is believed that unless the Government forces succeed in the coming battle with the prisoners a general plundering of the city will take place. At the request of Mrs. Plaza I have received her three little sons and their nurses in the Legation and shall give them and other proper applicants refuge here until the danger is over. Mrs. Plaza and two daughters are at the Chilean Legation. I will take every precaution to protect the Legation and its inmates from injury. The penitentiary is so strongly constructed and so situated as to make it a fort overlooking the city. I will keep the Department advised.

Hartman.

[Untitled] File No. 822.00/364.

[Document 395]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Quito, February 26, 1914, 10 p.m.

The Government forces regained control of the penitentiary this afternoon after an hour of fighting. The record of the day shows twelve prisoners and two policemen killed and sixteen men wounded. The Government victory has allayed the fears of the people and the city is quiet now.

Hartman.

[Untitled] File No. 822.00/365.

[Document 396]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Quito, February 28, 1914, 10 a.m.

I have received from the Minister for Foreign Affairs official information that Dr. Alfredo B. Moreno, President of the Senate arrived in Quito yesterday and has assumed the duties of the Presidency during the absence of President Plaza at Esmeraldas. Matters here have quieted down and the President’s three little sons and nurses have left this Legation and returned to the President’s house. Mrs. Plaza has left the Chilean Legation and is at home.

Hartman.

Consular Agent Hedian to the Secretary of State. File No. 822.00/369.

[Document 397]

Consular Agent Hedian to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Esmeraldas [Undated ; Received March 5, 1914].

Government, after ineffectual attacks Tuesday and last night, retired. Only one gunboat remains in sight.

Hedian.

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State. File No. 822.00/377.

[Document 398]

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Quito, March 17, 1914, 11 a.m.

I am informed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs that the port of Esmeraldas is again open to commerce, the city having been captured by the Government forces. President Plaza is expected to arrive in Quito March 19.

Hartman.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Goding. File No. 822.00/374.

[Document 399]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Goding.

Department of State,
Washington, March 23, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your despatch No. 17 of February 12, 1914, with regard to the revolutionary situation in Esmeraldas.

The Department has been fully informed regarding the revolutionary movement in question,

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State. File No. 822.00/378.

[Document 400]

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Quito, April 16, 1914, 2 p.m.

I am reliably informed that on April 14, 400 revolutionists captured Ibarra. It is believed by Government officers that the revolutionists will be greatly reenforced by sympathizers between Quito and Ibarra. So much concern is felt among the Government officers regarding the situation that I have been requested by a representative of Mrs. Plaza to receive three of the sons of the President at the Legation in the event of the revolutionists succeeding at Ibarra and marching against Quito. I have promised to receive the refugees and have preparations nearly ready.

Hartman.

[Untitled] File No. 822.00/383.

[Document 401]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Quito, June 2, 1914, 1 p.m.

The American Consul General at Guayaquil telegraphed this morning that our consular agent at Esmeraldas reports that that city is practically besieged by the revolutionists and that the situation is becoming difficult.

Hartman.

[Untitled] File No. 822.00/386.

[Document 402]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Quito, August 14, 1914, 11 a.m.

Owing to revolutionary conditions Congress has granted extraordinary powers to the President.

Hartman.

[Untitled] File No. 822.00/387.

[Document 403]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Quito, August 22, 1914, 3 p.m.

I believe that conditions in Ecuador now are such as warrant my asking authority of the Department to undertake negotiations looking toward the ending of the revolution. I do not know whether either the Government or Concha, the chief of the revolution, will consent to such negotiations but both sides are short of money and the people are sick of war. I realize that many difficulties will be encountered and that it is doubtful whether the efforts will succeed; but I regard the matter of such importance that I am willing to assume the additional work and responsibility and take chances on the results. Please answer by telegraph.

Hartman.

The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman. File No. 822.00/387.

[Document 404]

The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 25, 1914, 4 p.m.

Your August 22, 3 p.m. The Department does not consider it advisable or prudent for the Government of the United States to mix in any way in the internal, political affairs of Ecuador.

Bryan.

Claims of the Guayaquil & Quito Railway Co. against Ecuador; arbitration proceedings; protest of the Railway Co. in relation to the J. G. White contractClaims of the Guayaquil & Quito Railway Co. against Ecuador; arbitration proceedings; protest of the Railway Co. in relation to the J. G. White contract2

2 Continued from For. Rel. 1913, pp. 473–504. See also, supra, the message of President Plaza.

[405] The Secretary of State to the American Arbitrator, the Honorable A.L. Miller.

Department of State, Washington, November 28, 1913.

File No. 422.11G93/713a.

[406] Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Quito, January 5, 1914.

File No. 422.11 G93/723.

[407] [Untitled]

American Legation, Quito, February 1, 1914.

File No. 422.11G93/737.

[408] The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

Department of State, Washington, February 7, 1914.

File No. 422.11G93/737.

[409] Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Quito, February 8, 1914.

File No. 422.11G93/738.

[410] The American Arbitrator to the Secretary of State.

Lima, February 13, 1914.

File No. 422.11G93/740.

[411] The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

Department of State, Washington, April 3, 1914.

File No. 422.11G93/739.

[412] The American Arbitrator to the President.

Washington, April 11, 1914.

File No. 422.11G93/749.

[413] Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Quito, July 10, 1914.

File No. 422.11 G93/757.

[414] The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

Department of State, Washington, August 26, 1914.

File No. 422.11G93/757.

The Secretary of State to the American Arbitrator, the Honorable A.L. Miller. File No. 422.11G93/713a.

[Document 405]

The Secretary of State to the American Arbitrator, the Honorable A.L. Miller.

Department of State,
Washington, November 28, 1913.

Sir: Referring to the certified copies of correspondence with which you have been furnished in relation to your mission as Arbitrator in the arbitration between the Government of Ecuador and the Guayaquil and Quito Railway Company, I beg leave particularly to advert to the note of the Ecuadorian Minister at Washington of the 8th of August last3 in which it is stated that, the Arbitrators having been named, they need only present themselves at Quito and take possession of their offices before the proper Ecuadorian judge; that by so doing they will become an arbitral tribunal independent of every authority or court of Ecuador or of the United States; and that, being amiables compositeurs, they are not obligated to apply the laws of any nation to reach a decision but must be inspired solely by the dictates of justice and equity according to their conscience and best knowledge and judgment, taking as their bases the antecedents of the case.

In taking possession of their office before the proper Ecuadorian judge, as the Minister’s note indicates, it is supposed that the Arbitrators will be required to make or sign a declaration or oath. If this be so, it is assumed that the oath will in substance provide, substantially in the language of the Minister’s note, that they are to be governed by the dictates of justice and equity according to their conscience and best knowledge and judgment, taking as the basis of their action the antecedents of the case.

The Department also deems it proper to call particular attention to the telegraphic note of the Minister of Ecuador of the 28th of October4 in which, referring to the phrase “juicio final” in his note of the 8th of August, he states that this phrase means an unappealable judgment, and that he had received from his Government a cablegram saying, “Congress empowers Executive to accept unappealable award.” The Minister then observes that, every difficulty having been removed, it is hoped that you will be instructed immediately to proceed to Ecuador in the discharge of your duties. The Department, as you will observe, replied on the 30th of October4 acknowledging the Minister’s communication and saying that you would be requested immediately to proceed to the discharge of your duties.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
J. B. Moore.

3  Id. 495.

4  Id. 499.

4  Id. 499.

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State. File No. 422.11 G93/723.

[Document 406]

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Quito, January 5, 1914.

Judge Miller arrived in Quito January 4.

Hartman.

[Untitled] File No. 422.11G93/737.

[Document 407]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Quito, February 1, 1914.

Arbitrators have failed absolutely to agree, and Judge Miller leaves for home February 4.

Hartman.

The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman. File No. 422.11G93/737.

[Document 408]

The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 7, 1914.

Your February 1. Please cable briefly whether board of arbitration was organized, what steps were taken to reach an agreement, and the points of difference on which final disagreement occurred.

Bryan.

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State. File No. 422.11G93/738.

[Document 409]

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Quito, February 8, 1914.

Answering your February 7. Arbitrators met in the room of the Chamber of Deputies, January 19, and took official oath They met next day to consider and adopt rules of procedure, but did not agree. After this meeting, negotiations were carried on by exchange of notes. After eleven days, they finally disagreed upon the following points:

The Ecuadorian Arbitrator insisted that the arbitration should be conducted under Ecuadorian law; that there should be but one secretary to the tribunal; that no person but a citizen of Ecuador could legally act as such secretary; that one of the secretaries of the Second Court is the only proper person to be such secretary; that the proceedings should be conducted, and official record kept, only in the Spanish language, and that the original record be filed in the courts here; that no time limit be fixed for receiving testimony; that the Arbitrators had no right to require by rule the parties to present their claims on penalty of their being barred.

From all these contentions Judge Miller dissented.

Hartman.

The American Arbitrator to the Secretary of State. File No. 422.11G93/740.

[Document 410]

The American Arbitrator to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Lima, February 13, 1914.

Organization proceeded no further than taking the oath. Negotiated for nearly three weeks in effort to reach satisfactory rules of procedure, I conceding every possible point that was not vital. Points of difference were: 1. Insisted that proceedings be conducted both in Spanish and English; Ecuador insisted that they be conducted in Spanish alone, and only one original record be kept.

2. I insisted that two secretaries be appointed, one by each Arbitrator, I naming Steer. They insisted that only one secretary could be appointed and that under Ecuadorian law he must be an Ecuadorian official; they further insisted that the secretary of the Ecuadorian court was by their arbitration law secretary of the arbitration tribunal until we selected some other Ecuadorian official as secretary. They also insisted that this one secretary should be sole custodian of all the papers and records of the tribunal, I contending for joint custody by the two secretaries named by us respectively.

3. They contended that arbitral tribunal could determine only such matters as parties saw fit to submit, while I insisted that parties should submit every matter in controversy up to date.

4. I contended that a definite time be fixed in advance in which evidence could be introduced, providing for extension of time if found necessary. They refused absolutely to fix any time.

5. They finally took the position that arbitral tribunal should adopt no rules whatever, as the matter was entirely controlled by Ecuadorian law of arbitration. This being a distinct violation of agreement made in Washington,5 I of course refused to agree.

These vital differences necessarily made the arbitration impossible, and I formally notified Ecuadorian Arbitrator that I would notify the President of our disagreement.

Miller.

5  For. Rel. 1913, pp. 502–504; also pp. 495–498.

The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman. File No. 422.11G93/739.

[Document 411]

The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

Department of State,
Washington, April 3, 1914.

Sir: I enclose herewith a copy of a letter of Mr. T. H. Powers Farr, Vice President of the Guayaquil and Quito-Railway Company, protesting in behalf of the company against any operation of the Ecuadorian Government’s recent contract with Messrs. J. G. White and Company, Limited,6 which would infringe or encroach upon the first and preferential charge on the entire customs revenues, previously given by the Ecuadorian Government to the railway company as a guaranty for the payment of the principal, interest and sinking fund of the latter’s bonds. The provisions therein quoted from the contract between the Government of Ecuador and Messrs. J. G. White and Company, Limited, purporting to assign or pledge to the latter certain percentages of the customs duties collected at Guayaquil, appear to be correct according to the translation of that contract forwarded by the Legation with its No. 30 of January 30, 1914, except that paragraph B of article 8 as cited by Mr. Farr should apparently be paragraph G.

It also appears from the copy of the contract between the Government of Ecuador and the Guayaquil and Quito Railway Company which is in the Department’s possession that Mr. Farr’s statements as to the provisions of that contract relating to the guaranty by the Government of Ecuador of the bonds of the railway company are substantially correct, except that in such contract it is provided that the customs revenues of the Government are subject to certain prior liens for the payment of the Consolidated Debt and the active debt of the Government due to certain banks.

In any event, it would appear, from the Department’s information, that the lien upon such customs revenues for the guaranty of the railway company’s bonds must be considered under the Government’s contract with the company as superior to any lien on such revenues attempted to be imposed by the later contract with White and Company.

If the Legation’s information confirms the above statement of facts, you will bring to the attention of the Foreign Office the substance of the protest of the railway company as set forth in Mr. Farr’s letter, and say that, as the company’s representations appear to be well founded, the matter is brought to the notice of the Government of Ecuador only in a precautionary sense, for the purpose of reserving the company’s rights and preventing future misunderstanding, it being assumed that the Ecuadorian Government does not contemplate the performance of the recent contract with White and Company in such a way as to infringe the guaranty previously given to the railway company.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

[Inclosure.]

The Guayaquil and Quito Railway Company to the Secretary of State.

New York, January [sic] 6, 1914.

Sir: At a meeting of the Directors of the Guayaquil and Quito Railway Company held on the 5th day of February [sic], 1914, the Vice President was instructed to call the attention of the Department of State at Washington to certain provisions in the reported contract between the Government of Ecuador and J. G. White & Co., Limited, to wit: Art. 8. The funds for the construction of the water-works are the following: (A) 2 % of the import duties collected at the Guayaquil Custom House.

(B) 8 % additional of the import duties collected in the Guayaquil Custom House.

The contract between the Government of Ecuador and the Railway Company provides that the Government of Ecuador guarantees the principal, interest and sinking fund of the Railway Company bonds by a first and preferential charge on the entire Custom revenues.

There is due the Railway Company on account of interest and sinking fund as follows: Jan. 2, 1909 £5, 230

Jan. 2, 1910, to Jan. 1, 1914, incl., 9 semi-yearly periods at 11, 230 101, 070

Total amount of sinking fund overdue 106, 300

4 coupons of 56,165 each 224, 660

Total gross arrears on a/c of 5% bonds 330, 960

Until this indebtedness is settled by the Government of Ecuador, the Railway Company protest against any operation of the contract with Messrs. J. G. White & Company Limited which will in any way infringe the prior right and claim of the Railway Company upon Custom House revenues.

I have [etc.]

T. H. Powers Farr,
Vice President.

6  For. Rel. 1913, p. 519.

The American Arbitrator to the President. File No. 422.11G93/749.

[Document 412]

The American Arbitrator to the President.

[Extract.]

Washington, April 11, 1914.

Sir: As the Arbitrator named by you under Article 27 of the contract dated June 14th, 1897, between the Republic of Ecuador and the Guayaquil and Quito Railway Company, to settle in conjunction with the Arbitrator named by the President of Ecuador all controversies or disagreements existing between the contracting parties, I have the honor to report that after a month spent in Quito in prolonged conferences and negotiations with the Ecuadorian Arbitrator, we have not been able to agree.* * *

Respectfully,

A. L. Miller.

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State. File No. 422.11 G93/757.

[Document 413]

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

American Legation,
Quito, July 10, 1914.

Sir: Referring to the Department’s unnumbered instruction of April 3rd, 1914, I have the honor of informing the Department that on May 16th, 1914, I wrote my note No. 66 to the Minister for Foreign Affairs in full compliance with said instruction, and that in reply thereto, I received note No. 192 of date June 22, 1914, from the Minister for Foreign Affairs, duplicate copies of portions of which, together with translation, are herewith enclosed. The formal part of the note, not being important is omitted, not being necessary for the Department’s information.

In view of the importance of the suggestions and proposals therein made, I have thought it proper, before making formal reply thereto, to submit the note to the Department for instructions.

I have [etc.]

Chas. S. Hartman.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Minister Hartman.

No. 192.] Ministry for Foreign Affairs,
Quito, June 22, 1914.

Mr. Minister:* * * In reply to your excellency’s courteous communication it is my duty to say to your excellency the following:

My Government being desirous of maintaining with that of your excellency the closest relations of international cordiality, because it has always regarded that they are far above other kinds of interests, has given to your excellency’s Government very high proofs of respect and very special deference, even going beyond the limits fixed by the practice between nations which deserve to be on the moral level at which international law places them.

In support of such an affirmation I may mention to your excellency the note from this Ministry, No. 275, of May 6, 1912,7 and the “Memoria” (memorandum) addressed by it on the same date to His Excellency the President of the United States, regarding the existing difficulties with the Railway Company.

But in consideration of sacred and much more valuable interests for our Governments than any other ones, as are those referring to the maintenance and strengthening of the cordial and reciprocal relations between them, it seems to me that the opportunity has arrived cordially to suggest to your excellency, in a serene and high spirit of international justice and advantages, the necessity of limiting diplomatic intervention to the bounds fixed by international law, that is to say, to cases of denial of justice.

Fortunately for our respective Governments, the case which has given ground to your excellency’s note to which I reply, is not one of those which can justify diplomatic intervention. It is not a question of denial of justice. It is a question of reserving the rights of a private commercial enterprise—which although American surely has not the character of a public institution of the United States—against the eventual prejudice which it supposes a contract entered into by my Government may cause it.

Had said enterprise appealed to our Ministry of Public Works, it would have already been given the most ample assurance to the effect that its interests will not be prejudiced but, on the contrary, enormously benefited by the White contract and by the achievement of the works to which it refers.

But if the appealing of the Railway Company to your excellency’s Government involves the intention of impressing on my Government the high moral and material respectability of that of your excellency, the acceptance and endorsing of its petition on the part of your Government implies perhaps on your excellency’s Government a conception so excessively wide and generous regarding protection of interests of American citizens in Ecuador that it may seem incompatible with the high spirit of justice with which that Government—I am absolutely sure—desires to inspire all its acts.

The conception that justice, equity and reciprocal consideration are 4he bases of international law, to the growth of which the illustrious Government of your excellency has cooperated does not obscure the high criterion and ample knowledge of your excellency which I am pleased to recognize.

My Government appeals to them (to justice, equity, and reciprocal consideration), Mr. Minister, to suggest to your excellency’s Government that it is the Railway Company’s duty to deal with my Government direct, with the assurance that the claims it may present shall be favorably accepted, provided that they be just.

Regarding the case of the White contract, my Government congratulates itself that that of your excellency properly presumes that my Government does not consider the realization of said contract as contrary to the guaranty given to the Railway Company in accordance with the contract of June 14, 1897.

I avail [etc.]

R. H. Elizalde.

7  For. Rel. 1912, p. 418.

The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman. File No. 422.11G93/757.

[Document 414]

The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

No. 44.] Department of State,
Washington, August 26, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your unnumbered despatch of July 10, transmitting the answer of the Minister for Foreign Affairs to your note of May 16 in regard to the Guayaquil and Quito Railway Company, and requesting instructions as to your procedure.

In reply you are informed that the Department does not consider it necessary at the present time to make any reply to the note from the Foreign Office.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Financial affairsFinancial affairs

[415] Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Quito, August 22, 1914.

File No. 822.51/185

[416] The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

Department of State, Washington, August 25, 1914.

File No. 822.51/185.

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State. File No. 822.51/185

[Document 415]

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Quito, August 22, 1914.

The Ecuadorean Government earnestly solicits the assistance of the United States Government in their attempt to procure a loan of $8,000,000 from the National City Bank or the First National Bank of New York City. The Minister for Foreign Affairs informs me that the loan is desired to pay the indebtedness of the Government to Ecuadorean banks which bear high rates of interest. He says that Ecuador will pledge fifty per cent of all export duties as security for the loan, and that export duties amount annually to approximately 10,000,000 sucres. On this basis and with proper safeguards as to collection and application of portion pledged, the loan appears reasonably safe unless the revolution should be successful, in which case delay in payment would probably follow. I believe that such assistance as our Government can properly render in the matter will be greatly appreciated by Ecuador.

Hartman.

The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman. File No. 822.51/185.

[Document 416]

The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 25, 1914.

Your August 22. On account of the grave disturbance to all the money markets of the world and the almost total suspension of credits, the Department does not feel that the present is a propitious time to assist Ecuador in obtaining a loan.

Bryan.

Imprisonment of Robert B. Jones, an American citizenImprisonment of Robert B. Jones, an American citizen

[417] American Citizens at Guayaquil to the Secretary of State.

Guayaquil, [undated ; received March 3, 1914]

File No. 322.112J72.

[418] The Secretary of State to Consul General Goding.

Department of State, Washington, March 4, 1914.

File No. 322.112J72.

[419] Consul General Goding to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Guayaquil, March 5, 1914, 8 a.m.

File No. 322.112.T72/1.

[420] The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

Department of State, Washington, March 5, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 322.112J72/1.

[421] The Secretary of State to Consul General Goding.

Department of State, Washington, March 6, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 322.112J72/1.

[422] Consul General Goding to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Guayaquil, March 7, 1914.

File No. 322.112J72/9.

[423] Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Quito, March 7, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 322.112J72/3.

[424] The Secretary of State to Consul General Goding.

Department of State, Washington, March 9, 1914.

File No. 322.112J72.

[425] The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

Department of State, Washington, March 9, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 322.112J72/3.

[426] Consul General Goding to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Guayaquil, March 11, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 322.112J72/4.

[427] [Untitled]

American Consulate General, Guayaquil, March 13, 1914.

File No. 322.112J72/11.

[428] The Secretary of State to Consul General Goding.

Department of State, Washington, March 16, 1914.

Filo No. 322.112J72/4.

[429] Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Quito, March 18, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 322.112J72/8.

[430] Consul General Goding to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Guayaquil, June 27, 1914.

File No. 322.112J72/16.

American Citizens at Guayaquil to the Secretary of State. File No. 322.112J72.

[Document 417]

American Citizens at Guayaquil to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Guayaquil, [undated ; received March 3, 1914]

Jones, ex-Consul Guayaquil, imprisoned since December 17th without hope release. Every attorney consulted considers extremely unlawful and groundless. We American citizens request immediate protection. Consul Coding familiar with case.

Yoder et al.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Goding. File No. 322.112J72.

[Document 418]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Goding.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 4, 1914.

American citizens, Guayaquil, report imprisonment of ex-Consul Jones. Investigate and report by telegraph, extend all possible and proper protection, and state why you have not previously reported arrest. Inform Yoder and other senders of telegram.

Bryan.

Consul General Goding to the Secretary of State. File No. 322.112.T72/1.

[Document 419]

Consul General Goding to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate General,
Guayaquil, March 5, 1914, 8 a.m.

I have followed Consular regulations, paragraph 170. There are reports fully and often at the Legation, repeatedly urging immediate action in the Jones case owing to violation of the Ecuadorian laws. The facts are these:

Chinese shot not more than three months ago. Dozen witnesses prove Jones half block distant from the house when the shot was fired within. Jones’ arrest, imprisonment, and the unnecessary delay shameful, in violation of Ecuadorian laws and constitution opinion of the high court judges and the ablest lawyers. All persons of standing including the highest officials and the President of the Chinese colony are satisfied Jones’ innocence. His arrest and imprisonment disgrace to the United States. Forcible measures imperatively needed at once.

Goding.

The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman. File No. 322.112J72/1.

[Document 420]

The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 5, 1914, 5 p.m.

American citizens report imprisonment of R. B. Jones since December 17th in an unjust and illegal manner. Upon inquiry from Department, Consul General confirms this and states that strong measures are imperatively needed. Also that Jones’ case has been fully and often reported to Legation in accordance with Consular regulations. Report fully by telegraph what action you have taken.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Goding. File No. 322.112J72/1.

[Document 421]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Goding.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 6, 1914, 11 a.m.

Your March 5, 8 a.m. Legation has been instructed to report on imprisonment of Jones. Department will keep you advised and desires that for the present you continue to report directly to it as well as to the Legation.

Bryan.

Consul General Goding to the Secretary of State. File No. 322.112J72/9.

[Document 422]

Consul General Goding to the Secretary of State.

[Extract]

No. 22.] American Consulate General,
Guayaquil, March 7, 1914.

Sir: As my telegram was necessarily brief, herein is a more extended report on Mr. Robert B. Jones’ case. On the afternoon of December 11, 1913, Mr. Jones called at the home of a Chinaman to collect the rent, as agent of the place, which was many months overdue, remaining on the outside of the front door during a rather heated conversation with a half-caste son of the renter. Mr. Jones then walked to the corner of the block where he was talking with two men, when they as well as many others heard the report of a revolver from within the house occupied by the Chinese. At the moment the shot was heard, and from the time of the departure of Mr. Jones, the front door of the said house was closed and locked; for when the neighbors and a policeman tried to enter they could not and were compelled to do so through a side entrance from a patio.

One neighbor, a woman residing in the adjoining house, heard persons crying; and, after failing to gain an entrance through the locked front door (at the same time observing Mr. Jones talking to two men at the corner), she passed along a side passage through a door connecting with the patio, and into a bedroom where the half-caste was lying with his head in his mother’s lap, a revolver being on a stand near by. A sister of the injured man (she is 10 years old), replying to a question said “my brother has shot himself.” When the next caller entered the room a few moments afterward, the revolver was not in sight, and the mother stated that Mr. Jones had shot her son, which she and the young wife of the man continue to affirm, adding that the young daughter told them, although they personally saw nothing.

On December 13, 1913, Mr. Jones was arrested and taken to jail, although several witnesses of good social standing swear they saw Mr. Jones at the corner when the report of the shot was heard, one gentleman living across the street, who was just leaving his house, swears he saw the deceased looking out from the window toward where Mr. Jones was standing talking to two men, and a few moments afterward heard the report of the shot within the house occupied by the deceased.

Witness after witness swore to similar facts, yet Mr. Jones’ arrest and imprisonment followed.

I have kept the American Minister in Quito fully informed by telegraph and by letter.

That you may understand the case, I enclose copies of many of the sworn affidavits of witnesses used in the proceedings.8

Since writing the above I have learned of a movement among the Guayaquil merchants who, to the number of about two hundred, are signing an indignant protest against the arrest and imprisonment of Mr. Jones.

I have [etc.]

Frederic W. Goding.

8 Not printed.

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State. File No. 322.112J72/3.

[Document 423]

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Quito, March 7, 1914, 11 a.m.

Answering your March 5, 5 p.m. On January 3 I received first complaint from the American Consul General that the Jones trial was being unnecessarily delayed. I then presented the matter by note and in person to the Minister for Foreign Affairs asking that necessary measures be taken to insure Jones a prompt, fair fend just trial. This was promised both verbally and in a note from the Minister for Foreign Affairs dated January 10. On January 20 I again in person and by note informed the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the continued delay and urged prompt action should be taken by his Government to remedy the matter. He replied January 20 that orders by telegraph had been sent to the Governor of Guayaquil to secure for Jones a prompt and fair trial. On January 23 I received a note from the Minister for Foreign Affairs quoting what purported to be the law showing that the delay in the case was authorized. I communicated this to our Consul General and suggested that Jones’ lawyer advise me on that point. This has not been done. On February 13 I suggested through the Consul General that I be furnished a complete and accurate statement of the material record, facts, and the law applicable, to enable me to again properly present the case to the Ecuadorian Government. On same day Attorney Lockwood, acting here as a friend for Jones, made the same request. No attention was given to these requests. Accordingly on February 28 I telegraphed the Consul General to urge Jones and his lawyer to promptly furnish the statement requested. On March 3 an imperfect and unauthenticated statement signed by Jones personally was presented by his nephew. I considered it advisable that I should have a certified copy of the material evidence of the principal witnesses as well as a brief of the law upon which to base a note asking for his release. Mr. Lockwood agreed with me and the nephew telegraphed for one to Guayaquil. When the statement is completed and the certified copy of the testimony received my note will be prepared and presented insisting upon his immediate discharge unless the Department otherwise instructs.

Hartman.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Goding. File No. 322.112J72.

[Document 424]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Goding.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 9, 1914.

Forward to the Legation and Department as soon as obtainable certified copy evidence and brief of law Jones’ case.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman. File No. 322.112J72/3.

[Document 425]

The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 9, 1914, 6 p.m.

Your March 7, 11 a.m. When testimony received cable brief synopsis to Department and if facts and law warrant request immediate release of Jones.

Bryan.

Consul General Goding to the Secretary of State. File No. 322.112J72/4.

[Document 426]

Consul General Goding to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate General,
Guayaquil, March 11, 1914, 4 p.m.

Certified copies of the evidence and of brief in case of Jones in the Legation since last Saturday. Carbon copies uncertified mailed to you March 9. Shall I forward certified copies? Jones released under bonds to-day, starts immediately to Washington, D. C.

Goding.

[Untitled] File No. 322.112J72/11.

[Document 427]

[Untitled]

No. 24.] American Consulate General,
Guayaquil, March 13, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that Mr. Robert B. Jones, the American citizen who was illegally imprisoned, was discharged March 11, 1914, at noon, under an opinion given by the judge a copy of which is enclosed.8

As stated by the judge, not a suspicion was ever against him, yet he, an innocent man was compelled to pass three months in a filthy jail associated with the vilest criminals, the neglect of his business having been the cause of his financial ruin, as well as the loss of health of his wife.

I have [etc.]

Frederic W. Goding.

8 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Goding. Filo No. 322.112J72/4.

[Document 428]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Goding.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 16, 1914.

Your March 11, 4 p.m. Forward certified copies.

Bryan.

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State. File No. 322.112J72/8.

[Document 429]

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Quito, March 18, 1914, 11 a.m.

Answering your March 9, 6 p.m. Copy of decree in case of Jones just received shows that he was definitely discharged March 10. Therefore I am not telegraphing synopsis of testimony as requested.

Hartman.

Consul General Goding to the Secretary of State. File No. 322.112J72/16.

[Document 430]

Consul General Goding to the Secretary of State.

No. 46.] American Consulate General,
Guayaquil, June 27, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose certified copy of the judge’s decree8 discharging the bondsmen of Mr. Robert B. Jones, which closes the case. The document was called for in Department telegram dated March 16, 1914. A similar copy has been sent to the American Legation at Quito, and an uncertified copy has been placed on file on this office.

I have [etc.]

Frederic W. Goding.

8 Not printed.

Exclusion of Goo Kwai, an American citizen of Chinese birthExclusion of Goo Kwai, an American citizen of Chinese birth

[431] Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Quito, November 4, 1914.

File No. 322.112G64.

[432] [Untitled]

American Legation, Guayaquil, November 5, 1914.

File No. 322.112G64/1.

[433] Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Quito, November 8, 1914.

File No. 322.112G64/2.

[434] The Secretary of State to the Minister of Ecuador.

Department of State, Washington, December 7, 1914.

File No. 322.112G64/2./2

[435] The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

Department of State, Washington, December 8, 1914.

File No. 322.112G64/1.

[436] The Minister of Ecuador to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Ecuador, Washington, December 11, 1914.

File No. 322.112G64/3.

[437] [Untitled]

Legation of Ecuador, Washington, December 17, 1914.

File No. 322.112.G64/4.

[438] The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

Department of State, Washington, December 28, 1914.

File No. 322.112GG4/4.

[439] The Secretary of State to the Minister of Ecuador.

Department of State, Washington, December 31, 1914.

File No. 322.112G64/4.

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State. File No. 322.112G64.

[Document 431]

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Quito, November 4, 1914.

Mr. Goo Kwai, an American citizen of Chinese birth, residing Hawaii and holding passport issued by Department of State, numbered 34640, desires to enter Ecuador to visit relatives. He was not permitted to land at Guayaquil except through the good offices of the American Consulate which is responsible for his attitude until the decision of the Foreign Office is made. I presented the case informally to the Minister for Foreign Affairs on October 27 and again on October 30, leaving memorandum with the Minister. To-day I received informal memorandum from the Minister informing me that the President of Ecuador, not wishing to establish a precedent which might produce complications in Ecuador in the future, had determined not to decide the question without presenting it for the consideration of the Secretary of State at Washington through the Ecuadorian Legation. I will forward despatch with full details by next pouch.

Hartman.

[Untitled] File No. 322.112G64/1.

[Document 432]

[Untitled]

[Extract]

No. 80.] American Legation,
Guayaquil, November 5, 1914.

Sir: Referring to my telegram of November 4 relating to the application of Goo Kwai, an American citizen of Chinese birth, for permission to enter Ecuador, I have the honor to present herewith for the information of the Department, the full history of the case, so far as this Legation has knowledge of it.

On October 20 I received a letter from the American Vice Consul General at Guayaquil informing me that Mr. Goo Kwai, a Hawaiian Chinese-American who is now in Panama and who wishes to come to Guayaquil to visit relatives * * * has had some difficulty in obtaining the proper certificates, etc., from the Ecuadorian Consul there, necessary for Mr. Goo’s embarkation for this port. I thought that I would be able to arrange the matter with the Governor without bothering you, but the Governor in charge is a new man, and I have not been able to get the matter through with him as I had expected; so I am sending you herewith all the correspondence on the matter, and will ask that you kindly dispose of the case as you see fit.

Copies of the enclosures transmitted to this Legation in the above letter, are herewith enclosed.8 * * *

At the time of the receipt of the foregoing letter, and enclosures, the Minister for Foreign Affairs was absent from Quito, and Minister Sanchez (in charge) was ill, so I was unable to bring the matter to the attention of the Foreign Office until October 27. On that date I personally presented the case informally to the Minister in charge, and left with him for his convenience, a memorandum.

On October 30, 1914, I received a telegram from Vice Consul General Baker which reads as follows: Mr. Goo arrived from Panama to-day and was not allowed to land except through the good offices of the Consulate. I am responsible till we have the decision of the Foreign Office on the matter. The boy carries an American passport and speaks good English.

Baker.

On the same day I delivered the substance of the information contained in the foregoing telegram to the Minister for Foreign Affairs in person, and presented to him the entire case. From his expressions at that time, I had but little doubt that the case would be decided promptly and in accordance with my views. But to my great surprise and disappointment a memorandum was delivered yesterday from the Minister, dated November 4, 1914, of which the enclosed are copies with translation.

Upon receipt of the foregoing memorandum, I deemed it proper to advise the Department by cable, of the salient features of the case, and accordingly sent the telegram referred to in the first paragraph of this despatch.* * *

I have [etc.]

Chas. S. Hartman.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Minister Hartman.

Ministry for Foreign Affairs,
Quito, November 4, 1914.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs presents his compliments to his excellency the Minister of the United States, and has the honor to inform him, in reply to his memorandums relating to the passport requested for the native Chinese and American citizen Goo Kwai, that, since this matter would involve for Ecuador a precedent which might bring complications in the future, the President of the Republic has not wished to decide it without first submitting it to the study and consideration of the Secretary of State at Washington through the Legation of Ecuador at said city.

R. H. Elizalde avails himself [etc.]

8 Not printed.

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State. File No. 322.112G64/2.

[Document 433]

Minister Hartman to the Secretary of State.

No. 82.] American Legation,
Quito, November 8, 1914.

Sir: By way of supplement to my No. 80, of November 5, 1914, in re application of Mr. Goo Kwai, an American citizen of Chinese birth, who desires to enter Ecuador to visit relatives, I have the honor to submit these additional observations:

On both occasions when I informally presented this case to the Foreign Office, I orally stated that in my view of the matter there is but one question in the case, and that is: Will a person who holds a passport in due form, issued by the Secretary of State of the United States, certifying that the holder thereof is an American citizen, be admitted into the territory of Ecuador or not?

The views announced by our Government in the several cases cited and freely quoted by Mr. Moore in vol. 3, pages 885 to 994 of his International Law Digest conclusively answer that question.

While I was at the Foreign Office on yesterday presenting another matter, the Minister again brought up the Goo Kwai case. It is evident from what he said that the Ecuadorian Government regards this case as a very important one. They fear, if Mr. Goo Kwai is admitted, even to visit relatives, that a flood of the same kind of American citizens from Hawaii will rush into Ecuador.

I have [etc.]

Chas. S. Hartman.

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Ecuador. File No. 322.112G64/2./2

[Document 434]

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Ecuador.

No. 11.] Department of State,
Washington, December 7, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that the Department has been advised by the American Minister to Ecuador that the Minister for Foreign Affairs has stated to him the intention of the President of Ecuador to present for the consideration of the Secretary of State, through the Ecuadorian Legation, the question of permitting Goo Kwai, an American citizen of Chinese birth, to enter Ecuador for a visit to relatives.

I have the honor to request, therefore, that you inform the Department whether you have received any instructions from your Government to take up this matter with the Secretary of State.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman. File No. 322.112G64/1.

[Document 435]

The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

No. 50.] Department of State,
Washington, December 8, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your No. 80, of November 5, and your No. 82, of November 8, in regard to the desire of Mr. Goo Kwai, an American citizen of Chinese birth, to enter Ecuador to visit his relatives in that country.

The Department has addressed to the Minister of Ecuador at Washington a note, a copy of which is enclosed, in which it inquires whether he has received from his Government any instructions to take up this matter with the Secretary of State.

Pending the receipt of a reply to that note, the Department has no instructions to give the Legation in the matter, except to continue its good offices for the assistance of Mr. Kwai, if occasion shall seem to permit of their exercise.

As you will readily understand, the Department is compelled to take into consideration in dealing with this case the legislation of the United States excluding Chinese persons, in general, from this country.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The Minister of Ecuador to the Secretary of State. File No. 322.112G64/3.

[Document 436]

The Minister of Ecuador to the Secretary of State.

[Translations.]

Legation of Ecuador,
Washington, December 11, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: The last mail from Ecuador brought me instructions from my Government to confer with your excellency over a petition filed by Goo Kwai, a Chinaman naturalized in the United States, who wishes to repair to Ecuador on a visit to his family.

For that purpose and with your excellency’s kind note No. 11 of the 7th instant before me, I have the honor to assure you that I shall be glad to talk over the matter with you when I next call at the Department, of which I will let your excellency know the evening before.

I am [etc.]

G. S. Córdova.

[Untitled] File No. 322.112.G64/4.

[Document 437]

[Untitled]

Legation of Ecuador,
Washington, December 17, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: I had on this day the honor to confer with the Honorable Robert Lansing, Counselor of the Department, over the case of the Chinaman, Goo Kwai, who entered Ecuador in violation of the provisions which exclude Chinese from its territory and after the Consul of Ecuador in Panama had denied the application for a passport made by the said Goo Kwai, who has had nothing more to say in his defence than that he claimed citizenship of the United States.

And we decided at that conference after examining the case that the laws of the Ecuadorian nation on the subject must be obeyed; but on the strength of considerations of another nature, the Chinaman, Goo Kwai, should be granted the favor of staying in Ecuador until the last day of this month on a visit to his friends.

I apprized my Government of this agreement to-day and hope that you will also advise the Minister of the United States to Ecuador as decided at the interview hereinabove referred to.

I am [etc.],

G. S. Córdova.

The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman. File No. 322.112GG4/4.

[Document 438]

The Secretary of State to Minister Hartman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 28, 1914.

Result conference Ecuadorian Minister and Counselor Lansing, agreed Goo Kwai allowed remain visiting friends Ecuador until December 31.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Ecuador. File No. 322.112G64/4.

[Document 439]

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Ecuador.

No. 14.] Department of State,
Washington, December 31, 1914.

I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of December 17, stating that in your conference with the Counselor of the Department on the same day, it was agreed that in the case of the Chinese, Goo Kwai, who entered Ecuador in violation of the regulations which exclude Chinese from its territory, the laws of Ecuador must be obeyed, but that he would nevertheless be granted the favor of remaining in that country until the last day of this month, to visit his friends. You add that you have advised your Government of this agreement, and ask the Department to inform the American Minister at Quito of it.

In reply I beg to say that on December 28 the Minister at Quito was informed by telegraph of the agreement reached.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

France:France:

Contents

Protection by the United States of French interests in Mexico.Protection by the United States of French interests in Mexico.

(See Mexico: Protection of French citizens and interests.)

Assistance to American refugees in Mexico by French diplomatic and consular officers and naval vessels.Assistance to American refugees in Mexico by French diplomatic and consular officers and naval vessels.

(See Mexico: Protection of American citizens, etc.)

French Protectorate in Morocco.French Protectorate in Morocco.

(See Morocco.)

Liability to French military service of naturalized American citizens of French origin and of American-born persons of French parentage. Dual citizenshipLiability to French military service of naturalized American citizens of French origin and of American-born persons of French parentage. Dual citizenship1

1 See a similar correspondence under Italy, p. 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602].

[440] Mr. William M. Chadbourne to the Secretary of State.

New York, December 18, 1913.

File No. 351.117/4.

[441] The Acting Secretary of State to Mr. W. M. Chadbourne.

Department of State, Washington, December 24, 1913.

File No. 351.117/4.

[442] The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick.

Department of State, Washington, December 27, 1913, 3 p.m.

File No. 351.117/3.

[443] Ambassador Herrick to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Paris, January 2, 1914.

File No. 351.117/5.

[444] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick.

Department of State, Washington, January 16, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 351.117/5.

[445] Ambassador Herrick to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Paris, January 19, 1914.

File No. 351.117/6.

[446] [Untitled]

American Embassy, Paris, March 25, 1914.

File No. 351.117/7.

[447] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick.

Department of State, Washington, April 4, 1914.

File No. 351.117/10.

[448] The Acting Secretary of State to Mr. Milton K. Young.

Department of State, Washington, September 22, 1914.

File No. 351.117/21.

[449] The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick.

Department of State, Washington, September 24, 1914.

File No. 351.117/20a.

[450] The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick.

Department of State, Washington, October 27, 1914.

File No. 351.117/16a.

[451] Ambassador Herrick to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Paris, October 28, 1914.

File No. 351.117/17.

[452] The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick.

Department of State, Washington, November 4, 1914.

File No. 351.117/17.

[453] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick.

Department of State, Washington, November 12, 1914.

File No. 351.117/18.

[454] Ambassador Herrick to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Paris, November 12, 1914.

File No. 351.117/21.

[455] Ambassador Herrick to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Paris, November 17, 1914.

File No. 351.117/23.

[456] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick.

Department of State, Washington, November 25, 1914.

File No. 351.117/19.

[457] Ambassador Sharp to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Paris, December 18, 1914.

File No. 351.117/22.

[458] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Sharp.

Department of State, Washington, December 31, 1914.

File No. 351.117/22.

Mr. William M. Chadbourne to the Secretary of State. File No. 351.117/4.

[Document 440]

Mr. William M. Chadbourne to the Secretary of State.

New York,
December 18, 1913.

Dear Sir: A client of mine, who was born in France of French parents, came to this country in his youth and became a naturalized American citizen without ever having performed the required military service in the French army. It seems that a law has been passed in France to the effect that persons of a certain age, who never performed their military service, may exempt themselves from liability for punishment for their failure to do so by serving for a very short term of about a month.

My client would like to avail himself of this law in order that he may be free to visit France whenever he chooses, without fear of getting into trouble. But he does not want to do anything that might involve a loss of his American citizenship. You will note that Section 2 of the Act of March 2, 1907, provides that American citizenship is lost by naturalization in a foreign country or by taking an oath of allegiance to any foreign state.

It may be that you have had occasion to consider this question or can refer me to some decision on the point, and if this is the case, I should be greatly obliged if you would let me have anything that might be of assistance in deciding this question.

Yours very truly,

William M. Chadbourne.

The Acting Secretary of State to Mr. W. M. Chadbourne. File No. 351.117/4.

[Document 441]

The Acting Secretary of State to Mr. W. M. Chadbourne.

Department of State,
Washington, December 24, 1913.

Sir: The Department has received your letter of December 18, concerning a certain naturalized citizen of the United States of French origin who desires to place himself in such a position that he may visit France without being molested under the military service laws. It appears that he is under the impression “that a law has been passed in France to the effect that persons of a certain age, who never performed their military service, may exempt themselves from liability for punishment for their failure to do so by serving for a very short term of about a month and that he desires to take advantage of such law. In relation to this matter you call attention to the provision of the first paragraph of Section 2 of the Act of March 2, 1907: That any American citizen shall be deemed to have expatriated himself when he has been naturalized in any foreign state in conformity with its laws, or when he has taken an oath of allegiance to any foreign state.

Your attention is called to the following provision of Article 17 of the French Civil Code: The following lose their French nationality:

1. A Frenchman naturalized in a foreign country or who acquires foreign nationality at his own request by the effect of the law.

If he is still subject to the obligations of military service in the active army, his naturalization abroad will not work a loss of his French nationality unless it has been authorized by the French Government.

The Department understands that under the French military law persons of French origin may be called upon to perform military duty between the ages of twenty and fifty-three years and that they are obliged to serve three years in the active army. So far as the Department is informed there is no provision for a shorter term of service in cases of persons of French origin who have obtained naturalization as citizens of other countries.

Applications for relief from the performance of military service may be addressed to the Minister of Justice at Paris. I regret to say, however, that the Department understands that the French Government rarely absolves a Frenchman of military age from liability for military service.

The Department is not informed whether it is necessary to take a permanent oath of allegiance to France in connection with enlistment in the French army. It may be possible to obtain authentic information concerning this point from the French Consul General in New York City.

I am [etc.]

J. B. Moore.

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick. File No. 351.117/3.

[Document 442]

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 27, 1913, 3 p.m.

The Department informed by Senator Smoot concerning recent arrest in France for military service of Joseph Nouguier. He was born at Moulins, France, June 24, 1884, emigrated to this country about December 5, 1903, and was naturalized as American citizen February 14, 1912. He was appointed postmaster at San Rafael, Utah, July 3, 1912. Senator Smoot has presented a petition of seventy citizens of Utah for the release of Mr. Nouguier. Please present this matter to the French Government and express the desire of this Government that it be made possible for Mr. Nouguier to leave France and return to this country.

Moore.

Ambassador Herrick to the Secretary of State. File No. 351.117/5.

[Document 443]

Ambassador Herrick to the Secretary of State.

No. 494.] American Embassy,
Paris, January 2, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s telegram of December 27, 3 p.m., instructing me to communicate with the French Government with a view to obtaining a release from service in the French Army of Joseph Nouguier, born at Moulins, France, June 24, 1884, and naturalized as an American citizen on the 14th day of February, 1912.

I understand from the Department’s telegram that the said Joseph Nouguier emigrated from France at the age of about 19 years; that is to say, a very short time before he would have been required to perform his military service. I therefore beg to call your attention to this Embassy’s despatch1 No. 304, of March 18, 1913, relating to a very similar case, of one John or Jean Espil. It is clear, I think, from this case what the attitude of the French Government is regarding the enforcement of the military service rules.

I have moreover been just informed by the Counselors of this Embassy, Messrs. Goudert Brothers, concerning the case of Joseph Nouguier, that this latter would have no legal right in France to be released from military service.

I venture to suggest that in view to former cases referred to it would not be advisable to present this case to the Foreign Office. I therefore take the liberty of awaiting further instructions before complying with the Department’s request.

I have [etc.]

Myron T. Herrick.

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick. File No. 351.117/5.

[Document 444]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 16, 1914, 2 p.m.

Your despatch No. 494, of January 2, concerning Joseph Nouguier. The Department understands the conflict between the laws of France and the United States as to naturalization; nevertheless desires that the attention of the French Government be called to the facts of Nouguier’s naturalization in this country and appointment as postmaster, and that the representations set forth in its telegram of December 27 be made.

Bryan.

Ambassador Herrick to the Secretary of State. File No. 351.117/6.

[Document 445]

Ambassador Herrick to the Secretary of State.

No. 509.] American Embassy,
Paris, January 19, 1914.

Sir: Referring to your telegram of December 27, 3 p.m., and my despatch No. 494 of January 2, 1914, in regard to the arrest of Mr. Joseph Nouguier, for non-performance of his military service, I have the honor to report that in accordance with your telegraphic instructions of January 16, 2 p.m., I have presented his case to the Foreign Office and requested that it be made possible for him to leave France and return to America.

I will cable the Department the result of my representations as soon as an answer is received from the Foreign Office.

I have [etc.]

Myron T. Herrick.

[Untitled] File No. 351.117/7.

[Document 446]

[Untitled]

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Paris, March 25, 1914.

Your December 27, 3 p.m., and January 16, 2 p.m. French Government advises me that since Joseph Nouguier did not obtain authorization from French Government to be naturalized as an American citizen in accordance with provisions of Article 17, paragraph 1, of the Civil Code, French Government must continue to consider him a French citizen and he must in consequence discharge his military service in France.

Herrick.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick. File No. 351.117/10.

[Document 447]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick.

No. 255.] Department of State,
Washington, April 4, 1914.

Sir: The Department sends you herewith, for your information, a copy of a letter of April 2, 1914, from Mr. J.’ A. C. Fargo, 2nd, Assistant Manager of the American Express Company, New York City, concerning the status and liability for military service in France of Edward P. Chrystie, who was born in France of an American father also born there; and a copy of the Department’s reply of this day.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

[Inclosure 1.]

Mr. Fargo to the Secretary of State.

New York,
April 2, 1914.

Dear Sir: With reference to the passport issued by you on March 30 in favor of Edward P. Chrystie, we learn that in the circulars inclosed therewith the inference is made that naturalized citizens of French extraction are subject to military service in their native country.

We realize that Mr. Chrystie’s case is rather an unusual one and that even though he is a descendant of Albert N. Chrystie, who was a native citizen of this country, his direct parentage may hardly be entitled to the claim of a native citizen, owing to the fact that his father was born in France.

It would involve Mr. Chrystie in what to him would be an intolerable predicament if the military authorities should detain him for military service in France, and In order to have his position defined as clearly as it is possible to do so, we should esteem it a great favor if you were to kindly offer an opinion on the possibilities of such a contingency arising.

In the event of your being unable to give assurances that Mr. Chrystie would be exempt from such service, we beg on his behalf your kind interest and indulgence to the extent of informing the American Consul in Paris of the circumstances relating to Mr. Chrystie’s parentage and citizenship in order that our Consul might know the situation precisely and be in a position to take up the matter with the French Government in the event of Mr. Chrystie being compelled to call upon him for assistance.

Assuring you [etc.]

J. A. C. Fargo 2nd.

[Inclosure 2.]

The Secretary of State to Mr. Fargo.

Department of State,
Washington, April 4, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your letter of April 2, 1914, concerning [etc.]. From previous correspondence it appears that his grandfather, Albert N. Chrystie, was a native of this country and that his father, James N. Chrystie, was born at Havre, France, but did not become a French citizen, and that he himself was born at Havre September 7, 1887, and came to this country in 1894.

As James N. Chrystie had resided in this country for some years before the birth of his son, Edward P. Chrystie, the latter is considered a native (that is, born) citizen of the United States according to the provision of Section 1993 of the Revised Statutes. It appears, however, that he may also be considered a native citizen of France under the provision of Paragraph 3, Article 8, of the French Civil Code, which, as modified by an act of July 22, 1893, provides as follows: The following are Frenchmen:* * *

3. Every person born in France of foreign parents, of whom one was also born there, except that he has the privilege, if it was his mother who was born in France, of declining French nationality during the year following the attainment of his majority, by conforming to the provisions of Subdivision 4 hereinafter.

It will be observed that Mr. Chrystie has a dual nationality, being considered American under American law and French under French law; consequently the Department is not in a position to assure him that he will not be required to perform military service in case he voluntarily places himself within the French jurisdiction. As it appears that he came to this country when a young boy, has resided here for some years since attaining his majority, and has since made a practical election of American rather than French nationality, it seems to the Department that the Embassy at Paris would be warranted in interceding in his behalf if, upon going to France, he should be arrested for military service or otherwise molested by French officials. However, in view of the fact already noted, that Mr. Chrystie was born a French citizen under French law, the Department can give you no assurance that the intercession of the Embassy in his behalf would meet with the desired result.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing, Counselor,
For the Secretary of State.

The Acting Secretary of State to Mr. Milton K. Young. File No. 351.117/21.

[Document 448]

The Acting Secretary of State to Mr. Milton K. Young.

Department of State,
Washington, September 22, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your letter1 of September 17, in which you request [etc.]

The Department has this day sent a copy of your letter, together with the copy of the court record of Mr. Pellissier’s naturalization as an American citizen, to the American Ambassador at Paris, with instructions to present this case to the French Government, and ask that Mr. Pellissier be released, and that he be permitted to leave France with the other members of his family, and return to this country. The Ambassador was directed to call attention to the facts mentioned in your letter which make it appear especially important to Mr. Pellissier that he be released.

I regret to say, however, that, in view of the French law, under which the naturalization of Frenchmen as citizens of other countries is not recognized unless they have obtained special permission to change their allegiance, or have fulfilled their military liability to France, the Department is unable to assure you that Mr. Pellissier will be released and permitted to return to this country. Enclosed herewith, for your information, is a copy of the Department’s printed circular entitled “Notice to American Citizens Formerly Citizens of France Who Contemplate Returning to that Country.”2

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

1 See inclosure with the next paper.

2 See page 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], footnote.

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick. File No. 351.117/20a.

[Document 449]

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick.

No. 317.] Department of State,
Washington, September 24, 1914.

Sir: The Department sends you herewith copy of a letter of September 17, 1914, from Mr. Milton K. Young of Los Angeles, California, concerning the detention, for military service in France, of Francois F. Pellissier, a naturalized citizen of the United States of French origin. It appears that he is accompanied by his wife, three children, and his sister-in-law. The Department also encloses the accompaniment, a certified copy of the record of Mr. Pellissier’s naturalization as a citizen of the United States in the Superior Court of California, at Los Angeles, July 30, 1910.

Please present this case to the French Government, and ask that Mr. Pellissier be released, and that permission be granted him and the other members of his family to leave France and return to the United States. In doing so, please call attention to the facts stated in Mr. Young’s letter which make it especially important for Mr. Pellissier to return to this country.

I have [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

[Inclosure.]

Mr. Milton K. Young to the Secretary of State.

Los Angeles,
September 17, 1914.

Dear Sir: As the attorney for François F. Pellissier, I desire to make to you the following representation:

The said Pellissier is a native of France. He came to the State of California at the age of fifteen years and has ever since been resident of said state and remaining within its borders until the month of May, 1914. He became a naturalized citizen of the United States by a decree of the Superior Court of the State of California, rendered on the 30th day of July, 1900. In the month of May of this year, in company with his wife, three children, and his wife’s sister, all natives of California, he departed this country for the purpose of touring Europe. At the outbreak of the recent war, he and his said family were sojourning at Place 2, Grenette Gap (Hautes-Alpes), France. He attempted to leave said country with his family; but was detained by the military authorities and informed that such detention was for the purpose of impressing him into military service for the Government of France, in the pending conflict, in case his services were required. The latest information from him upon that subject is by letter of date August 14 and at that time he had not been called to duty in the army. His relatives here have gained the idea that the other members of his family, all native-born citizens of this country, are also detained against their will. This urgent need for Mr. Pellissier’s return to this country grows out of the following facts:

He is vice president and general manager of the Los Angeles Creamery Company, presumably the largest enterprise of that character in the State of California, and the direct management and control of its affairs have been in the hands of C. W. Platt, president, and the said Pellissier. Since the departure of Mr. Pellissier for France, the said Platt was shot with a pistol in the hands of a temporarily deranged person, the result being that he is physically disabled and wholly incapacitated from attending to the affairs of said business. A large number of stock-holders are therefore dependent upon the said Pellissier being able to perform his duties to save them from irreparable loss and of course the business naturally requires his presence. The aged parents of Mr. and Mrs. Pellissier are greatly worried by reason of their absence enforced under existing circumstances. Mr. Pellissier’s private fortune is invested in the Creamery Company and will greatly suffer by reason of his continued absence. Mr. Pellissier is of the age of about thirty-nine years. The family bear names as follows: wife, Marie F. Pellissier; children, Frank F. Pellissier, Leon Pellissier, Laurent Pellissier; sister-in-law, Eugenie Valla.

For the reasons given, we respectfully request that your Department make such application to the Government of France as it deems expedient for the return to this country of the persons named.

Most respectfully,

Milton K. Young.

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick. File No. 351.117/16a.

[Document 450]

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 27, 1914.

207. Have you issued emergency passport Pierre Ismael Chandeysson and presented his case to French authorities? Department informed he was naturalized September 22, 1906, but has been impressed into French Army.

Lansing.

Ambassador Herrick to the Secretary of State. File No. 351.117/17.

[Document 451]

Ambassador Herrick to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Paris, October 28, 1914.

231. Your 206 [207], October 27. Chandeysson given certificate of citizenship about August 12; was also assisted to obtain funds; now enrolled in 7th Company, 120th Territorial Regiment.

Herrick.

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick. File No. 351.117/17.

[Document 452]

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 4, 1914.

233. Your 231, October 28. Did Chandeysson voluntarily enlist in the French Army? If not, ask for release on the ground of American citizenship.

Lansing.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick. File No. 351.117/18.

[Document 453]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 12, 1914.

261. Department informed Jean Eloi Candevan born at Poey, Basses Pyrenees, December 1, 1877; emigrated to this country at age of sixteen; naturalized as American citizen 1902; impressed into French army at Poey. Investigate; ask for release.

Bryan.

Ambassador Herrick to the Secretary of State. File No. 351.117/21.

[Document 454]

Ambassador Herrick to the Secretary of State.

No. 753.] American Embassy,
Paris, November 12, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to report that I did not fail to comply with the instructions in the Department’s No. 317 of September 24, directing me to ask the French Government to release Mr. François F. Pellissier, a naturalized citizen of the United States of French origin, from military service in France.

I am now in receipt of a note (copy and translation enclosed) stating that according to the terms of Article 1 of the French law of March 21, 1905, every Frenchman is obliged to do military service. Moreover, Article 17 of the Civil Code provides that when a French citizen is subject to military duty, naturalization as a citizen of a foreign country does not cancel such obligation unless his foreign naturalization has been authorized by the French Government.

The Foreign Office states that inasmuch as Mr. Pellissier was subject to military duty on July 30, 1900, (the date at which he was naturalized an American citizen) he is still subject to military duty, in view of the fact that he did not obtain permission from the French Government for such naturalization and that therefore he is considered by the military authority as a French citizen.

This decision by the French Government not to release Mr. Pellissier from the obligation incumbent upon him by French law, is in keeping with the attitude taken by the French Government in similar cases in times of peace. Reference to the many reports made by this Embassy in instances covering this same point, will show the invariable attitude of the Government of the Republic on this question; it is therefore hardly to be expected that the Government would depart at this time from a policy to which it has adhered in times of peace, and I respectfully beg to invite your attention to this particular subject which will no doubt arise from time to time during the continuation of hostilities.

Whereas I am desirous of upholding the rights of our citizens with the utmost vigor, it nevertheless is embarrassing for the Embassy to submit cases of this nature on which the French Government has so repeatedly given a decision contrary to the requests of the American Government.

I have [etc.]

Myron T. Herrick.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Ambassador Herrick.

Foreign Office,
Bordeaux, November 6, 1914.

Mr. Ambassador: Your excellency has kindly brought before my notice the case of Mr. Frangois Pellissier, a born Frenchman, naturalized American, who was taken for military service by the French military authorities during a trip he was making in France at the beginning of last August.

The law of March 21, 1905, provides in Article 1 that “every Frenchman is subject to personal military service.” Moreover, article 17 of the Civil Code provides that “if a Frenchman is still subject to military duty in the active army, foreign naturalization shall only allow him to lose his French nationality when said naturalization shall have been authorized by the French Government.”

Mr. Pellissier was naturalized American on July 30, 1900; he was still, at that time, subject to military duty; he should therefore have obtained the authorization of the Government. Inasmuch as he became naturalized without authorization, the military authorities were bound to consider him as having remained French.

With assurances [etc.]

Delcassé.

Ambassador Herrick to the Secretary of State. File No. 351.117/23.

[Document 455]

Ambassador Herrick to the Secretary of State.

No. 767.] American Embassy,
Paris, November 17, 1914.

Sir: Referring to the Department’s No. 233 of November 4 relating to the case of Mr. P. I. Chandeysson, I have the honor to report that the Embassy has ascertained that Chandeysson did not voluntarily enlist in the French army. Considering however the refusal of the French Government to release Mr. François F. Pellissier from his military obligations under precisely similar circumstances, and especially in view of the statement made in the circular1 issued by the Department of State on February 10, 1914, for the benefit of American citizens formerly citizens of France who contemplate returning to their native country, that, “a Frenchman naturalized abroad without the consent of his Government, and who at the time of his naturalization was still subject to military service in the active army or in the reserve of the active army, is held to be amenable to the French military laws,” I respectfully request the authority of the Department to withhold representations in behalf of Mr. Chandeysson and in all similar cases which may subsequently arise.

I have [etc.]

Myron T. Herrick.

1  This circular, issued June 6, 1913, and reissued February 10, 1914, is as follows: notice to american citizens formerly citizens of france who contemplate returning to that country.

The information given below is believed to be correct, yet is not to be considered as official, as it relates to the laws and regulations of a foreign country.

All Frenchmen who are not declared unfit or excused may be called upon for military duty between the ages of twenty and fifty years. They are obliged to serve two years in the active army, eleven in the reserve of the active army, six in the territorial army, and six in the reserve of the territorial army.

If released from all military obligations in France, or if the authorization of the French Government was obtained beforehand, naturalization of a former French citizen in the United States is accepted by the French Government; but a Frenchman naturalized abroad without the consent of his Government, and who at the time of his naturalization was still subject to military service in the active army or in the reserve of the active army, is held to be amenable to the French military laws. Not having responded to the notice calling him to accomplish his military service, he is placed on the list of those charged with noncompliance with the military laws, and if he returns to France he is liable to arrest and trial, and upon conviction is turned over to the army, active, reserve, or territorial, according to his age. Long absence from France and old age do not prevent this action.

A Frenchman naturalized abroad, after having passed the age of service in the active army and the reserve, nevertheless continues on the military list until he has had his name struck from the rolls, which may usually be done by his sending his naturalization certificate through the United States Embassy to the proper French authorities.

The French Government rarely gives consent to a Frenchman of military age to throw off his allegiance. Application on the subject may, however, be addressed to the Minister of Justice at Paris, accompanied by a full statement of the particulars and a fee of 675 francs. If the request is granted the name of the person concerned is erased from the military list and he may return to France safely.

There is no treaty between the United States and France defining the status of former French citizens who have become naturalized American citizens.

Passports are not necessary to enter France, but are usually required of sojourners or travelers afterwards. It is not required that they be visaed or endorsed.

Department of State,
Washington, June 6, 1913.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick. File No. 351.117/19.

[Document 456]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 25, 1914.

311. Auguste Peralme, naturalized as American citizen September 24, 1906, impressed into Thirteenth Company of the 117th Regiment of Neims [sic] Infantry. He came to this country twenty-two years ago at age of seventeen. His wife and two children destitute here. Ask for release and report result.

Bryan.

Ambassador Sharp to the Secretary of State. File No. 351.117/22.

[Document 457]

Ambassador Sharp to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Paris, December 18, 1914.

390. No answer having been received to Embassy’s despatch No. 767, November 17, shall I make representations behalf Auguste Peralme as per Department’s No. 311, November 25?

Sharp.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Sharp. File No. 351.117/22.

[Document 458]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Sharp.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 31, 1914.

442. Your 390, December 18. Request release Peralme as instructed. Emphasize fact that he emigrated before reaching military age and has wife and children destitute in this country. Say that apparently provisions of Article 17 of French Nationality Law of 1889 should not apply to naturalized Americans who emigrated before reaching military age, and that this Government cannot concede the principle if the law is applied to such persons. Express earnest hope of this Government that cases may be differentiated and Peralme and others in same situation allowed to leave France.

Bryan.

Germany:Germany:

Contents

Protection by the United States of German interests in Mexico.Protection by the United States of German interests in Mexico.

(See Mexico: Protection of German subjects and interests.)

Assistance to American refugees in Mexico by German diplomatic and consular officers and naval vessels.Assistance to American refugees in Mexico by German diplomatic and consular officers and naval vessels.

(See Mexico: Protection of American citizens, etc.)

Great Britain:Great Britain:

Contents

Arbitration agreement between the United States and Great Britain, extending the duration of the Convention of April 4, 1908Arbitration agreement between the United States and Great Britain, extending the duration of the Convention of April 4, 1908

Signed at Washington, May 31, 1913; ratification advised by the Senate, February 21, 191k; ratified by the President, March 27, 1914; ratified by Great Britain, March 11, 1914; ratifications exchanged at Washington, April 10, 1914; proclaimed April 10, 1914.

[459] By the President of the United States of America.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this tenth day of April in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-eighth.

Treaty Series No. 587.]

By the President of the United States of America. Treaty Series No. 587.]

[Document 459]

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas an Agreement between the United States of America and Great Britain extending, for a further period of five years, the arbitration convention concluded between them on April 4, 1908, was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Washington on the thirty-first day of May, one thousand nine hundred and thirteen, the original of which Agreement is word for word as follows:

Agreement extending the duration of the Arbitration Convention of April 4, 1908.

The President of the United States of America and His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India, being desirous of extending the period of five years during which the Arbitration Convention concluded between them on April 4, 1908, is to remain in force, which period is about to expire, have authorized the undersigned, to wit: William Jennings Bryan, Secretary of State of the United States, and Sir Cecil Spring Rice, His Britannic Majesty’s Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary to the United States, to conclude the following articles:

Article I.

The Convention of Arbitration of April 4, 1908, between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India, the duration of which by Article IV thereof was fixed at a period of five years from the date of the exchange of ratifications, which period will terminate on June 4, 1913, is hereby extended and continued in force for a further period of five years from June 4, 1913.

Article II.

The present Agreement shall be ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by His Britannic Majesty, and it shall become effective upon the date of the exchange of ratifications, which shall take place at Washington as soon as possible.

Done in duplicate at Washington this thirty-first day of May, one thousand nine hundred and thirteen.

[seal.] William Jennings Bryan.

[seal.] Cecil Spring Rice.

And whereas the said Agreement has been duly ratified on both parts, and the ratifications of the two governments were exchanged in the City of Washington, on the tenth day of April, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Agreement to Be made public, to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this tenth day of April in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-eighth.
Woodrow Wilson.

By the President:
William Jennings Bryan
Secretary of State.

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, concluded between the United States and Great BritainTreaty for the advancement of general peace, concluded between the United States and Great Britain

Signed at Washington, September 15, 1914; ratification advised by the Senate, September 25, 1914; ratified by the President, November 4, 1914; ratified by Great Britain, October 8, 1914; ratifications exchanged at Washington, November 10, 1914; proclaimed, November 11, 1914.

[460] By the President of the United States of America

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this eleventh day of November in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.

Treaty Series No. 602.]

By the President of the United States of America Treaty Series No. 602.]

[Document 460]

By the President of the United States of America

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas, a Treaty between the United States of America and Great Britain looking to the advancement of the cause of general peace was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Washington on the fifteenth day of September, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, the original of which Treaty is word for word as follows:

The President of the United States of America and His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India, being desirous to strengthen the bonds of amity that bind them together and also to advance the cause of general peace, have resolved to enter into a treaty for that purpose, and to that end have appointed as their plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States, the Honorable William Jennings Bryan, Secretary of State of the United States; and

His Britannic Majesty, the Eight Honorable Sir Cecil Arthur Spring Rice, G. C. V. O., K. C. M. G., etc., His Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary at Washington;

Who, after having communicated to each other their respective full powers, found to be in proper form, have agreed upon and concluded the following articles:

Article I.

The High Contracting Parties agree that all disputes between them, of every nature whatsoever, other than disputes the settlement of which is provided for and in fact achieved under existing agreements between the High Contracting Parties, shall, when diplomatic methods of adjustment have failed, be referred for investigation and report to a permanent International Commission, to be constituted in the manner prescribed in the next succeeding article; and they agree not to declare war or begin hostilities during such investigation and before the report is submitted.

Article II.

The International Commission shall be composed of five members, to be appointed as follows: One member shall be chosen from each country, by the Government thereof; one member shall be chosen by each Government from some third country; the fifth member shall be chosen by common agreement between the two Governments, it being understood that he shall not be a citizen of either country. The expenses of the Commission shall be paid by the two Governments in equal proportions.

The International Commission shall be appointed within six months after the exchange of the ratifications of this treaty; and vacancies shall be filled according to the manner of the original appointment.

Article III.

In case the High Contracting Parties shall have failed to adjust a dispute by diplomatic methods, they shall at once refer it to the International Commission for investigation and report. The International Commission may, however, spontaneously by unanimous agreement offer its services to that effect, and in such case it shall notify both Governments and request their cooperation in the investigation.

In the event of its appearing to His Majesty’s Government that the British interests affected by the dispute to be investigated are not mainly those of the United Kingdom but are mainly those of some one or more of the self governing dominions, namely, the Dominion of Canada, the Commonwealth of Australia, the Dominion of New Zealand, the Union of South Africa, and Newfoundland, His Majesty’s Government shall be at liberty to substitute as the member chosen by them to serve on the International Commission for such investigation and report another person selected from a list of persons to be named one for each of the self governing dominions but only one shall act, namely, that one who represents the dominion immediately interested.

The High Contracting Parties agree to furnish the Permanent International Commission with all the means and facilities required for its investigation and report.

The report of the International Commission shall be completed within one year after the date on which it shall declare its investigation to have begun, unless the High Contracting Parties shall limit or extend the time by mutual agreement. The report shall be prepared in triplicate; one copy shall be presented to each Government, and the third retained by the Commission for its files.

The High Contracting Parties reserve the right to act independently on the subject matter of the dispute after the report of the Commission shall have been submitted.

Article IV.

This treaty shall not affect in any way the provisions of the Treaty of the 11th January, 1909, relating to questions arising between the United States and the Dominion of Canada.

Article V.

The present treaty shall be ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by His Britannic Majesty; and the ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible. It shall take effect immediately after the exchange of ratifications, and shall continue in force for a period of five years; and it shall thereafter remain in force until twelve months after one of the High Contracting Parties have given notice to the other of an intention to terminate it.

In witness whereof the respective plenipotentiaries have signed the present treaty and have affixed thereunto their seals.

Done in duplicate at Washington on the 15th day of September, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and fourteen.

[seal.] William Jennings Bryan

[seal.] Cecil Spring Rice

And whereas, the said Treaty has been duly ratified on both parts, and the ratifications of the two Governments were exchanged in the City of Washington, on the tenth day of November, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Treaty to be made public to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof,

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this eleventh day of November in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.
Woodrow Wilson.

By the President:
William Jennings Bryan
Secretary of State.

Jurisdiction of the United States over foreign ships and persons on board them in United States waters; jurisdiction in foreign waters of the master or other person authorized by the United States over members of the crew of a private ship sailing under the United States flagJurisdiction of the United States over foreign ships and persons on board them in United States waters; jurisdiction in foreign waters of the master or other person authorized by the United States over members of the crew of a private ship sailing under the United States flag

[461] The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, March 23, 1914.

File No. 800.858/3.

[462] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, May 19, 1914.

File No. 800.858/3.

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 800.858/3.

[Document 461]

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

No. 92.] British Embassy,
Washington, March 23, 1914.

Sir: I have the honour to inform you that I have received a despatch from His Majesty’s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs stating that a considerable number of cases have occurred in recent years in which difficulties have arisen with foreign States in consequence of the assertion by British authorities of their right to exercise criminal jurisdiction on board foreign vessels (including mail steamers) lying in British territorial waters, or over persons on board such ships. The view adopted by His Majesty’s Government has been that British jurisdiction in such cases is complete, but that has in several cases been disputed by the foreign Governments concerned.

An interdepartmental committee has now been appointed to consider the state of the law as regards criminal and civil jurisdiction over foreign vessels and persons on board the same in British ports and territorial waters; and to advise how far it would be possible or desirable to arrive at an arrangement with foreign countries which would obviate disputes of the nature referred to, and to what extent legislation would be necessary in the United Kingdom in order to render such an arrangement feasible.

The Committee have decided to postpone their discussions until information has been furnished as to the law and practice of the principal maritime countries of Europe and of the United States of America.

I am accordingly instructed to furnish my Government with a full report on both the law and practice of the United States in regard to the exercise of criminal and civil jurisdiction (a) by the United States over foreign ships and persons on board them in United States waters, and (b) in foreign territorial waters over members of the crew by the master of a private ship, sailing under the United States flag, or by any other person acting under the authority of the United States.

I have the honour to invoke your kind assistance and to enquire whether I may be favoured with the information necessary to enable me to report on the lines desired by my Government.

I have [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice.

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador. File No. 800.858/3.

[Document 462]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

No. 355.] Department of State,
Washington, May 19, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge your note of March 23, 1914, in which you call attention to the views of your Government regarding the question of jurisdiction over foreign merchant vessels. You state that an “interdepartmental committee has now been appointed to consider the state of the law as regards criminal and civil jurisdiction over foreign vessels and persons on board of the same in British ports and territorial waters; and to advise how far it would be possible or desirable to arrive at an arrangement with foreign countries which would obviate disputes of the nature referred to, and to what extent legislation would be necessary in the United Kingdom in order to render such an arrangement feasible.” You request to be furnished with information to enable you to furnish your Government with” a full report on both the law and practice of the United States in regard to the exercise of criminal and civil jurisdiction (a) by the United States over foreign ships and persons on board of them in United States waters, and (b) in foreign waters over members of the crew by the master of a private ship, sailing under the United States flag, or by any other person acting under the authority of the United States.”

With a view to furnishing the information desired by your Government the Department takes pleasure in inviting attention to a number of decisions of American courts, certain diplomatic correspondence, treaty stipulations between this Government and other nations, and certain provisions of the municipal legislation of the United States.

In the matter of criminal jurisdiction exercised by the courts of this country over foreign\ ships in territorial waters of the United States and over persons on board such vessels, the leading case is that known as Wildenhus’s case (120 U. S., 1) in which the Supreme Court of the United States sustained the jurisdiction of the courts of New Jersey where the crime of felonious homicide had been committed by a Belgian subject on the person of another Belgian subject on board of a Belgian vessel lying in the port of Jersey City, New Jersey. The following excerpt from the opinion of the court delivered by Mr. Chief Justice White clearly states the principles underlying the assumption or non-assumption of jurisdiction by the local courts (pp. 11–12 [Pgs. 11–12 include portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]): It is part of the law of civilized nations that when a merchant vessel of one country enters the ports of another for the purposes of trade, it subjects itself to the law of the place to which it goes, unless by treaty or otherwise the two countries have come to some different understanding or agreement; for, as was said by Chief Justice Marshall in The Exchange, 7 Cranch, 116, 144, “it would be obviously inconvenient and dangerous to society, and would subject the laws to continual infraction, and the government to degradation, if such … merchants did not owe temporary and local allegiance, and were not amenable to the jurisdiction of the country.” United States v. Diekelman, 92 U. S. 520; 1 Phillimore’s Int. Law, 3d ed. 483, par 351; Twiss’ Law of Rations in Time of Peace, 229, par. 159; Creasy’s Int. Law, 167, par. 176; Halleck’s Int. Law, 1st ed. 171. And the English judges have uniformly recognized the rights of the courts of the country of which the port is part to punish crimes committed by one foreigner on another in a foreign merchant ship. Regina v. Cunningham, Bell C. C. 72; S. C. 8 Cox G. C. 104; Regina v. Anderson, 11 Cox C. C. 198, 204.; S. C. L. R. 1 C. C. 161, 165; Regina v. Keyn, 18 Cox C. C. 403, 486, 525; S. C. 2 Ex. Div. 63, 161, 213. As the owner has voluntarily taken his vessel for his own private purposes to a place within the dominion of a government other than his own, and from which he seeks protection during his stay, he owes that government such allegiance for the time being as is due for the protection to which he becomes entitled.

From experience, however, it was found long ago that it would be beneficial to commerce if the local government would abstain from interfering with the internal discipline of the ship, and the general regulation of the rights and duties of the officers and crew towards the vessel or among themselves. And so by comity it came to be generally understood among civilized nations that all matters of discipline and all things done on board which affected only the vessel or those belonging to her, and did not involve the peace or dignity of the country, or the tranquillity of the port, should be left by the local government to be dealt with by the authorities of the nation to which the vessel belonged as the laws of that nation or the interests of its commerce should require. But if crimes are committed on board of a character to disturb the peace and tranquillity of the country to which the vessel has been brought, the offenders have never by comity or usage been entitled to any exemption from the operation of the local laws for their punishment, if the local tribunals see fit to assert their authority. Such being the general public law on this subject, treaties and conventions have been entered into by nations having commercial intercourse, the purpose of which was to settle and define the rights and duties of the contracting parties with respect to each other in these particulars, and thus prevent the inconvenience that might arise from attempts to exercise conflicting jurisdictions.

Attention may be called to a number of decisions in relation to the exercise of civil jurisdiction in cases involving the rights of foreign vessels or of persons connected with such vessels.

In ex parte Newman (14 Wallace, 152), a case where foreign seamen had libeled a foreign boat for wages, the Supreme Court said (pp. 168–169 [Pgs. 168–169 include portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, and Doc. 176]): Admiralty courts, it is said, will not take jurisdiction in such a case except where it is manifestly necessary to do so to prevent a failure of justice, but the better opinion is that, independent of treaty stipulation, there is no constitutional or legal impediment to the exercise of jurisdiction in such a case. Such courts may, if they see fit, take jurisdiction in such case, but they will not do so as a general rule without the consent of the representative of the country to which the vessel belongs, where it is practicable that the representative should be consulted. His consent, however, is not a condition of jurisdiction, but is regarded as a material fact to aid the court in determining the question of discretion, whether jurisdiction in the case ought or ought not to be exercised.

In The Belgenland (114 U. S., 355), a case where the Supreme Court sustained the jurisdiction of the Federal courts of a libel for damages arising from a collision on the high seas between two foreign vessels, that tribunal said (pp. 363–365 [Pgs. 363–365 include portions of Doc. 555, Doc. 556, Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, and Doc. 562]): For circumstances often exist which render it inexpedient for the court to take jurisdiction of controversies between foreigners in cases not arising in the country of the forum; as, where they are governed by the laws of the country to which the parties belong, and there is no difficulty in a resort to its courts; or where they have agreed to resort to no other tribunals. The cases of foreign seamen suing for wages, or because of ill treatment, are often in this category; and the consent of their consul, or minister, is frequently required before the court will proceed to entertain jurisdiction; not on the ground that it has not jurisdiction; but that, from motives of convenience or international comity, it will use its discretion whether to exercise jurisdiction or not; and where the voyage is ended, or the seamen have been dismissed or treated with great cruelty, it will entertain jurisdiction even against the protest of the consul. This branch of the subject will be found discussed in the following cases: The Catherina, 1 Pet. Adm. 104; The Forsoket, 1 Pet. Adm. 197; The St. Oloff, 2 Pet. Adm. 428; The Golubchick, 1 w. Rob. 143; The Nina, L, R. 2 Adm. and Eccl. 44; S. C. on appeal, L. R. 2 Priv. Co. 38; The Leon XIII., 8 Prob. Div. 121; The Havana, 1 Sprague, 402; The Becherdass Ambaidass, 1 Lowell, 569; The Pawashick, 2 Lowell, 142.

Of course, if any treaty stipulations exist between the United States and the country to which a foreign ship belongs, with regard to the right of the consul of that country to adjudge controversies arising between the master and crew, or other matters occurring on the ship exclusively subject to the foreign law, such stipulations should be fairly and faithfully observed. The Elwin Kreplin, 9 Blatchford, 438, reversing S. C. 4 Ben. 413; see S. C. on application for mandamus, Ex parte Newman, 14 Wall. 152. Many public engagements of this kind have been entered into between our government and foreign States. See Treaties and Conventions, Rev. Ed. 1873, Index, 1238.

In the absence of such treaty stipulations, however, the case of foreign seamen is undoubtedly a special one, when they sue for wages under a contract which is generally strict in its character, and framed according to the laws of the country to which the ship belongs; framed also with a view to secure, in accordance with those laws, the rights and interests of the ship-owners as well as those of master and crew, as well when the ship is abroad as when she is at home. Nor is this special character of the case entirety absent when foreign seamen sue the master, of their ship for ill-treatment. On general principles of comity, Admiralty Courts of other countries will not interfere between the parties in such cases unless there is special reason for doing so, and will require the foreign consul to be notified, and, though not absolutely bound by, will always pay due respect to, his wishes as to taking jurisdiction.

Not alone, however, in cases of complaints made by foreign seamen, but in other cases also, where the subjects of a particular nation invoke the aid of our tribunals to adjudicate between them and their fellow subjects, as to matters of contract or tort, solely affecting themselves and determinable by their own laws, such tribunals will exercise their discretion whether to take cognizance of such matters or not. A salvage case of this kind came before the United States District Court of New York in 1848. The master and crew of a British ship found another British ship near the English coast apparently abandoned (though another vessel was in sight), and took off a portion of her cargo, brought it to New York, and libeled it for salvage. The British consul and some owners of the cargo intervened and protested against the jurisdiction, and Judge Betts discharged the case, delivered the property to the owners upon security given, and left the salvors to pursue their remedy in the English courts. One hundred and ninety-four Shawls, 1 Abbot, Adm. 317.

In the case of The Carolina, a British vessel (14 Fed. Rep. 424), where an action was brought by a foreign seaman in the United States Court for the District of Louisiana to recover damages for assault and battery alleged to have been committed on the high seas, the Court said (pp. 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 633], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634]): It is undoubtedly true, as a general proposition, that an action for a personal tort follows the person, and may be brought in any foreign court. It is also true that the courts of a nation are established and maintained for the convenience of its own citizens or subjects, and if foreigners are permitted to become actors therein, it is because of what is termed comity between nations. American Law Review, vol. 7, p. 417, and Daniel Webster’s Works (Everett’s Edition), vol. 6, pp. 117, 118. The only ground upon which a foreigner could urge a claim to become a libelant in our courts would be that it was by comity due his government that its subjects should be thus heard, and, so far as this claim could be considered as a right, it could be insisted on only by that government, and, except in cases of inhumanity or gross injustice, would disappear whenever the claimant’s government took a position against it.

There is in this case no circumstance such as the unwarranted termination of the voyage, the discharge of a seaman, or brutality, which might possibly constitute a proper ground for the interposition if the jurisdiction of a foreign court without the request of the representative of libelant’s government. It is a suit brought by a foreigner springing out of a voyage on the ship of a friendly nation, in the midst of that voyage, against the subjects of that nation, on account of alleged grievances. The libelant not only proposes to disconnect himself from the ship, but asks the detention of ship, officers, and crew in a foreign port, in order to settle a dispute which can far better be settled by the tribunals of the country in which, under whose laws, and in connection with whose commerce, he made his contract, and to which he agreed to return. The representative of that country asks this court not to interfere. It is urged, and that fairly, that by the very agreement of the parties—the articles of shipping—the courts of the kingdom of Great Britain have been made the forum for the settlement of this dispute; that they afford adequate redress; and that for courts to entertain this and similar suits during a voyage which the parties had agreed to make at intermediate points at which the vessel might touch, would impose delays which might seriously and uselessly embarrass the commerce of a friendly power. The exercise of jurisdiction in such a case is discretionary, and, until the Congress of the United States controls the subject by legislation, is discretionary with its courts, and should be controlled by precedent if that exist. In this case I am satisfied, by reason and abundant authority, that the court should decline to entertain jurisdiction.

In Patterson v. Bark Eudora (190 U. S., 169), the Supreme Court held that a British vessel and its master were within the provisions of the act of December 31, 1898, prohibiting the payment to seaman of advanced wages. The court, after referring to its previous decision in relation to the question of jurisdiction over foreign vessels, said (p. 178): It follows from these decisions that it is within the power of Congress to prescribe the penal provisions of section 10, and no one within the jurisdiction of the United States can escape liability for a violation of those provisions on the plea that he is a foreign citizen or an officer of a foreign merchant vessel. It also follows that it is a duty of the courts of the United States to give full force and effect to such provisions. It is hot pretended that this government can control the action of foreign tribunals. In any case presented to them they will be guided by their own views of the law and its scope and effect, but the courts of the United States are bound to accept this legislation and enforce it whenever its provisions are violated. The implied consent of this government to leave jurisdiction over, the internal affairs of foreign merchant vessels in our harbors to the nations to which those vessels belong may be withdrawn. Indeed, the implied consent to permit them to enter our harbors may be withdrawn, and if this implied consent may be wholly withdrawal it may be extended upon such terms and conditions as the government sees fit to impose. And this legislation, as plainly as words can make it, imposes these conditions upon the shipment of sailors in our harbors, and declares that they are applicable to foreign as well as to domestic vessels.

In United States v. Diekelman (92 U. S., 520.) the Supreme Court held that a foreign ship visiting the port of New Orleans during the Civil War was subject to the rules promulgated by the President governing the entry and clearance of foreign vessels and the goods they might carry.

The general principles enunciated in the cases to which attention has been called are concisely summarized in the following quotation from the opinion of the court in the case of The Ester, in which suit was brought against a Swedish steamship by a seaman to recover unpaid wages and damages for personal injury (190 Fed. Rep., 218, 220–221): (1) The merchant vessels of one country visiting the ports of another for the purposes of trade subject themselves to the laws which govern the port they visit, so long as they remain. United States v. Diekelman, 92 U. S. 520, 23 L. Ed. 742; Wildenhus’ Case, 120 U. S. 11, 7 Sup. Ct. 385, 30 L. Ed. 565.

(2) In the absence of treaty stipulations, the courts of admiralty have civil jurisdiction in all matters appertaining to the foreign ship while in port, and also in certain cases when the court has the vessel in its territorial jurisdiction, although the cause of action arose on the high seas. The Belgenland, 114, U. S. 855, 5 Sup. Ct. 860, 29 L. Ed. 152; Wildenhus’ Case, 120 U. S. 1, 7 Sup. Ct. 385, 30 L. Ed. 565.

(3) The exercise of this civil jurisdiction, where those who are concerned are all citizens of the same foreign state and the cause of action occurred on or with regard to the ship, is not imperative, but discretionary, and the courts from motives of convenience or international comity will not take jurisdiction without the assent of the consul of the country to which the ship belongs, where the controversy involves matters arising beyond the territorial jurisdiction of this country, or relates to differences between the master and the crew, or the crew and the ship-owners. In such cases on such general principles of comity, the admiralty courts of this country will not interfere between the parties, unless there is special reason for doing so, and will require the foreign consul to be notified, and although not absolutely bound by, will always pay respect to, his wishes as to taking jurisdiction. Ex parte Newman, 14 Wall. 152, 20 L. Ed, 877; The Belgenland, 114 U. S. 355, 5 Sup. Ct. 860, 29 L. Ed. 152; Patterson v. Eudora, 190 U. S. 169, 23 Sup. Ct. 821, 47 L. Ed. 1002.

(4) Where, however, special circumstances exist, such as where the voyage is ended, or the seamen have been dismissed or treated with great cruelty, the courts, in the absence of treaty stipulations, will entertain jurisdiction, even against the protest of the consul. The Belgenland, 114 U. S. 355, 5 Sup. Ct. 860, 29 L. Ed. 152.

(5) Where treaty stipulations exist, however, with regard to the right of the consul of a foreign country to adjudge controversies arising between the master and the crew, or other matters occurring on the ship exclusively subject to the foreign law, such stipulations are the law of the land, and must be fairly and faithfully observed. The Belgenland. 114 U. S. 355, 5 Sup. Ct. 860, 29 L. Ed. 152; Wildenhus’ Case, 120 U. S. 17, 7 Sup. Ct. 385, 30 L. Ed. 565.

(6) Congress has power by legislation to regulate matters affecting foreign seamen and foreign vessels and foreigners, generally when within the ports of this country by making their entrance subject to such conditions as Congress may seek to impose or withdrawing its consent to permit them to enter wholly, if it see fit. Patterson v. Eudora, 190 U. S. 169, 23 Sup. Ct. 821, 47 L. Ed. 1002.

With reference to the question of the jurisdiction over American merchant vessels in foreign territorial waters, it may be stated that the Government of the United States in the past has asserted in behalf of its vessels the rights which, as indicated by the judicial decisions to which attention has been called, are accorded to foreign vessels in waters of the United States. This Government, while conceding on the one hand that, when one of its vessels visits the port of another country for the purposes of trade, it is amenable to the jurisdiction of that country and is subject to the laws which govern the port it visits so long as it remains unless it is otherwise provided by treaty, has, on the other hand, on a number of occasions, made clear its views to the effect that, by comity, matters of discipline and all things done on board which affect only the vessel or those belonging to her and do not involve the peace or dignity of the country or the tranquillity of the port should be left by the local government to be dealt with by the authorities of the nation to which the vessel belongs, as the laws of that nation or the interests of its commerce may require. Numerous excerpts from diplomatic correspondence indicating the position of this Government on this subject may be found in Moore’s Digest of International Law, Vol. II, pp. 272–362.

Private vessels belonging to this country are deemed parts of its territory. They are accordingly regarded as subject to the jurisdiction of this country, on the high seas, and in foreign ports, even though they admittedly are also temporarily subject generally to the laws of such ports.

In United States v. Rodgers (150 U. S. 249), a case in which the Supreme Court sustained the jurisdiction of courts of the United States to try a person for an assault committed on a vessel belonging to a citizen of the United States while such vessel was in the Detroit River and within the limits of the Dominion of Canada, Mr. Justice Field, who delivered the opinion of the court, said (pp. 264–265 [Pgs. 264–265 include portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, Doc. 378, and Doc. 379]): It is true,* * * that, as a general principle, the criminal laws of a nation do not operate beyond its territorial limits, and that to give any government, or its judicial tribunals, the right to punish any act or transaction as a crime, it must have occurred within those limits. We accept this doctrine as a general rule, but there are exceptions to it as fully recognized as the doctrine itself. One of those exceptions is that offenses committed upon vessels belonging to citizens of the United States, within their admiralty jurisdiction (that is, within navigable waters), though out of the territorial limits of the United States, may be judicially considered when the vessel and parties are brought within their territorial jurisdiction. As we have before stated, a vessel is deemed part of the territory of the country to which she belongs Upon that subject we quote the language of Mr. Webster, while Secretary of State, in his letter to Lord Ashburton of August, 1842. Speaking for the Government of the United States, he stated with great clearness and force the doctrine which is now recognized by all countries. He said: “It is natural to consider the vessels of a nation as parts of its territory, though at sea, as the State retains its jurisdiction over them; and, according to the commonly received custom, this jurisdiction is preserved over the vessels even in parts of the sea subject to a foreign dominion. This is the doctrine of the law of nations, clearly laid down by writers of received authority, and entirely conformable, as it is supposed, with the practice of modern nations. If a murder be committed on board of an American vessel by one of the crew upon another or upon a passenger, or by a passenger on one of the crew or another passenger, while such vessel is lying in a port within the jurisdiction of a foreign State or sovereignty, the offense is cognizable and punishable by the proper court of the United States in the same manner as if such offense had been committed on board the vessel on the high seas. The law of England is supposed to be the same. It is true that the jurisdiction of a nation over a vessel belonging to it, while lying in the port of another, is not necessarily wholly exclusive. We do not so consider or so assert it. For any unlawful acts done by her while thus lying in port, and for all contracts entered into while there, by her master or owners, she and they must, doubtless, be answerable to the laws of the place. Nor, if her master or crew, while on board in such port, break the peace of the community by the commission of crimes, can exemption be claimed for them. But, nevertheless, the law of nations, as I have stated it, and the statutes of governments founded on that law, as I have referred to them, show that enlightened nations, in modern times, do clearly hold that the jurisdiction and laws of a nation accompany her ships not only over the high seas, but into ports and harbors, or wheresoever else they may be water-borne, for the general purpose of governing and regulating the rights, duties, and obligations of those on board thereof, and that, to the extent of the exercise of this jurisdiction, they are considered as parts of the territory of the nation herself.” 6 Webster’s Works, 306, 307.

The defendant in this case was indicted under Section 5346 of the Revised Statutes of the United States, which is as follows: Every person who, upon the high seas, or in any arm of the sea, or in any river, haven, creek, basin, or bay, within the admiralty jurisdiction of the United States, and out of the jurisdiction of any particular State, on board any vessel belonging in whole or part to the United States, or any citizen thereof, with a dangerous weapon, or with intent to perpetrate any felony, commits an assault on another shall be punished by a fine of not more than three thousand dollars and by imprisonment at hard labor not more than three years.

The place of trial in the case was determined by Section 730 of the Revised Statutes, which reads as follows: The trial of all offenses committed upon the high seas or elsewhere, out of the jurisdiction of any particular State or district shall be in the district where the offender is found or into which he is first brought.

A number of treaties concluded by this Government contain provisions vesting in consular officers jurisdiction over questions of wages, shipment and discharge of seamen, and over all transactions occurring on board of vessels lying in foreign ports, whether in the nature of contracts, torts or crimes, so far as they concern only the vessels and their cargoes and the persons on board and do not concern the public peace of the country or the rights of persons not belonging on board. The following articles of the consular convention concluded July 11, 1870, between Austria-Hungary and the United States contain comprehensive provisions of this character: Article XI. Consuls, Vice Consuls or Consular Agents, shall have exclusive charge of the internal order of the merchant vessels of their nation. They shall have therefore the exclusive power to take cognizance of and to settle all differences which may arise at sea or in port between captains, officers and crews in reference to wages and the execution of mutual contracts, subject in each case to the laws of their own nation. The local authorities shall in no way interfere, except in cases where the differences on board ship are of a nature to disturb the peace and public order in port or on shore, or when persons other than the officers and crew of the vessel are parties to the disturbance, except as aforesaid, the local authorities shall confine themselves to the rendering of forcible assistance if required by the Consuls, Vice Consuls or Consular Agents, and shall cause the arrest, temporary imprisonment and removal on board his own vessel of every person whose name is found on the muster-rolls or register of the ship or list of the crew.

Article XII. Consuls General, Consuls. Vice Consuls or Consular Agents, shall have the power to cause the arrest of all sailors or all other persons belonging to the crews of vessels of their nation who may be guilty of having deserted on the respective territories of the high contracting Powers, and to have them sent on board or back to their native country. To that end they shall make a written application to the competent local authority, supporting it by the exhibition of the ship’s register and list of the crew, or else, should the vessel have sailed previously, by producing an authenticated copy of these documents, showing that the persons claimed really do belong to the ship’s crew. Upon such request the surrender of the deserter shall not be refused. Every aid and assistance shall, moreover, be granted to the said consular authorities for the detection and arrest of deserters, and the latter shall be taken to the prisons of the country and there detained at the request and expense of the consular authority until there may be an opportunity for sending them away. The duration of this imprisonment shall not exceed the term of three months, at the expiration of which time, and upon three days’ notice to the consul, the prisoner shall be set free, and he shall not be liable to rearrest for the same cause. Should, however, the deserter have committed on shore an indictable offense, the local authorities shall be free to postpone his extradition until due sentence shall have been passed and executed. The high contracting parties agree that seamen, or other individuals forming part of the ship’s crew, who are citizens of the country in which the desertion took place, shall not be affected by the provisions of this article.

Article XIII. In all cases where no other agreement to the contrary exists between owners, freighters and insurers, all damages suffered at sea by the vessels of the two countries, whether they enter the respective ports voluntarily or by stress of weather, shall be settled by the Consuls General, Consuls, Vice Consuls or Consular Agents of their respective nation, provided no interests of citizens of the country where the said functionaries reside, nor of citizens of a third Power are concerned. In that case, and in the absence of a friendly compromise between all parties interested, the adjudication shall take place under supervision of the local authorities.

Article XIV. In the event of a vessel belonging to the Government, or owned by a citizen of one of the two contracting States, being wrecked or cast on shore upon the coast of the other, the local authorities shall inform the Consuls General, Consuls, Vice Consuls or Consular Agents of the district of the occurrence, or if such Consular Agency does not exist, they shall communicate with the Consuls General, Consuls, Vice Consuls or Consular Agents of the nearest district.

All proceedings relative to the salvage of American vessels wrecked or cast on shore in Austro-Hungarian waters shall be directed by the United States Consuls General, Consuls, Vice Consuls or Consular Agents; also all proceedings relative to the salvage of Austro-Hungarian vessels wrecked or cast on shore in American waters, shall be directed by Austro-Hungarian Consuls General, Consuls, Vice Consuls or Consular Agents.

An interference of the local authorities in the two countries shall take place for the purpose only of assisting the consular authorities in maintaining order and protecting the rights of salvage not belonging to the crew; also for enforcing the regulations relative to the import or export of the merchandise saved.

In the absence and until the arrival of the Consuls General, Consuls, Vice Consuls or Consular Agents, or their duly appointed delegates, the local authorities shall take all the necessary measures for the protection of persons and preservation of the property saved from the wreck.

No charges shall be made for the interference of the local authorities in such cases, except for expenses incurred through salvage and the preservation of property saved, also for those expenses which, under similar circumstances, vessels belonging to the country where the wreck happens would have to incur.

In case of a doubt concerning the nationality of the wrecks, the local authorities shall have exclusively the management and execution of the provisions laid down in the present article.

As of possible interest, attention may be called to the following cases which are interpretative of treaty stipulations of this nature: Dallemagne v. Moisan (197 U. S., 169); The Marie (49 Fed. Rep., 286); The Welhaven (55 Fed. Rep., 80); The Neck (138 Fed. Rep., 144); The Bound Brook (146 Fed. Rep., 160); Ex parte Anderson (184 Fed. Rep., 114); The Ester (190 Fed. Rep., 216); Tellefsen v. Fee (168 Mass., 188).

With a view to the proper execution of such treaty provisions, the following statutes have been enacted by Congress: Whenever it is stipulated by treaty or convention between the United States and any foreign nation that the consul general, consuls, vice consuls, or consular or commercial agents of each nation, shall have exclusive jurisdiction of controversies, difficulties, or disorders arising at sea or in the waters or ports of the other nation, between the master or officers and any of the crew, or between any of the crew themselves, of any vessel belonging to the nation represented by such consular officer, such stipulations shall be executed and enforced within the jurisdiction of the United States as hereinafter declared. But before this section shall take effect as to the vessels of any particular nation having such treaty with the United States, the President shall be satisfied that similar provisions have been made for the execution of such treaty by the other contracting party, and shall issue his proclamation to that effect, declaring this section to be in force, as to such nation.

In all cases within the purview of the preceding section the consul general, consul, or other consular or commercial authority of such foreign nation charged with the appropriate duty in the particular case, may make application to any court of record of the United States, or to any judge thereof, or to any commissioner of a district court, setting forth that such controversy, difficulty, or disorder has arisen, briefly stating the nature thereof, and when and where the same occurred, and exhibiting a certified copy or abstract of the shipping articles, roll, or other proper paper of the vessel, to the effect that the person in question is of the crew or ship’s company of such vessel; and further stating and certifying that such person has withdrawn himself, or is believed to be about to withdraw himself, from the control and discipline of the master and officers of the vessel, or that he has refused, or is about to refuse, to submit to and obey the lawful jurisdiction of such consular or commercial authority in the premises; and further stating and certifying that, to the best of the knowledge and belief of the officer certifying, such person is not a citizen of the United States. Such application shall be in writing and duly authenticated by the consular or other sufficient official seal. Thereupon such court, judge, or commissioner shall issue his warrant for the arrest of the person so complained of, directed to the marshal of the United States for the appropriate district, or in his discretion to any person, being a citizen of the United States, whom he may specially depute for the purpose, requiring such person to be brought before him for examination at a certain time and place.

If on such examination, it is made to appear that the person so arrested is a citizen of the United States, he shall be forthwith discharged from arrest, and shall be left to the ordinary course of law. But if this is not made to appear, and such court, judge, or commissioner finds, upon the papers hereinbefore referred to, a sufficient prima: facie case that the matter concerns only the internal order and discipline of such foreign vessels, or, whether in its nature civil or criminal, does not affect directly the execution of the laws of the United States, or the rights and duties of any citizen of the United States, he shall forthwith, by his warrant, commit such person to prison, where prisoners under sentence of a court of the United States may be lawfully committed, or, in his discretion, to the master or chief officer of such foreign vessel, to be subject to the lawful orders, control, and discipline of such master or chief officer, and to the jurisdiction of the consular or commercial authority of the nation to which such vessel belongs, to the exclusion of any authority or jurisdiction in the premises of the United States or any State thereof. No person shall be detained more than two months after his arrest, but at the end of that time shall be set at liberty and shall not again be arrested for the same cause. The expenses of the arrest and the detention of the person so arrested shall be paid by the consular officer making the application.

The district and circuit courts, and the commissioners of the district courts, shall have power to carry into effect, according to the true intent and meaning thereof, the award, or arbitration, or decree of any consul, vice consul, or commercial agent of any foreign nation, made or rendered by Virtue of authority conferred on him as such consul, vice consul, or commercial agent, to sit as judge or arbitrator in such differences as may arise between the captains and crews of the vessels belonging to the nation whose interests are committed to his charge, application for the exercise of such power being first made to such court or commissioner by petition of such consul, vice consul, or commercial agent. And said courts and commissioners may issue all proper remedial process, mesne and final, to carry into full effect such award, arbitration, or decree, and to enforce obedience thereto, by imprisonment in the jail or other place of confinement in the district in which the United States may lawfully imprison any person arrested under the authority of the United States, until such award, arbitration, or decree is complied with, or the parties are otherwise discharged therefrom, by the consent in writing of such consul, vice consul, or commercial agent, or his successor in office, or by the authority of the foreign government appointing such consul, vice consul, or commercial agent; Provided, however, That the expenses of the said imprisonment and maintenance of the prisoners, and the cost of the proceedings, shall be borne by such foreign government, or by its consul, vice consul, or commercial agent requiring such imprisonment. The marshals of the United States shall serve all such process, and do all other acts necessary and proper to carry into effect the premises, under the authority of the said courts and commissioners. (Revised Statutes of the United States, Sees. 728, 4079–4081.)

As of further possible interest in connection with the subject under consideration, the Department begs to enclose herewith a compilation of laws entitled “Navigation Laws of the United States.” This compilation contains statutes of the United States relating to merchant vessels and merchant seamen.

The Department will be glad to furnish your Government with any further desirable information regarding the matters referred to in your note.

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Panama Canal tolls: repeal of the provision of the Panama Canal Act exempting vessels in the coastwise trade of the United States from the payment of tollsPanama Canal tolls: repeal of the provision of the Panama Canal Act exempting vessels in the coastwise trade of the United States from the payment of tolls1

1 Continued from For. Rel. 1913, pp 540–549.

[463] Address of the President delivered at a joint session of the two Houses of Congress on March 5, 1914.

March 5, 1914

63d Congress, 2d Session.

[464] Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, London, March 6, 1914.

File No. 811f.812/446.

Address of the President delivered at a joint session of the two Houses of Congress on March 5, 1914. 63d Congress, 2d Session.

[Document 463]

Address of the President delivered at a joint session of the two Houses of Congress on March 5, 1914.

March 5, 1914

[Referred, March 5, 1914, to the Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce.]

House Doc. No. 813.

Gentlemen of the Congress:

I have come to you upon an errand which can be very briefly performed, but I beg that you will not measure its importance by the number of sentences in which I state it. No communication I have addressed to the Congress carried with it graver or more far-reaching implications as to the interest of the country, and I come now to speak upon a matter with regard to which I am charged in a peculiar degree, by the Constitution itself, with personal responsibility.

I have come to ask you for the repeal of that provision of the Panama Canal Act of August 24, 1912, which exempts vessels engaged in the coastwise trade of the United States from payment of tolls, and to urge upon you the justice, the wisdom, and the large policy of such a repeal with the utmost earnestness of which I am capable.

In my own judgment, very fully considered and maturely formed, that exemption constitutes a mistaken economic policy from every point of view, and is, moreover, in plain contravention of the treaty with Great Britain concerning the canal concluded on November 18, 1901. But I have not come to urge upon you my personal views. I have come to state to you a fact and a situation. Whatever may be our own differences of opinion concerning this much debated measure, its meaning is not debated outside the United States. Everywhere else the language of the treaty is given but one interpretation, and that interpretation precludes the exemption I am asking you to repeal. We consented to the treaty; its language we accepted, if we did not originate it; and we are too big, too powerful, too self-respecting a nation to interpret with a too strained or refined reading the words of our own promises just because we have power enough to give us leave to read them as we please. The large thing to do is the only thing we can afford to do, a voluntary withdrawal from a position everywhere questioned and misunderstood. We ought to reverse our action without raising the question whether we were right or wrong, and so once more deserve our reputation for generosity and for the redemption of every obligation without quibble or hesitation.

I ask this of you in support of the foreign policy of the administration. I shall not know how to deal with other matters of even greater delicacy and nearer consequence if you do not grant it to me in ungrudging measure.

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State. File No. 811f.812/446.

[Document 464]

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
London, March 6, 1914.

168. The President’s address to Congress on Panama Canal tolls is published in full in all the chief newspapers here and the most appreciative and complimentary comment appears in press of all parties and is heard on all sides.

Page.

The Act repealing the exemption.

63d Congress. H. R 14385.

Public Doc. No. 113.

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That the second sentence in section five of the Act entitled “An Act to provide for the opening, maintenance, protection, and operation of the Panama Canal, and the sanitation and government of the Canal Zone,” approved August twenty-fourth, nineteen hundred and twelve, which reads as follows: “No tolls shall be levied upon vessels engaged in the coastwise trade of the United States,” be, and the same is hereby, repealed.

Sec. 2. That the third sentence of the third paragraph of said section of said Act be so amended as to read as follows: “When based upon net registered tonnage for ships of commerce the tolls shall not exceed $1.25 per net registered ton, nor be less than 75 cents per net registered ton, subject, however, to the provisions of article nineteen of the convention between the United States and the Republic of Panama, entered into November eighteenth, nineteen hundred and three”: Provided, That the passage of this Act shall not be construed or held as a waiver or relinquishment of any right the United States may have under the treaty with Great Britain, ratified the twenty-first of February, nineteen hundred and two, or the treaty with the Republic of Panama, ratified February twenty-sixth, nineteen hundred and four, or otherwise, to discriminate in favor of its vessels by exempting the vessels of the United States or its citizens from the payment of tolls for passage through said canal, or as in any way waiving, impairing, or affecting any right of the United States under said treaties, or otherwise, with respect to the sovereignty over or the ownership, control, and management of said canal and the regulation of the conditions or charges of traffic through the same.

Approved, June 15, 1914.

Presentation of a statue of Washington to Great Britain by the State of VirginiaPresentation of a statue of Washington to Great Britain by the State of Virginia

[465] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

Department of State, Washington, April 1, 1914.

File 093.11141/21.

[466] The Secretary of State to the Governor of Virginia.

Department of State, Washington, April 2, 1914.

File No. 093.11141/21.

[467] Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, London, April 29, 1914.

File No. 093.11141/23.

[468] The Secretary of State to the Governor of Virginia.

Department of State, Washington, May 15, 1914.

File No. 093.11141/23.

[469] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

Department of State, Washington, May 15, 1914.

File No. 093.11141/23.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page. File 093.11141/21.

[Document 465]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

No. 196.] Department of State,
Washington, April 1, 1914.

Sir: Referring to your telegram of February 26 last,2 reporting that, in reply to your unofficial inquiries in the matter, the Foreign Office had indicated that the British Government would accept the replica of Houdon’s statue of Washington offered by the State of Virginia, the Department encloses copies of a letter and of its enclosure from the Governor of that State in further relation to the matter.

You will formally communicate to the British Government the offer as set forth in this letter.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
John E. Osborne.

[Inclosure.]

The Governor of Virginia to the Secretary of State.

Governor’s Office,
Richmond, Va.,, March 26, 1914.

My Dear Sir: As you have already been officially informed by the Clerk of the House of Delegates, the General Assembly of Virginia enacted a joint resolution providing that a replica or copy in bronze of the Houdon statue of General George Washington should be presented by the Commonwealth of Virginia to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.

Replying to the tender, which was made by cable through your office while the General Assembly was in session, the Clerk of the House of Delegates was notified by the Honorable J. B. Moore, Counselor of your Department, that he was in receipt of a cablegram from the American Ambassador at London to the effect that the liveliest satisfaction had been expressed by Sir Edward Grey at this disposition on the part of Virginia, and that the Ambassador awaited instructions through the Secretary of State to make the formal offer, which he was sure would be appreciatively accepted at the first meeting of the Cabinet.

By a further concurrent resolution, the General Assembly directed me, as Governor of Virginia, to transmit to you that portion of the resolution agreed to on February 20, 1914, which was cabled to the American Ambassador at London, with the request that the Secretary of State communicate the same to the Government of Great Britain and ascertain its wishes in relation thereto.

I am, therefore, enclosing you herewith the resolution referred to, with the request that you transmit same through the regular channels to the Government of Great Britain and Ireland.

Yours very truly,

H. C. Stuart.

[Subinclosure.]

Joint Resolution of the General Assembly of Virginia.

Whereas, unbroken peace and good will has existed between the United States and Great Britain for more than a century, and the people of Virginia entertain the warmest friendship for the people of their mother country—

Now therefore, as a token of esteem and good will.

Be it resolved by the House of Delegates of Virginia, the Senate concurring, That a replica of the Houdon statue of George Washington be presented to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.

2 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Governor of Virginia. File No. 093.11141/21.

[Document 466]

The Secretary of State to the Governor of Virginia.

Department of State,
Washington, April 2, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 26th ultimo in further relation to the desire of the State of Virginia to present to the British Government a replica of Houdon’s statue of Washington.

In reply I have the honor to say that, with reference to the previous correspondence, it has afforded the Department pleasure to transmit copies of your letter and of its enclosure to the American Ambassador at London, with instructions formally to communicate the offer therein made to the British Government.

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State. File No. 093.11141/23.

[Document 467]

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

No. 303.] American Embassy,
London, April 29, 1914.

Sir: Replying to the Department’s instruction No. 196 of April 1, 1914, with regard to the offer of the Commonwealth of Virginia to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland of a replica of the Houdon statue of Washington, I have the honor to report that, immediately on receipt of the instruction under acknowledgment, I addressed a formal offer of the statue to His Majesty’s Government through the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and am now in receipt of a note dated April 24, 1914, a copy of which is herewith enclosed, from Sir Edward Grey accepting this gift on behalf of his Government and expressing their high appreciation for the gift and the sentiments which prompted its offer.

I have [etc.]

Walter Hines Page.

[Inclosure.]

Sir Edward Grey to Ambassador Page.

Foreign Office,
London, April 24, 1914.

Your Excellency: I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your note of the 14th instant enclosing copy of the Joint Resolution of the General Assembly of the State of Virginia to the effect that a replica of the Houdon statue of George Washington should be presented by the Commonwealth of Virginia to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.

In thanking your excellency for this communication I beg you will be so good as to cause to be conveyed to the General Assembly of Virginia the acceptance by His Majesty’s Government of this statue together with an expression of their high appreciation for the gift which it is proposed to present to them on this occasion of the One Hundredth year of peace between Great Britain and the United States.

His Majesty’s Government also desire to say that they have been much gratified by the words of friendship and esteem contained in the resolution and most sincerely reciprocate the sentiments therein expressed.

I have [etc.]

E. Grey.

The Secretary of State to the Governor of Virginia. File No. 093.11141/23.

[Document 468]

The Secretary of State to the Governor of Virginia.

Department of State,
Washington, May 15, 1914.

Sir: Referring to previous correspondence concerning the desire of the State of Virginia to present to the British Government a replica of Houdon’s statue of Washington, with special reference to your letter of March 26, 1914, I have the honor to enclose a copy of a despatch on the subject from the American Ambassador at London, covering a copy of a note from the Foreign Office making formal acceptance of this gift.

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page. File No. 093.11141/23.

[Document 469]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

Department of State,
Washington, May 15, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your No. 303 of the 29th ultimo, covering a copy of a note from the Foreign Office making formal acceptance on the part of the British Government of the gift of a replica of Houdon’s statue of Washington offered by the State of Virginia.

It has afforded the Department pleasure to communicate copies of your despatch and of its enclosure to the Governor of Virginia with reference to the previous correspondence.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Colonization of the Gold Coast, West Africa, by American NegroesColonization of the Gold Coast, West Africa, by American Negroes

[470] Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, London, February 21, 1914.

File No. 811.7111/51.

[471] [Untitled]

American Embassy, London, February 21, 1914.

File No. 811.7111/57.

[472] Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, London, February 23, 1914.

File No. 811.7111/52.

[473] Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, London, February 23, 1914.

File No. 811.7111/58.

[474] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

Department of State, Washington, March 9, 1914.

File No. 811.7111/58.

[475] The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, March 12, 1914.

File No. 811.7111/52.

[476] [Untitled]

British Embassy, Washington, March 17, 1914.

File No. 811.7111/64.

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State. File No. 811.7111/51.

[Document 470]

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
London, February 21, 1914.

152. Sir E. Grey informs me that a negro named Sam has been spreading propaganda among the population of Boggs, Oklahoma, and selling shares in an “African Trading Company” with a view to inducing negroes to emigrate to the Gold Coast Colony. The British Government has convincing information that Sam’s transactions are not genuine nor the company for which he acts reliable and the Gold Coast Government have denied that they have any authorized immigration agent. The British Ambassador at Washington reports that five hundred negro emigrants purpose to leave the United States for the Gold Coast about the 26th instant on the representations of Sam, and Sir Edward Grey earnestly requests that you will do all in your power to prevent the departure of these emigrants since he is morally certain that the entire scheme is fraudulent and that the intending emigrants are foredoomed to disappointment.

Page.

[Untitled] File No. 811.7111/57.

[Document 471]

[Untitled]

No. 251.] American Embassy,
London, February 21, 1914.

Sir: With reference to my telegram of February 21, I have the honor to transmit herewith enclosed a copy of a note I have just received from the Foreign Office conveying a request from Sir Edward Grey that you do all in your power to prevent the departure from the United States of a body of negroes who it is believed propose to emigrate from the State of Oklahoma to the Gold Coast Colony, leaving the United States on the 26th instant induced thereto by the fraudulent representations of a negro named Sam.

I have [etc.]

Walter Hines Page.

[Inclosure.]

The British Foreign Office to Ambassador Page.

Foreign Office,
London, 21st February, 1914.

Your Excellency: I have the honour to inform your excellency that correspondence has recently passed between His Majesty’s Ambassador at Washington and the United States State Department relative to the activities of a negro named Sam in Oklahoma. This individual, who claims, apparently, to be an African chief and the authorized agent of His Majesty’s Government to transport negroes to the Gold Coast, seems to have been spreading propaganda among the negro population of Boggs, Oklahoma, and selling shares in an “African Trading Company,” with a view to inducing negroes to emigrate to the Gold Coast Colony.

His Majesty’s Government, of whom the United States Government enquired through Sir C. Spring Rice as to the possibilities of negroes from the United States acquiring land in the Gold Coast Colony, are strongly of opinion that the immigration of these negroes into that colony should not be encouraged for the reason that the land is almost entirely held communally by the native chiefs and communities, so that a negro from the United States could only obtain land by adoption into a native community—which as the immigrants would presumably be Christian and civilized would no doubt be unacceptable to them—or by lease, which would involve lengthy formalities and uncertain results. In addition to these objections, His Majesty’s Government consider that the climate and conditions of the Colony are entirely unsuited to natives of the North American continent.

Enquiries have, moreover, been made as to the bona fides of the negro Sam, with the result that it has been ascertained that his transactions are not genuine, nor the Company for which he acts reliable. The Gold Coast Government have denied that they have any authorized immigration agent.

According to a telegram from His Majesty’s Ambassador dated the 16th instant, five hundred negro emigrants propose to leave the United States for the Gold Coast on or about the 26th instant on the strength of the propaganda of this individual and of certain leases which he purports to have acquired in the Colony.

In view of the undesirable character of Sam, of the unsuitability of the Gold Coast climate, and of the fact that the inducements held out are unfounded, His Majesty’s Government most earnestly desire that steps may be taken by the United States Government to prevent the departure of these emigrants. His Majesty’s Government are morally certain that the entire scheme is fraudulent.

I have the honour therefore to request that your excellency will be good enough to advise your Government by telegraph of these facts, of the nature of the scheme put forward by Sam and of the certainty that these intending emigrants are foredoomed to disappointment, and that you will request them to do all in their power to prevent their departure.

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
W. Langley.

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State. File No. 811.7111/52.

[Document 472]

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
London, February 23, 1914.

My February 21. Sir Edward Grey requests me to add the information that the Governor of the Gold Coast Colony telegraphs to the effect that the leases Sam is said to have acquired in the Colony have not been registered here.

Page.

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State. File No. 811.7111/58.

[Document 473]

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

No. 252.] British Embassy,
London, February 23, 1914.

Sir: With reference to my telegrams of February 21 and February 23, and to my despatch No. 251 of the 21st instant, I have the honor to transmit herewith enclosed a copy of a note I have just received from the Foreign Office to the effect that enquiries have been made of the Governor of the Gold Coast Colony as to the authenticity of the leases which the negro Sam purports to have acquired in the Colony, which have resulted in the Governor’s answer by telegraph that the leases in question have not been registered in the Gold Coast.

I have [etc.]

Walter Hines Page.

[Inclosure]

The British Foreign Office to Ambassador Page.

Foreign Office,
London, 23rd February, 1914.

Your Excellency: With reference to my note of the 21st instant relative to the proceedings of a negro of Oklahoma named Sam in connexion with propaganda of immigration to the Gold Coast Colony, I have the honour to inform your excellency that enquiries have been made of the Governor of that Colony as to authenticity of the leases which, as I stated to your excellency, this individual purports to have acquired in the Colony.

The Governor has now replied by telegraph that the leases in question have not been registered in the Gold Coast.

I should be glad if your excellency would be good enough to inform your Government by telegraph of this fact.

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
W. Langley.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page. File No. 811.7111/58.

[Document 474]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

No. 186.] Department of State,
Washington, March 9, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your despatches Nos. 251 and 252, of February 21 and 23, respectively, in which you enclose copies of notes received by you from the British Minister for Foreign Affairs asking that steps be taken to prevent the departure for the Gold Coast Colony of the followers of one “Chief Sam,” who claims to be an African chief.

The Department has transmitted copies of your despatches to the Governor of Oklahoma, the Attorney General and the Postmaster General and has been informed by the Attorney General that his Department is unable to take any action against “Chief Sam.” The Post Office Department, however, is making an investigation of the matter to determine whether “Chief Sam “has made fraudulent use of the United States mails.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
John E. Osborne.

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 811.7111/52.

[Document 475]

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

No. 75.] British Embassy,
Washington, March 12, 1914.

Sir: I have had occasion during the last few weeks to address several unofficial communications to the Department of State on the subject of a scheme initiated by a negro in this country styling himself “Chief Sam” for shipping large numbers of negroes to the Gold Coast Colony in West Africa, where they were promised by the initiator of the movement facilities for settling and taking up land.

I have explained that there is no prospect whatever that Chief Sam would be able to fulfill his promises as regards the acquisition of land in the Colony; that the climatic conditions are highly unsuitable for American negroes; and that enquiry here has thrown grave doubt on Sam’s bona fides; and that therefore His Majesty’s Government desire to do all in their power to discourage the movement.

I have now received a telegram for Sir Edward Grey instructing me to inform the United States Government that it is intended to pass an ordinance compelling every individual immigrant into the Gold Coast, not being a native of West Africa, to deposit security for his repatriation if required to do so by the local authorities. The amount of the security will be £25 per head and the period during which it will become forfeit, if the immigrant becomes destitute, twelve months. The captain or owner of the ship will be obliged to carry back the immigrants who can not give such security.

I have the honour to request that you will be good enough to bring this information to the knowledge of the competent authorities.

I have [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice.

[Untitled] File No. 811.7111/64.

[Document 476]

[Untitled]

No. 81.] British Embassy,
Washington, March 17, 1914.

Sir: With reference to my Note No. 75 of the 12th instant relative to “Chief Sam’s” plan for promoting negro emigration to the Gold Coast Colony I have the honour to inform you, under instructions from Sir Edward Grey, that the ordinance in question is being passed.

In this connection I may add that the British Vice Consul at Portland, Maine, has been instructed not to issue British papers to the steamer Curityba which I understand has been purchased by “Chief Sam” and is the property of the Akim Trading Company, of South Dakota.

I have [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice.

Protection by the United States of British interests—in the Dominican Republic and in Mexico.Protection by the United States of British interests—in the Dominican Republic and in Mexico.

(See Dominican Republic: Protection of British Interests; and Mexico: Protection of British subjects, etc.)

Assistance to American refugees in Mexico by British diplomatic and consular officers.Assistance to American refugees in Mexico by British diplomatic and consular officers.

(See Mexico: Protection of American citizens, etc.)

Agreement between the United States and Great Britain in relation to oil interests in Mexico.Agreement between the United States and Great Britain in relation to oil interests in Mexico.

(See Mexico: Protection of American oil interests, etc.)

Greece:Greece:

Contents

Inviolability of correspondence of consular officers; interpretation of the Consular Convention between the United States and Greece (Documents 477-484)

Inviolability of correspondence of consular officers; interpretation of the Consular Convention between the United States and GreeceInviolability of correspondence of consular officers; interpretation of the Consular Convention between the United States and Greece

[477] The Chargé d’Affaires of Greece to the Secretary of State.

Royal Legation of Greece, Washington, December 17, 1913.

File No. 702.6811/40.

[478] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires of Greece.

Department of State, Washington, January 3, 1914.

File No. 702.6811/40.

[479] The Chargé d’Affaires of Greece to the Secretary of State.

Royal Legation of Greece, Washington, March 7, 1914.

File No. 702.6811/43.

[480] The Secretary of State to the Governor of California.

Department of State, Washington, March 16, 1914.

File No. 711.6821/3.

[481] The Secretary of State to the Attorney General.

Department of State, Washington, March 28, 1914.

File No. 702.6811/40.

[482] The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires of Greece.

Department of State, Washington, March 28, 1914.

File No. 702.6811/40.

[483] The Attorney General to the Secretary of State.

Department of Justice, Washington, April 1, 1914.

File No. 702.6811/44.

[484] The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires of Greece.

Department of State, Washington, April 7, 1914.

File No. 702.6811/40.

The Chargé d’Affaires of Greece to the Secretary of State. File No. 702.6811/40.

[Document 477]

The Chargé d’Affaires of Greece to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

No. 6257.] Royal Legation of Greece,
Washington, December 17, 1913.

Mr. Secretary of State: In an action brought by the Orthodox Hellenic Community of Philadelphia against Mr. Aristotéle Tsakonas, His Majesty’s Consul at Philadelphia, intended to compel the said Consul to communicate to the pastor of the Community the latter’s appointment by the Holy Synod of Greece, mailed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Consulate, the judge of the District Court of the United States for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, Mr. Thompson, issued a decree placing Mr. Tsakonas under the injunction to hold the said papers in safekeeping until the further order of the court.

As that decree—a copy of which is enclosed, together with copies of the legal papers connected therewith1 —constitutes an interference of the local judiciary with the performance of the official duties of an Hellenic consular officer and as the judicial authority assumes the right of controlling the action of the consular authority, thus subordinating it to its supervision contrary to the accepted usage of all countries, I have the honor, in pursuance of my Government’s instructions, to draw your excellency’s attention to the matter and to beg that you will kindly use such means as may be appropriate to secure through the proper judicial authority the repeal or rescission of the decree herein above discussed.

In an interview with the Counselor of the Department before Judge Thompson issued his decree, I had the honor to call the Department of State’s attention to the possible action of the judicial authority which was likely to infringe the Consular Convention in force between Greece and the United States, and in particular the provisions relative to the inviolability of consular archives and of the papers filed therein.

Be pleased to accept [etc.]

A. Vouros.

1 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires of Greece. File No. 702.6811/40.

[Document 478]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires of Greece.

No. 182.] Department of State,
Washington, January 3, 1914.

Sir: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your note of December 17th relative to the action brought by the Orthodox Hellenic Community of Philadelphia against Mr. Aristotele Tsakonas.

It appears primarily to be the duty of the Consul to present to the court the means of defense which may be available to him under the Consular Convention between Greece and the United States; for until this is done it cannot be assumed by the Department that the court will disregard the applicable provisions of this Convention.

In any event it is not competent for this Department, which, under our system of government, is a part of the executive branch of the United States Government, to attempt to control or influence the deliberations of a Federal Court, which is a part of the judicial branch of the Government.

Accept [etc.]

J. B. Moore.

The Chargé d’Affaires of Greece to the Secretary of State. File No. 702.6811/43.

[Document 479]

The Chargé d’Affaires of Greece to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

No. 6620.] Royal Legation of Greece,
Washington, March 7, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: I have had the honor to receive your note No. 182 of January 3, on the subject of the suit brought against Mr. Aristotele Tsakonas, His Majesty’s Consul at Philadelphia, by the Orthodox Hellenic Community of that city.

Pursuant to the instructions I have just received from my Government—to which I had forwarded the contents of your above-mentioned note and which adheres to its opinion that the aforesaid suit, being an action bearing on the discharge of the Consul’s official duties, is tantamount to an intervention of the local authorities in the Consul’s relations with his Government contrary to the provisions of the existing Consular Convention between Greece and the United States and, in particular, Article VI which expressly stipulates that “the local authorities shall in no case examine the papers deposited in the consular offices that are inviolable “—I venture to apply to your excellency with a request that you kindly take such steps as you may deem appropriate to induce the local judicial authorities to desist from any further proceedings in the said suit brought against His Hellenic Majesty’s Consul at Philadelphia.

My Government would be glad to hear whether the Government of the United States shares its views on the subject or deems that the aforesaid Consul was regularly summoned in his official capacity before the local courts in a case that relates to the discharge of his duties as representative of his nation, in order that it may accordingly shape its attitude towards Consuls of the United States in Greece.

Be pleased to accept [etc.]

A. Vouros.

The Secretary of State to the Governor of California. File No. 711.6821/3.

[Document 480]

The Secretary of State to the Governor of California. 2

Department of State,
Washington, March 16, 1914.

Sir: The Greek Chargé d’Affaires advises this Department that Mr. B. de Fontana, Consul of Greece residing at San Francisco, whose jurisdiction extends over your State, informs him that the competent local authorities fail to pay proper attention to his communications in relation to the settlement of estates of Greek subjects in California, in conformity with Article XI of the Consular Convention of November 19, 1902, between the United States and Greece, and that the Consul also has had difficulty in securing the execution of certain letters rogatory addressed to the Examining Magistrate of Lincoln, California.

I have the honor to ask that you will kindly bring to the attention of the proper State, County and Municipal officers the stipulations of Article XI of said treaty and urgently request their compliance therewith, and that you will take such action with regard to the execution of said letters rogatory as may appear to be proper in the premises.

I enclose a copy of a despatch1 from the Consul of Greece at San Francisco, dated November 21, 1913, to the Greek Legation, which was left at the Department by the Greek Charge; also copies of the treaty referred to and of the Department’s circular of March 25, 1887, regarding the execution in this country of letters rogatory.1

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
John E. Osborne.

2 This paper, although not directly pertaining to the rest of this correspondence, is inserted because of its general relation to the subject. No response from the California authorities appears on file.

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Attorney General. File No. 702.6811/40.

[Document 481]

The Secretary of State to the Attorney General.

Department of State,
Washington, March 28, 1914.

Sir: Under date of December 17, 1913, the Greek Chargé d’Affaires advised the Department that the Greek Orthodox Community of Philadelphia had brought an action in the District Court of the United States for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania against Mr. Aristote Tsakonas, the Greek Consul at Philadelphia, seeking to compel said Consul to communicate to a certain person the latter’s appointment by the Holy Synod of Greece as Pastor of the Community, which appointment had been mailed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Consulate, and that said Court had issued a decree placing the Consul under an injunction to hold the papers relating to the matter in safe keeping until the further order of the Court. In reply, the Department advised the Greek Chargé that it appeared primarily to be the duty of the Consul to present to the Court the means of defense available to him under the Consular Convention between Greece and the United States.

Under date of March 7, 1914, the Greek Chargé responded to the effect that his Government adheres to its opinion that the aforesaid suit, being an action bearing on the discharge of the Consul’s official duties, is tantamount to an intervention of the local authorities in the Consul’s relations with his Government, contrary to the provisions of the existing Consular Convention between Greece and the United States, and in particular Article VI thereof, which expressly stipulates that “The Consular offices shall at all times be inviolable. The local authorities shall not, under any pretext, invade them. In no case shall they examine or seize the papers there deposited* * *.” The Chargé asks that such steps may be taken as may be deemed appropriate to induce the local official authorities to desist from any further proceedings in the said suit.

The Department therefore requests that if possible you will instruct the United States Attorney at Philadelphia to represent to the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania that this Department is of the opinion that the Court’s action in entertaining this suit against the Consul may be found to be in violation of the provision of Article VI of the Consular Convention of November 19, 1902, between the United States and Greece, as well as at variance with the principles of international law relative to the immunity of consular archives (Moore’s International Law Digest, Vol. V, p. 48 et seq.), and to suggest to the court the apparent advisability of dissolving the injunction granted and of discontinuing the litigation in question.

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
John E. Osborne.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires of Greece. File No. 702.6811/40.

[Document 482]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires of Greece.

No. 198.] Department of State,
Washington, March 28, 1914.

Sir: The Department acknowledges the receipt of your note of March 7, 1914, relative to the suit brought against Mr. Aristotele Tsakonas, the Greek Consul at Philadelphia, by the Orthodox Hellenic Community of that city.

As suggested to you in the Department’s note of January 3, 1914, upon the subject it appears to have been primarily the duty of the Consul to present to the Court the means of defense which may be available to him under the Consular Convention between Greece and the United States, and it is not improbable that if the Consul had availed himself of this defense the Court thereupon would have terminated the proceedings. However, with a view to informing the Court of the Department’s views in the matter, the Department has addressed the Attorney General requesting him if possible to instruct the United States Attorney at Philadelphia to represent to the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania the opinion of this Department that the Court’s action in entertaining the suit in question against the Consul may be found to be in violation of certain provisions of the Consular Convention between the United States and Greece and at variance with the principles of international law relative to the immunity of Consular archives, and to suggest to the Court the apparent advisability of dissolving the injunction which is granted and of discontinuing the litigation.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
John E. Osborne.

The Attorney General to the Secretary of State. File No. 702.6811/44.

[Document 483]

The Attorney General to the Secretary of State.

Department of Justice,
Washington, April 1, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to say that, as requested in your letter of the 28th ultimo, the Department has instructed the United States Attorney at Philadelphia to call the attention of the judge of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania to the provisions of Article VI of the Convention of July 11, 1903,3 with Greece (33 Stats. 2126), guaranteeing the inviolability of consular offices, and to suggest the apparent advisability of the dissolution of the order enjoining the Greek Consul at Philadelphia to hold certain papers transmitted to him by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, pending the further direction of the Court.

For the Attorney General:
E. Marvin Underwood.

3 Date of proclamation of the Consular Convention of Nov. 19, 1902.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires of Greece. File No. 702.6811/40.

[Document 484]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires of Greece.

No. 202.] Department of State,
Washington, April 7, 1914.

Sir: In further reply to your note of December 17, 1913, advising the Department [etc.] the Department herewith transmits to you for your information a copy of a letter from the Attorney General to the Department, dated April 1, 1914, in reply to the Department’s letter of March 28, 1914, calling attention to this case.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Guatemala:Guatemala:

Contents

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, concluded between the United States and GuatemalaTreaty for the advancement of general peace, concluded between the United States and Guatemala

Signed at Washington, September 20, 1913; ratification advised by the Senate with amendments, August 13, 1914; ratified by the President, August 27, 1914; ratified by Guatemala, May 15, 1914; ratifications exchanged at Washington, October 13, 1914; proclaimed, October 13, 1914.

[485] By the President of the United States of America.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this thirteenth day of October in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.

Treaty Series No. 598.]

By the President of the United States of America. Treaty Series No. 598.]

[Document 485]

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas, a Treaty between the United States of America and the Republic of Guatemala looking to the advancement of the cause of general peace was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Washington, on the twentieth day of September, one thousand nine hundred and thirteen, the original of which Treaty, being in the English and Spanish languages is, as amended by the Senate of the United States, word for word as follows:

The United States of America and the Republic of Guatemala, being desirous, to strengthen the bonds of amity that bind them together and also to advance the cause of general peace, have resolved to enter into a treaty for that purpose and to that end have appointed as their plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States, the Honorable William Jennings Bryan, Secretary of State; and

The President of Guatemala, Señor Don Joaquin Mendez, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Guatemala to the United States;

Who, after having communicated to each other their respective full powers, found to be in proper form, have agreed upon the following articles:

Article I.

The high contracting parties agree that all disputes between them, of every nature whatsoever, which diplomacy shall fail to adjust, shall be submitted for investigation and report to an International Commission, to be constituted in the manner prescribed in the next succeeding Article; and they agree not to declare war or begin hostilities during such investigation and report.

Article II.

The International Commission shall be composed of five members, to be appointed as follows: One member shall be chosen from each country, by the Government thereof; one member shall be chosen by each Government from some third country; the fifth member shall be chosen by common agreement between the two Governments. The expenses of the Commission shall be paid by the two Governments in equal proportion.

The International Commission shall be appointed within four months after the exchange of the ratifications of this treaty; and vacancies shall be filled according to the manner of the original appointment.

Article III.

In case the high contracting parties shall have failed to adjust a dispute by diplomatic methods, they shall at once refer it to the International Commission for investigation and report. The International Commission may, however, act upon its own initiative, and in such case it shall notify both Governments and request their cooperation in the investigation.

The report of the International Commission shall be completed within one year after the date on which it shall declare its investigation to have begun, unless the high contracting parties shall extend the time by mutual agreement. The report shall be prepared in triplicate; one copy shall be presented to each Government, and the third retained by the Commission for its files.

The high contracting parties reserve the right to act independently on the subject-matter of the dispute after the report of the Commission shall have been submitted.

Article IV.

The present treaty shall be ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof; and by the President of the Republic of Guatemala, with the approval of the Congress thereof; and the ratifications shall be exchanged as soon as possible. It shall take effect immediately after the exchange of ratifications, and shall continue in force for a period of five years; and it shall thereafter remain in force until twelve months after one of the high contracting parties have given notice to the other of an intention to terminate it.

In witness whereof the respective plenipotentiaries have signed the present treaty and have affixed thereunto their seals.

Done in Washington on the 20th day of September, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and thirteen.

[seal.] William Jennings Bryan

[seal.] Joaquín Méndez

And whereas, the said Treaty, as amended by the Senate of the United States, has been duly ratified on both parts, and the ratifications of the two Governments were exchanged in the City of Washington, on the thirteenth day of October, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Treaty to be made public, to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof, as amended, may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this thirteenth day of October in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.
Woodrow Wilson.

By the President:
Robert Lansing,
Acting Secretary of State.

Message of the President, Manuel Estrada Cabrera, to the CongressMessage of the President, Manuel Estrada Cabrera, to the Congress

[486] Minister Leavell to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Guatemala, March 11, 1914.

File No. 814.032/4.

Minister Leavell to the Secretary of State. File No. 814.032/4.

[Document 486]

Minister Leavell to the Secretary of State.

No. 27.] American Legation,
Guatemala, March 11, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to forward to the Department a copy of the Message that the President of Guatemala sent to the National Legislature when it convened on March 1, together with an English translation of that part of it which relates especially to the United States.

I have [etc.]

Wm. Hayne Leavell.

[Inclosure—Translation—Extract.]

[Untitled]

Our relations with the United States of America have been maintained on the same footing of cordiality and mutual respect, a fitting foundation upon which these relations have always rested. His Excellency Woodrow Wilson having been elected by the will of his fellow citizens to the Presidency of the Great Republic, this eminent statesman, leader of the Democratic Party, entered upon the duties of ruling his people; and my Government, desirous of manifesting the affection which it feels for that friendly nation, was represented in the inauguration ceremonies of the new Government, to which it is united with the closest links. His Excellency President Wilson, on several solemn occasions, has expressed the ideals of his Government to the end of increasing the political and friendly relations between the United States and the Central American States, which are on the threshold of a new life of development and prosperity due to the early opening of the Panama Canal. The policy of peace of the American Government is demonstrated by valuable proofs, among others by the treaty of peace to which all the nations of the world have been invited to adhere and which was signed by Guatemala in proper time. It is agreed upon by the convention to submit to an international commission, for its investigation and report, all the disputes which might arise between both Republics.

In the month of March of last year various parts of the United States suffered by great floods, and owing to this fact the People and Government of Guatemala sent their sympathy to the American Government.

The invitation of the American Government for Guatemala to take part in the Panama-Pacific International Exposition of San Francisco, California, was accepted, and our Diplomatic Representative in the United States was instructed to receive the deed to the site where our pavilion is to be built, and where our products and manufactures are to be exhibited. Certain ceremonies took place on this occasion, which made evident the friendly relations which happily exist between both nations.

Haiti:Haiti:

Contents

Political and financial affairs:—revolution, with Dominican aid; measures taken by the United States to restore order; resignation of President Oreste; election of President Zamor; recognition of his Government by the United States; resignation of President Zamor; election of President Theodore; proposal by the United States of a customs convention and other conditions precedent to recognition of his Government. Protest of Haiti against shipment abroad on the U. S. S. Machias of Government funds on deposit in the Banque NationalePolitical and financial affairs:1 —revolution, with Dominican aid; measures taken by the United States to restore order; resignation of President Oreste; election of President Zamor; recognition of his Government by the United States; resignation of President Zamor; election of President Theodore; proposal by the United States of a customs convention and other conditions precedent to recognition of his Government. Protest of Haiti against shipment abroad on the U. S. S. Machias of Government funds on deposit in the Banque Nationale

1 Continued from For. Rel. 1913, pp. 573–575. Political and financial matters are here placed in one chronological sequence because of their intimate connection.

[487] Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, January 3, 1914.

File No. 838.00/737.

[488] The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

Department of State, Washington, January 21, 1914.

File No. 838.00/747.

[489] Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, January 22, 1914.

File No. 838.00/757.

[490] The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

Department of State, Washington, January 22, 1914.

File No. 838.00/757.

[491] Consul Livingston to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Cape Haitien, January 23, 1914.

File No. 838.00/762.

[492] Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, January 23, 1914.

File No. 838.00/761.

[493] The Secretary of State to Consul Livingston.

Department of State, Washington, January 25, 1914.

File No. 838.00/762.

[494] The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

Department of State, Washington, January 25, 1914.

File No. 838.00/761.

[495] Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, January 27, 1914.

File No. 838.00/779.

[496] [Untitled]

American Legation, Port au Prince, January 30, 1914.

File No. 83800/787.

[497] The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

Department of State, Washington, January 30, 1914.

File No. 838.00/784.

[498] Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, February 2, 1914.

File No. 838.00/794.

[499] [Untitled]

American Legation, Port au Prince, February 3, 1914.

File No. 838.00/799.

[500] [Untitled]

American Legation, Port au Prince, February 7, 1914.

File No. 838:00/815.

[501] [Untitled]

American Legation, Port au Prince, February 8, 1914.

File No 838.00/821.

[502] The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

Department of State, Washington, February 9, 1914.

File No. 838.00/829a.

[503] Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, February 10, 1914.

File No. 838.00/831.

[504] Consul Livingston to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Cape Haitien, February 21, 1914.

File No. 838.00/853.

[505] Minister Smith to Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, February 21, 1914.

File No. 838.00/855.

[506] The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

Department of State, Washington, February 26, 1914.

File No. 838.00/855.

[507] Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, February 28, 1914.

File No. 838.00/864.

[508] The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

Department of State, Washington, March 1, 1914.

File No. 838.00/864.

[509] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, March 2, 1914.

File No. 838.00/864.

[510] Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, March 3, 1914.

File No. 838.00/865.

[511] [Untitled]

American Legation, Port au Prince, March 19, 1914.

File No. 838.00/893.

[512] The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

Department of State, Washington, March 20, 1914.

File No. 838.00/893.

[513] Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, March 22, 1914.

File No. 838.00/899.

[514] The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

Department of State, Washington, March 31, 1914.

File No. 838.00/864.

[515] Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, April 8, 1914.

File No. 839.00/913.

[516] Chargé Terres to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate. Port au Prince, May 10, 1914.

File No. 838.00/924.

[517] The Secretary of State to Chargé Terres.

Department of State, Washington, May 18, 1914.

File No. 838.00/924.

[518] Consul Livingston to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Cape Haitien, May 26, 1914.

File No. 838.00/930.

[519] Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, June 9, 1914.

File No. 838.51/340.

[520] Consul Livingston to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Cape Haitien, June 19, 1914.

File No. 838.00/935.

[521] Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, June 20, 1914.

[522] [Untitled]

American Legation, Port au Prince, June 22, 1914.

File No. 838.00/938.

[523] The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

Department of State, Washington, June 25, 1914.

File No. 838.00/938.

[524] The Secretary of State to Consul Livingston.

Department of State, Washington, June 26, 1914.

File No. 838.00/930.

[525] The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, July 2, 1914.

File No. 838.51/341a.

[526] The Secretary of State to Chargé Terres.

Department of State, Washington, July 9, 1914.

File No 838.00/949a.

[527] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Port au Prince, July 20, 1914.

File No. 838.00/960.

[528] Consular Assistant Hazeltine, on Special Detail, to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, July 30, 1914.

File No. 838.00/937.

[529] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, September 5, 1914.

File No. 838.00/986.

[530] [Untitled]

American Legation, Port au Prince, October 1, 1914.

File No. 838.51/355.

[531] The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, October 7, 1914.

File No. 838.51/355.

[532] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port an Prince, October 19, 1914.

File No. 838.00/996.

[533] Vice Consul Czaykowski to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Cape Haitien, October 19, 1914.

File No. 838.00/995.

[534] Minister Blanchard, to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, October 29, 1914.

File No. 838.00/1006.

[535] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, October 29, 1914.

File No. 838.00/1005a.

[536] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, October 30, 1914.

File No. 838.00/1006.

[537] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, October 30, 1914.

File No. 838.00/1008.

[538] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, October 31, 1914.

File No. 838.00/1008.

[539] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, October 31, 1914.

File No. 838.00/1009.

[540] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, November 4, 1914.

File No. 838.00/1157b.

[541] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, November 6, 1914.

File No. 838.00/1019.

[542] [Untitled]

American Legation, Port au Prince, November 7, 1914.

File No. 838.00/1020.

[543] [Untitled]

American Legation, Port au Prince, November 10, 1914.

File No. 838.00/1022.

[544] The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, November 12, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 838.00/1020.

[545] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, November 18, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 838.00/1024.

[546] The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, November 16, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 838.00/1024.

[547] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, November 18, 1914.

File No. 838.00/1028.

[548] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, November 21, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 838.00/1028.

[549] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, November 24, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 838.002/31.

[550] The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, November 24, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 838.00/1028.

[551] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, November 25, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 838.00/1039.

[552] The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, November 27, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 838.51/367.

[553] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, November 28, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 838.00/1039.

[554] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, December 1, 1914, 9 a.m.

File No. 838.00/1040.

[555] [Untitled]

American Legation, Port au Prince, December 2, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 838.51/359.

[556] [Untitled]

American Legation, Port au Prince, December 2, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 838.00/1041.

[557] [Untitled]

American Legation, Port au Prince, December 4, 1914, 9 a.m.

File No. 838.00/1044.

[558] The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, December 4, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 838.51/369.

[559] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, December 4, 1914, noon.

File No. 838.00/1040.

[560] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, December 7, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 838.51/371.

[561] The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, December 7, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 838.51/369.

[562] The National Bank of the Republic of Haiti to the Secretary of State.

New York, December 8, 1914.

File No. 838.516/13.

[563] [Untitled]

New York, [undated ; received December 10, 1914.]

File No. 838.516/14.

[564] The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, December 10, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 838.516/13.

[565] The National Bank of the Republic of Haiti to the Secretary of State.

New York, [undated ; received December 11, 1914.]

File No. 838.516/15.

[566] The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, December 12, 1914.

File No. 838.516/15.

[567] The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, December 12, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 838.51/379a.

[568] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, December 12, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 838.00/1063.

[569] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, December 14, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 838.516/17.

[570] The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, December 15, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 838.516/17.

[571] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, December 15, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 833.00/1065.

[572] [Untitled]

American Legation, Port au Prince, December 18, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 838.516/23.

[573] The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, December 19, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 838.00/1065.

[574] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, December 21, 1914, 9 a.m.

File No. 838.00/1068.

[575] The Minister of Haiti to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Haiti, Washington, December 22, 1914.

File No. 838.516/27.

[576] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, December 22, 1914, midnight.

File No. 838.516/26.

[577] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, December 24, 1914.

File No. 838.51/381.

[578] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, December 24, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 838.51/374.

[579] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, December 28, 1914.

File No. 838.00/1092.

[580] The Minister of Haiti to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Haiti, Washington, December 29, 1914.

File No. 838.516/37.

[581] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, December 30, 1914.

File 838.516/55.

[582] The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, December 30, 1914.

File No. 838.516/40.

[583] The Secretary of State to the Minister of Haiti.

Department of State, Washington, December 31, 1914.

File No. 838.516/27.

[584] The Secretary of State to Vice President Wehrhane of the National Bank of Haiti.

Department of State, Washington, December 31, 1914.

File No. 838.516/32.

[585] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, December 31, 1914.

File No. 838.516/32.

[586] The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, December 31, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 838.516/32.

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/737.

[Document 487]

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, January 3, 1914.

President Oreste to-day at an interview at his request informed me of the capture yesterday at Thomazeau of one Celestin, Haitian exile and the promoter of the disturbance on the frontier.* * * Oreste attributes Thomazeau troubles to the Dominican military authorities, and requested that the Department be informed as to his belief.* * * Threats have been made against the property of foreigners, according to the best obtainable information.* * * Situation throughout the Republic regarded as exceedingly grave. I would respectfully suggest and urge that a naval vessel be sent here at the earliest possible moment.

Smith.

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith. File No. 838.00/747.

[Document 488]

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 21, 1914.

In view of the situation, Nashville ordered to proceed to Cape Haitien for protection of American interests. Keep Department informed as to situation at Port au Prince.

Bryan.

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/757.

[Document 489]

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

American Legation,
Port au Prince, January 22, 1914.

President Oreste and the Haitian Foreign Office jointly request that the Department have the Nashville go to Fort Liberty with orders to Pradel, Minister of the Interior and in command there, to return to Port au Prince. The Government is unable to communicate with Pradel, who is cut off and who is urgently needed here as the strongest man to preserve order.* * *

Smith.

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith. File No. 838.00/757.

[Document 490]

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 22, 1914.

Cruiser Montana ordered to proceed to Port au Prince. She is expected to arrive the 24th. Advise the President of this fact, and also that the Nashville has been ordered to act as he and his Cabinet requested. Department is disposed to do anything proper to support constituted government.

Bryan.

Consul Livingston to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/762.

[Document 491]

Consul Livingston to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Cape Haitien, January 23, 1914.

Committee of Public Safety, named by revolution, has removed customs officials and appointed commission. National Bank of Haiti protests to Consulate.

Livingston.

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/761.

[Document 492]

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, January 23, 1914.

National Bank of Haiti, as creditor of the Government, protests to this Legation against the seizure of the custom house at Cape Haitien by rebels, and requests the “exercise of such influence as is possible to protect said creditors”

Smith.

The Secretary of State to Consul Livingston. File No. 838.00/762.

[Document 493]

The Secretary of State to Consul Livingston.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 25, 1914.

Your January 23. Use all possible persuasion to cause de facto administrators of customs to respect Haiti’s obligations to National Bank of Haiti.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith. File No. 838.00/761.

[Document 494]

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 25, 1914.

Your January 23. American Consul, Cape Haitien, has been directed to use all possible persuasion to cause de facto administrators of customs to respect Haiti’s obligations to National Bank.

If possible, impress upon revolutionary leaders the President’s policy as set forth in statement of March 122 , and insist upon constitutional methods for reform of any abuses. Demand full protection of life and property for all Americans and other foreigners.

Bryan.

2  For. Rel. 1913, p. 7.

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/779.

[Document 495]

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, January 27, 1914.

The President abdicated at three o’clock and has gone on board German war vessel Vineta. There was much firing and disorder but the city is in charge of civil authorities who assume all responsibility. Montana is preparing to land twenty-seven men as Legation guard. Vineta will do likewise. Revolutionists have not yet entered city but are reported on the way from St. Marco.

Smith.

[Untitled] File No. 83800/787.

[Document 496]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, January 30, 1914.

City quiet as a result of landing of marines and seamen. The South Carolina and Montana jointly have about 120 men ashore. Germans have 70 men ashore, and the British cruiser will land men on her arrival to-day. French war vessel is on the way here from Mexico. Presence of foreign war vessels and the landing of marines promises to accomplish the peaceful choice of a President, which seemed to be impossible a few days ago.

Smith.

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith. File No. 838.00/784.

[Document 497]

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 30, 1914.

Impress upon de facto authorities in Port au Prince and upon those in other parts of the Republic, through consuls and consular agents, the necessity of complying with national obligations with respect to assignment of customs funds for the payment of definite debts. Also impress upon them that there must be no diversion of public moneys required for present obligations. French Government is making similar representations.

Bryan.

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/794.

[Document 498]

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams—Extracts.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, February 2, 1914.

No revolutionary leader is as yet reported near Port au Prince. The delay in the arrival of a strong presidential candidate has greatly complicated the situation.

Department’s instruction as to customs has been carried out. The Bank continues to protest against administration of customs by revolutionists.

Smith.

[Untitled] File No. 838.00/799.

[Document 499]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, February 3, 1914.

The Zamor brothers, Charles and Oreste, are apparently in control of the revolutionary situation, having defeated Davilmar Theodore in battle at Gonaives on February 1. Oreste Zamor has sent a committee of eight to Port au Prince to gain permission of local authorities to enter the city. The reply is likely to be favorable. Zamor plans to establish provisional government and await action of Assembly. He may attempt to dissolve the present Assembly and elect a new one.

Smith.

[Untitled] File No. 838:00/815.

[Document 500]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, February 7, 1914.

Oreste Zamor has just entered Port au Prince with about 4000 men without disorder and has occupied the most important Government offices.

Smith.

[Untitled] File No 838.00/821.

[Document 501]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, February 8, 1914.

National Assembly obtained unexpected quorum and elected Oreste Zamor President by constitutional majority today. The matter of recognition will be imminent tomorrow and in order to avoid embarrassing international situation I would respectfully suggest that it is imperative that I have instructions immediately. I am reliably informed that there is no disposition on the part of any foreign representative to act independently and that all await the action of my Government. Zamor’s elevation to the Presidency undoubtedly accomplished by revolutionary means. His entry into the city was peaceable and he has preserved order since coming in.

Smith.

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith. File No. 838.00/829a.

[Document 502]

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 9, 1914.

All reports from Haiti indicate that Zamor Government will probably be stable and able to preserve order, but the President prefers to delay recognition until situation is more settled.

Please inquire of Government what guaranties it can give as to its permanence and ability to protect lives and property of foreigners. Also report how many provinces have accepted the new President and how many are in revolt.

What is the attitude of Davilmar Theodore and what prospect is there of his being able to disturb the new Government?

Bryan.

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/831.

[Document 503]

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, February 10, 1914.

The Department’s February 9. The Minister for Foreign Affairs today gave me assurance in writing as to the stability and policy, as follows: 1. The Government which the National Assembly has just established is stable because it depends on the cooperation of all Haitians truly desirous of the progress of their country. It will neglect nothing for the forcible protection of the persons and interests of foreigners as well as natives.

2. All the departments have accepted and recognize the authority of the new President. The City of Cape Haitien alone is in possession of Mr. Davilmar Theodore and his bands. But the inhabitants of the city are heartily with the new President and it is certain that when the troops at present marching on Cape Haitien approach that city, Mr. Davilmar Theodore will be obliged to efface himself without our having to regret the spilling of blood.

3. The attitude of Mr. Theodore causes no anxiety to the Government. Once the Cape is under the power of the new President, Mr. Theodore will be unable again to disturb the peace.

It is the unanimously expressed belief of the Diplomatic Corps that Theodore will be unable to cause serious disturbance. Our advices indicate Theodore has no money and but few soldiers. Zamor Government is considered strong, and only street talk and possibly some press despatches are to the contrary.

Smith.

Consul Livingston to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/853.

[Document 504]

Consul Livingston to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Cape Haitien, February 21, 1914.

Army of Theodore evacuated town last night leaving no police or other organized forces. Marines and sailors from Wheeling patrolled streets throughout night; sailors reembarked this morning; marines remain at Consulate. One division Government army entered this morning.

Livingston.

Minister Smith to Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/855.

[Document 505]

Minister Smith to Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, February 21, 1914.

The occupation of Cape Haitien by Zamor forces fully confirmed.

Smith.

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith. File No. 838.00/855.

[Document 506]

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 26, 1914.

Your February 21. You will immediately seek an interview with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the de facto Government at Port au Prince and state to him that the Government of the United States will be probably disposed to recognize the Government of Oreste Zamor as the duly elected constitutional government of the Republic of Haiti, since it appears from the support which it received in the north and in the other parts of the Republic that the advent of this Government is based upon the consent of the governed.

You will further state that the Government of the United States has always considered that there can be no freedom without order based upon law and upon public conscience and approval; that the United States will always lend its influence to the realization of these principles in practice; and that, desiring the peace and prosperity of all its sister republics, this Government desires to extend its genuine disinterested friendship and aid for the continuance of peace and prosperity in Haiti.

In your conference with the Minister for Foreign Affairs you will suggest to him that the United States is, as is natural, on account of the vested interests of American citizens in the Republic of Haiti, interested in the proper administration and collection of customs, and would be well disposed toward lending its aid in any practical way to the Government of Haiti if such were desired.

Further, that on account of the opening of the Panama Canal the United States is interested in the proper location of lighthouses along the coast of the different countries and islands by which the traffic will pass to enter the Panama Canal. In this connection this Government would be most willing to lend any expert assistance to the Government of Haiti in aiding her to determine the points most necessary for lighthouses.

At the time of the visit of Mr. Osborne, Assistant Secretary of State, to Haiti in 1913, the matter of the Mole Saint Nicholas as a naval station was under discussion. Different views were exchanged and an understanding was arrived at by which it was promised that no power other than the United States should gain a foothold in that section of the Republic. In presenting this last matter to the Minister for Foreign Affairs you will use your utmost tact and discretion in conveying to him the idea that while this Government has, for the present, no intention of entering into negotiations regarding Mole Saint Nicholas, it nevertheless desires that the understanding between President Oreste and the Assistant Secretary of State remain undisturbed.

You are instructed to cable immediately whatever reply is made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs to these various suggestions, and Department will then instruct you as to recognition.

Bryan.

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/864.

[Document 507]

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, February 28, 1914.

The Department’s February 26. I have just had an interview with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Leger. Pending recognition, he declined to give definite replies to interrogations addressed to him in accordance with instructions of the Department, except as follows:

Mr. Léger stated that the question of building lighthouses will be submitted to the Council of Ministers and will have proper consideration; that he personally believed that they ought to be built.

He stated that he could give no reply whatever to the interrogatory as to customs administration and collection.

He stated further that he could assure my Government that Haiti would not grant any favors to any foreign government at Mole St. Nicholas, and that the matter would stand as arranged with Assistant Secretary of State Osborne in July, 1913.

He further stated clearly that all matters in which the United States might be interested would have due consideration for determination after recognition.

I am led to believe that it will not be possible to obtain any definite replies from Mr. Leger until recognition has been granted.

Smith.

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith. File No. 838.00/864.

[Document 508]

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 1, 1914.

The Government formed by General Oreste Zamor, as constitutional President duly elected by the Haitian Congress, being now fully established in power with the assent of the people, you are instructed to recognize it.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 838.00/864.

[Document 509]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, March 2, 1914.

Your February 28. Referring to last statement of Minister for Foreign Affairs, you are instructed to inform him that this Government earnestly desires prompt signing of protocol of arbitration, and issuance of instructions for vise of passports of American citizens of Syrian origin naturalized prior to anti-Syrian law of 1903.3

Bryan.

3  For. Rel. 1913, pp. 575–589.

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/865.

[Document 510]

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, March 3, 1914.

The Department’s March 1. President Zamor received me formally this morning. Capt. Russell and Commander Bostwick also present.

Smith.

[Untitled] File No. 838.00/893.

[Document 511]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, March 19, 1914.

The following telegram has been received from Consul Livingston: Revolution receiving support on the frontier from Dominican side and may be prolonged. Overtures made to me by a friend of Theodore and by Minister Charles Zamor to attempt an arrangement. Please ask permission Department of State for me, with cooperation Commander of Nashville, to proceed to Dejabon and Ouanaminthe via Monte Cristi.

I remarked that this work be attended in perfect accord [sic] as Livingston suggests, as the situation mentioned needs attention.

Smith.

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith. File No. 838.00/893.

[Document 512]

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 20, 1914.

Your March 19. Please confer with Haitian Government as to the desirability of Consul at Cape Haitien making trip suggested by Theodore and Minister Zamor. If it is desired that he proceed, instructions will be sent by Navy Department to Commander of Nashville.

Bryan.

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/899.

[Document 513]

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, March 22, 1914.

Referring to the Department’s telegram of March 20. Minister of Foreign affairs after a consultation with the President informs me that the Haitian Government is anxious to have Consul Livingston aid in arranging for cessation of hostilities with Theodore but states that the Haitian Government cannot make formal request for the Government of the United States to do so. The private secretary of the President has twice called on me and requested in the name of the President that Consul Livingston be instructed to act in this matter in conjunction with Minister Zamor.

Smith.

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith. File No. 838.00/864.

[Document 514]

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 31, 1914.

In view of the long interval which has elapsed without reply to its representations of March 2, the Department finds itself compelled, in view of interests of certain American citizens which are suffering from this delay, again to call the attention of the Government of Haiti to its previous representations. You will present the substance of this instruction to the Minister for Foreign Affairs in the form of a memorandum and you will urge an immediate reply be made.

Bryan.

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State. File No. 839.00/913.

[Document 515]

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, April 8, 1914.

The Department’s instructions of March 31 were immediately complied with and the Minister for Foreign Affairs to-day replied to my memorandum. The reply is not entirely satisfactory inasmuch as the Minister for Foreign Affairs attempts to again open up the entire Syrian question. Through the Chief of Bureau of Foreign Affairs, however, I was informed to-day that the Haitian Consul General at New York City would be instructed to vise passports in accordance with former agreements between this Legation and the Haitian Foreign Office.

Continued efforts will be made from day to day to satisfactorily adjust this matter though it is most difficult to obtain action by the Minister for Foreign Affairs he being in a peculiar political situation and avoiding all possible action upon foreign affairs.

The entire Diplomatic Corps report inability to make any progress with pending questions.

Smith.

Chargé Terres to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/924.

[Document 516]

Chargé Terres to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate.
Port au Prince, May 10, 1914.

Referring to the Legation’s telegram of March 22. The Bishop of Cape Hatien having solicited by letter the cooperation of Consul Livingston in a plan for the pacification of Haiti “in the interest of Christian humanity,” Livingston to-day brought the matter to the attention of this Legation. Having been unofficially informed on several occasions that the Haitian Government was eager that some such steps be taken for the discussion of terms of peace with Davilmar Theodore and feeling that Livingston is most familiar with the situation in the north, I gave authority to Livingston to see the President, instructing him that if it was the desire of the Haitian Government, he should make formal request for such action. Livingston saw the President and the following letter signed by the President was addressed to him: “Accepting gladly the voluntary offer of your good offices I request that you join with the Bishop of Cape Haitien in the efforts to be made at Ouanaminthe with a view to pacification.”

Livingston is of the opinion that terms of peace may be fixed through a visit to Ouanaminthe accompanied by the Bishop and has requested permission to undertake the mission. I would respectfully recommend to the Department that the necessary authority be communicated at as early a date as possible. Otherwise the present situation may be prolonged for weeks not only to the detriment of Haiti but of American interests as well. I await Department’s instruction which will be immediately communicated to Consul Livingston who departed for Cape Haitien early this afternoon.

Terres.

The Secretary of State to Chargé Terres. File No. 838.00/924.

[Document 517]

The Secretary of State to Chargé Terres.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 18, 1914.

Legation’s May 10. Inform Livingston that he is authorized to proceed to Ouanaminthe with the Bishop of Cape Haitien and may employ his good offices with a view to making peace between the Government and leaders of the revolution.

Bryan.

Consul Livingston to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/930.

[Document 518]

Consul Livingston to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 231.] American Consulate,
Cape Haitien, May 26, 1914.

Sir: Referring to a telegraphic authorization from the Department of State, received through the American Legation at Port au Prince on the 19th instant, for me to proceed to the Haitian frontier town of Ouanaminthe in company with Monseigneur Frangois Marie Kersuzan, Bishop of Cape Haitien, and use my good offices with a view to a peaceful settlement of the differences between the Haitian Government and the leaders of the revolution, I have the honor to state that* * * at midnight of the 20th, I was called and informed that a gunboat had arrived and would take me to Monte Cristi.* * * We reached Monte Cristi at midday. I immediately went ashore and was informed that the Bishop was there, having already visited Ouanaminthe and returned. I repaired at once to the place where he was stopping and was informed of the results of his attempt at mediation. He was received by the leaders of the revolution with all due respect and consideration, and discussed the matter with them in all its phases. He appealed to them in the interest of humanity without producing any visible effect. He then directed their attention to the critical condition of their country and made appeal to their patriotism. They stubbornly and absolutely refused, claiming themselves to be the aggrieved party and holding the Haitian Government responsible for the loss of life and for any misfortune that might befall the country.* * *

I set out the same afternoon for Dajabon and Ouanaminthe. We arrived at Dajabon at 6:30 o’clock in the afternoon, and the next morning I sent my card over to Ouanaminthe to General Davilmar Theodore, the chief of the revolution, requesting him to fix an hour for receiving me. He wrote back that he would be very glad to receive me at eleven o’clock. At that hour I found General Théodore, the revolutionary cabinet, and the leading generals of the movement awaiting me. They received me very cordially.* * * I informed them that I could not discuss the relations existing between them and the Government party but simply desired to see if it were not possible for the two parties to have some understanding whereby their differences might be composed in a way to put an end to hostilities. I dwelt at some length upon the critical condition of their country, reminding them of recent events that had transpired at Port au Prince and the menace of still graver complications if all parties did not come together and work for governmental stability and economy in the public administration.* * * They listened with great courtesy and attention and then replied that if the country should suffer from the present movement, if their autonomy should be menaced as a result of their efforts to overthrow the present Government, the fault should be placed with the Zamor brothers—the President and General Charles Zamor—and that no consideration of patriotism would induce them to suspend hostilities.* * * The unanimous decision of those who spoke was that the only condition on which they were willing to treat would be the retirement of both the Zamors. I expressed to them my regret that they should persist in regarding the matter in that light and informed them that I hoped still to be of service to them in case they should reconsider their decision.

It is possible that General Davilmar Théodore would accept terms of arrangement if left free to act on his own opinion. It seems that he is urged on and even menaced by a few of his generals and advisers who have been practically outlawed by the Government generals in command and who have nothing to expect from a peaceful arrangement.

The revolutionists are openly aided by the Dominicans across the frontier at Dajabon. They are as free on one side as on the other, and not only have thus a place of retreat if forced out of Ouanaminthe, but have agents there who supply them with provisions and ammunition whenever obtainable.* * *

I am [etc.]

Lemuel W. Livingston.

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.51/340.

[Document 519]

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, June 9, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to report as follows upon the financial status of Haiti, as of this date:

Subscriptions were closed yesterday to an internal loan to the Government, amounting to one and one-half million gourdes, representing in American gold at the prevailing rate of exchange (viz 380 premium) about $312,500.

This loan was subscribed within the past week by small merchants throughout Haiti. About one-fourth of the total was subscribed by merchants in the coast towns and the remainder by Port au Prince merchants and investors. Practically all of these are Germans.

[Terms of the loan contract and other financial matters.]

Decidedly the most interesting development of the financial situation in Haiti is the action contemplated by the bank to refuse to renew for the fiscal year 1914–1915, the “convention budgetaire.” The manager of the bank tells me that the board of directors most probably will refuse to renew this convention, by the terms of which the bank, from month to month, advances all the ordinary expenses of the Government, reimbursing itself at the end of the fiscal year from the surplus remaining after the payment of amortizations and interest on the three foreign loans.

In the event the bank refuses to renew the convention, for which negotiations probably will be begun by the Government in July, and certainly not later than August, the financial situation will at once reach an acute stage.

If then, at the end of the fiscal year, on September 30, the bank shall not have renewed the convention, the Government will find itself without funds of any sort, and with no income, and undoubtedly will find it most difficult to operate. The statement that the Government, in the absence of a budget convention, will be without income is based upon the fact that under the terms of the Loan Contract of 1910, the bank is designated as the sole treasury of the Government, and as such receives all moneys of the Government, and further, is empowered to hold such moneys intact until the end of the fiscal year, which, in this particular case, would be September 30, 1915. There is nothing in the loan contract providing for advancements by the bank, and the convention budgétaire has been in the nature of an accommodation extended by the bank. As before stated, the suspension of the convention budgétaire most likely would bring the Government to a condition where it could not operate.

It is just this condition the bank desires, for it is the belief of the bank that the Government when confronted by such a crisis, would be forced to ask the assistance of the United States in adjusting its financial tangle and that American supervision of the customs would result.

[Report of public opinion.]

In the event the bank refuses in July or August to renew the convention budgétaire, it is not unlikely that the Government of Haiti will soon thereafter indicate its willingness to negotiate with the United States in an effort to find some way out of its financial difficulties. In saying this I am only repeating unofficial information, which has come to me, to the effect that an appeal to the United States for assistance is being discussed in the Palace as a probable remedy for the precarious state in which Haiti now finds herself.

I have [etc.]

Madison R. Smith.

Consul Livingston to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/935.

[Document 520]

Consul Livingston to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Cape Haitien, June 19, 1914.

Revolutionists interfering with operations of railroad, whole line in their possession, train overdue, wires cut and handcar fired on. Warship necessary.

Livingston.

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State. [Document 521]

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams–Extracts.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, June 20, 1914.

Because of seriousness of revolution in north, President Zamor will go to the front tomorrow.* * * In the absence of the President the Government will be in the hands of a Commission to be created tonight and which will act in conjunction with the Cabinet. Port au Prince is quiet but the presence of a naval vessel appears to be of the utmost importance.

Smith.

[Untitled] File No. 838.00/938.

[Document 522]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, June 22, 1914.

My June 20.* * * The President has moved about two thousand men to Saint Marc. Port au Prince is quiet and the Commission appointed to act with the Cabinet is regarded as a very good one. However, there is much apprehension expressed on the streets.

Smith.

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith. File No. 838.00/938.

[Document 523]

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 25, 1914.

Your June 22. Navy Department has ordered a United States vessel to proceed to Haitian waters, probably arriving Cape Haitien June 28 or 29. Will afterwards be ordered to Port au Prince.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Livingston. File No. 838.00/930.

[Document 524]

The Secretary of State to Consul Livingston.

Department of State,
Washington, June 26, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your despatch No. 231 of May 26, 1914, with regard to the revolutionary situation in Haiti.

The despatch has been read with interest by the Department and it approves the course pursued by you as outlined therein.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.51/341a.

[Document 525]

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State,
Washington, July 2, 1914.

Sir: I enclose copy of a draft of the proposed convention between the United States and the Republic of Haiti and a copy of the Convention concluded between the United States and the Dominican Republic on February 8, 1907.4

The draft of a proposed convention with the Government of Haiti is fashioned after the convention with the Dominican Republic, so far as that convention is applicable to the situation’ in Haiti, and follows closely its terms and language, except in two particulars, namely:

First, in Article I of the proposed convention is to be found a provision for the designation by the President of the United States of a Financial Adviser to the Republic of Haiti, with enumerated functions and duties, in case such appointment should be deemed necessary or should be requested by Haiti; this is not found in the convention concluded with the Dominican Republic. Such a provision, if incorporated in the convention which may be concluded with Haiti, would be of great advantage to that Government in aiding in the improvement of its finances, in strengthening its credit, in enabling it to attain its objects respecting its internal affairs and in providing additional checks against graft and imposition upon that Government in the administration of its finances. If it should be advanced that the authority of the President to designate a financial adviser would be implied from the authority to be extended to him to appoint a receiver, assistants and other employees, the Department feels that the authority should be explicitly stated in the convention for the guidance of the high contracting parties and should not be left to be implied. Recently it was found advisable to install a financial adviser to the Government of Santo Domingo, with functions and duties similar to those enumerated in Article I of the enclosed draft. For the reasons stated, the Department regards the provision for the designation of a financial adviser as of importance.

Second, Article IX of the proposed convention is not in the Convention concluded with the Dominican Republic. The advantages to accrue to the Government of Haiti from the incorporation of Article IX in the convention which may be concluded will advance themselves to that Government. In addition to those enumerated in support of the provision for a Financial Adviser, this Article IX will add to the stability and security of the Government of Haiti, secure the free course of its imports and exports against interference from all directions and will make clear the authority of the United States to aid in the attainment of each and all the objects comprehended within the convention, and this matter had best not be left to implication.

You will, therefore, sound the Government of Haiti for an expression of its attitude toward the proposed convention and its views of the terms of the draft, and advise the Department of any objections which may be advanced to any of the proposed articles, specialty noting and reporting them, and from time to time report the progress which you may make.

The Department will arrange to have Captain Russel’s ship, the South Carolina, to call at Port au Prince to take you to a conference with President Zamor to whom, when you shall see him, you will convey assurances of the most cordial friendship of the United States for the Government and people of the Republic of Haiti and of the desire of this Government to aid in the purposes of that Government for the tranquility, security and prosperity of the Republic. You will also keep the Department fully advised of the military situation ill the Island.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

[Inclosure.]

Draft of a convention between the United States and the Republic of Haiti.

preamble.

The United States and the Republic of Haiti desiring to confirm and strengthen the amity existing between them by the most cordial cooperation in measures for their common advantage, and the Republic of Haiti desiring to remedy the present unsatisfactory condition of its revenues and finances to check the loss of much of its revenues due in part to internal disturbances, to provide against injudicious increase of its public debt, to inaugurate a comprehensive system of public accounts and audits, to make adequate provision to meet its exterior debts to maintain the tranquillity of the Republic, to carry out plans for the economic development and prosperity of the Republic and its people, to strengthen its credit and generally to fix and maintain its finances upon a firm and stable basis, and the United States being in full sympathy with all of these aims and objects and desiring to contribute in all proper ways to their accomplishment,

The United States and the Republic of Haiti, having resolved to conclude a convention with these objects in view, have appointed for that purpose Plenipotentiaries, on the part of the United States, and on the part of the Republic of Haiti,

who, having exhibited to each other their respective powers which are seen to be full in good and true form, have agreed as follows:

I.

The President of the United States shall appoint a General Receiver, who, with such assistants and employees as the President of the United States may appoint or authorize, shall collect, receive and apply all customs duties on imports and exports accruing at the several custom houses and ports of entry of the Republic of Haiti; and if he shall deem it necessary and expedient, or if the Haitian Government shall request, the President of the United States shall designate a Financial Adviser to the Republic of Haiti who shall devise an adequate system of public accounting, aid in increasing the revenues and adjusting them to the expenses, inquire into the validity of the debts of the Republic, enlighten both Governments with reference to all eventual debts, recommend improved methods of collecting and applying the revenues, and generally exercise the functions of a comptroller of accounts.

II.

The Government of the Republic of Haiti will provide by law or appropriate decrees for the payment of all customs duties to the General Receiver, and will extend to the Receivership all needful aid and full protection in its execution of the powers conferred and duties imposed herein; and the United States on its part will extend like aid and protection.

III.

Upon the appointment of the General Receiver the Government of the Republic of Haiti, in cooperation with the General Receiver, shall collate, classify, arrange and make full statement of all the debts of the Republic, the amounts, character, maturity and condition thereof, and the interest accruing and the sinking fund requisite to their final discharge.

IV.

All sums collected and received by the General Receiver shall be applied by him, first, to the payment of the salaries and allowances of the General Receiver, his assistants and employees and expenses of the Receivership, including the salary and expenses of the Financial Adviser, if one shall be appointed; second, to the interest and sinking fund of the public debt of the Republic of Haiti; and, third, remainder to the Haitian Government for purposes of current expenses.

In making these applications the General Receiver will proceed to pay salaries and allowances monthly and expenses as they arise, and on the first of each calendar month will set aside in a separate fund the quantum of the collections and receipts of the previous month, found to be a fair contribution to the ultimate sum required to meet interest and provide the sinking funds.

V.

The expenses of the Receivership, including salaries and allowances of the General Receiver, his assistants and employees, shall not exceed five per centum of the collections and receipts from customs duties, unless by agreement by the two Governments.

VI.

The General Receiver shall make monthly reports of all collections, receipts and disbursements to the appropriate officer of the Republic of Haiti and to the Department of State of the United States, which reports shall be open to inspection and verification at all times by the appropriate authorities of each of the said Governments.

VII.

The Republic of Haiti, shall not increase its public debt except by previous agreement with the President of the United States, and shall not contract any debt or assume any financial obligation unless the ordinary revenues of the Republic available for that purpose, after defraying the expenses of the Government, shall be adequate to pay the interest and provide a sinking fund for the final discharge of such debt.

VIII.

The Republic of Haiti will not without the assent of the President of the United States modify the customs duties in a manner to reduce the revenues therefrom; and in order that the revenues of the Republic may be adequate to meet the public debt and the expenses of the Government, to preserve tranquillity and to promote material prosperity, the Republic of Haiti will cooperate with the Financial Adviser, if one is appointed, in his recommendations for improvement in the methods of collecting and disbursing the revenues and for new sources of needed income.

IX.

The United States shall have authority to prevent any and all interferences with the receipt, collection, or free course of the customs, or with the free exercise of any of the powers conferred or duties imposed herein upon the Receivership or with the attainment of any of the objects comprehended in this convention.

X.

This agreement shall continue in force for a period of ____ years from and after its ratification by the Contracting Parties in accordance with their respective laws.

4  For. Rel. 1907, pp. 307–310.

The Secretary of State to Chargé Terres. File No 838.00/949a.

[Document 526]

The Secretary of State to Chargé Terres.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 9, 1914.

American Consul at Cape Haitien and Commander of South Carolina have been instructed to cooperate for the advancement of American interests with other Americans now at Cape Haitien. Commander South Carolina further instructed to proceed to Port au Prince if so desired by you to convey you from that place to any part of the Republic as requested by you. Keep in constant communication by wireless with South Carolina and advise Department by cable fully as to situation.

Bryan.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State File No. 838.00/960.

[Document 527]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State 5

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, July 20, 1914.

The Palace, the military headquarters and the port office were attacked at eleven o’clock last night. Rebels were repulsed after ten minutes fighting. No fatalities reported among the Government forces but several wounded. Several rebels have been captured and executed within the last few days. Indications are that General Defly, refugee at German Legation, is the leader of the recent disturbances. Government authorities assure us of their ability to prevent uprisings but they also express fear of defection of troops if trouble continues and protest against the arbitrary and indefinite harboring of political refugees by certain foreign legations. Cape Haitien attacked by rebels early this morning but they were repulsed with considerable loss.

Blanchard.

5 The new Minister assumed the duties of his post on July 14, 1914; Mr. Smith had left on July 7.

Consular Assistant Hazeltine, on Special Detail, to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/937.

[Document 528]

Consular Assistant Hazeltine, on Special Detail, to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 7.] American Legation,
Port au Prince, July 30, 1914.

Sir: Since the outbreak on July 19, reported in telegram of July 20, there have been no disturbances of any kind in Port au Prince, and from an examination of the Government’s forces it appears that the city is under perfect control. Martial law has been proclaimed and is strictly observed.

Several members of the Cabinet as well as General Faine have expressed confidence in their ability to maintain control, but admit their inability to prevent such outbreaks as long as certain foreign legations, notably the German Legation, persist in arbitrarily harboring for an indefinite period political refugees who are known to be the leaders and instigators of the disturbances.

The political situation at present is very uncertain. Despite the continued successes of the Government forces, the political situation is extremely critical. It is not the unpopularity of the present Government nor the strength of the rebel forces that may eventually cause the downfall of the Zamor Government. Back of all this there remains the financial distress of the Government and its inability to borrow sufficient funds to complete the military campaign as outlined. The ultimate success or downfall of the Zamor Government can have no effect on the financial situation which in reality comprises the political situation. There remains but one known guaranty which could be used to float a small loan. This guaranty is the revenue from stamp taxes and is valued at $100,000 a year. The Chambers are now attempting to raise $300,000 upon this guaranty. It is reliably reported that the German Minister has warned all German residents that the German Government will not support any claims based upon subscriptions to the proposed loan. The Banque Nationale de la Republique d’Haiti has formally refused to advance a loan owing to the disturbed conditions, but has admitted that the guaranty offered is worth the amount sought. With the refusal of aid from these two sources, it is doubtful whether the proposed loan can be consummated although there is always the possibility of the Government obtaining a loan at exorbitant rates from other sources.

In addition to the urgent indebtedness, amounting to $149,000 gold, there must be added a large revolutionary debt, and a considerable sum to be paid to the Dominicans who, it is reliably reported, are effectively assisting the Haitian Government forces in the North.

Thus the political situation is subordinate to and embodied in the financial situation. The Government is in effective control in the capital as well as in the south. In the north, the Government troops have won signal victories and have forced the rebel forces to retreat to the eastern boundary where the latter are harassed by the combined forces of President Zamor and General Charles Zamor, and were it not for the acute financial crisis it could be confidently predicted that the Government would be in complete control of the whole country within a fortnight.

I have [etc.]

Ross Hazeltine.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/986.

[Document 529]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

[Extract]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, September 5, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to report that the taking of Ouanaminthe has been celebrated in Port au Prince by proclamation, public band concert, night parades arid fireworks, and would be a great step toward pacification were it not for the continued critical financial condition of the Zamor Government.

The financial condition remains unchanged. The Bank, having already advanced more than 50% of the amount due under the “convention budgétaire,” has declined to advance any more on the August budget. No decision has as yet been reached regarding September advances.

The question of the issuing of paper money is being contemplated by the Government to enable it to meet its most pressing obligations, payment of troops, etc., as it is without funds whatsoever, and the Bank is now being approached for its support to that end.

I have [etc.]

A. Bailly-Blanchard.

[Untitled] File No. 838.51/355.

[Document 530]

[Untitled]

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, October 1, 1914.

On September 28 the Haitian Government, through the Minister of Finance, introduced a bill in the Chamber of Deputies providing for an issue of 12,500,000 gourdes, paper money. The National Bank of the Republic of Haiti has formally protested against this action claiming it to be a violation of Article XIII of the Bank’s contract. The Government, on its part, asserts that the Bank has already violated its contract by suspending payment provided for by the convention budgetaire and claims that this suspension compels it to resort to this extreme measure.

Blanchard.

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.51/355.

[Document 531]

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 7, 1914.

It appears that payments under expiring convention budgetaire, for the months of September and October require a total of about $200,000 gold; also that moratorium in France and conditions produced by war constitute circumstances which Haitian Government should consider in connection with failure of National Bank of Republic to make these payments. As possible solution it is suggested that the Bank might be permitted to use from funds now held in bank at Port au Prince for retirement of existing Haitian paper money the sum of $200,000 gold for purpose of making these payments, at same time transferring an equal amount to that fund from the funds of the Bank on deposit in France. The effect of which would not be a depletion of the fund but a mere transfer of it pro tanto from the one bank to the other, this arrangement to be on condition that Haitian Government will first enact the legislation necessary to continue in force present affectations [sic] given to convention budgetaire until such time as arrears to the budgetaire for 1913–1914 are finally paid.

The Department regrets any differences between the Republic of Haiti and the National Bank which might upset at a time of general financial stress the entire arrangements heretofore entered into.

Bring this to the attention of the Haitian Government at once and ask for its consideration of this proposal and for an expression of its views thereon.

Bryan.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/996.

[Document 532]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port an Prince, October 19, 1914.

Consulate at Cape Haitien reports: “Political situation very critical. Marines landed. Zamor and followers enter Consulate.”

For the present everything quiet Port au Prince but under the circumstances deem advisable presence of war vessel here. I am endeavoring to ascertain facts. Consul is now at Cape Haitien.

Blanchard.

Vice Consul Czaykowski to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/995.

[Document 533]

Vice Consul Czaykowski to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Cape Haitien, October 19, 1914.

Zamor Government fallen in the north. Zamor with troops embarked on board Haitian warship for Gonaives. President Zamor believed to be at or going to Gonaives. Revolutionists in Cape. Tacoma’s forces landed and control foreign district.

P. Czaykowski.

Minister Blanchard, to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/1006.

[Document 534]

Minister Blanchard, to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, October 29, 1914.

General uprising here last night, heavy firing all over the city. The capital in complete possession of the revolution. The members of the Government refugees in the various legations and consulates. President Zamor fled and he is on board Dutch vessel which passed here last night from Gonaives to Petit Goave and which is expected to return this afternoon when the President’s wife and child, and General Charles Zamor, Minister of the Interior, propose to embark under the protection of Dominican Legation where they are now refugees. Firing still continues; much excitement and disorder, there being no constituted authority. Executive palace looted, general pillage and incendiarism feared. Presence of war vessels urgent.

Blanchard.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.00/1005a.

[Document 535]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 29, 1914.

Transport Hancock with eight hundred marines has been ordered to proceed to Port au Prince immediately with orders to land men at your request. Hancock is due at Port au Prince evening of October 30. Battleship Kansas from Mexican waters has also been ordered to Port au Prince.

Department is contemplating convention along the lines of its instruction of July 2. At the same time it is desired to reach agreement for a fair election to be held within a specified time similar to Department’s action in Dominican Republic.

Department feels it advisable to negotiate with Zamor brothers and, if President Zamor has already left the country, wishes every protection afforded to Charles Zamor, now reported refugee in Consulate.

Upon arrival of the Hancock you will at your discretion request commanding officer to take charge of Port au Prince and will restore Charles Zamor to his Cabinet functions.

Lansing.

[Untitled] File No. 838.00/1006.

[Document 536]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, October 30, 1914.

Department’s October 29, and your October 29. As the Zamors have fled and capital in complete possession of revolution, please get in communication with war vessels immediately upon their arrival and after conference with officers make in your discretion such dispositions for protection of life and property of Americans and foreigners and the maintenance of order as may be necessary to accomplish these ends. Kansas should arrive November 3. Department has asked Navy Department to instruct Commander of United States forces in Haitian waters to accede to your request for the movement of ships and the landing of men.

Impress upon remaining officers of Government and leaders of revolutionary movement that United States Government views with the utmost concern the present situation and may feel compelled to take steps necessary to prevent a period of disorder and anarchy, which would menace the rights and property of Americans and other foreigners. With this purpose of the United States in view, you will endeavor to bring heads of contending factions together with a view to reaching a practical agreement for the restoration of permanent order and peace, and the establishment of a stable constitutional government.

Keep the Department constantly and fully advised as to the action which you may take and your views as to the situation and the policy to be pursued.

Lansing.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/1008.

[Document 537]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, October 30, 1914.

Immediately on receipt of your October 29, I had an interview with Charles Zamor who has left Dominican Legation and is now with four other Ministers, refugees at the French Legation. After a consultation with his supporters he stated that as far as he was concerned it was too late; conditions were now entirely changed. Abandoning hope of aid from the Government of the United States in the present revolution the President had resigned and was on board Dutch vessel which leaves tonight and he was unable to communicate with him; troops were disbanded and had possibly joined the revolution. He thought that armed intervention alone from the Government of the United States could save the country from anarchy. He finally stated that he would remain here until the next steamer if I promised escort to protect him on leaving, which I did. Other refugees undecided as to the possibility of leaving tonight. Considerable firing yesterday and last night and still continues. Await arrival Hancock to confer with the Commanding Officer as to landing and taking charge of city. Theodore reported en route Port au Prince via Gonaives. Consular Agent at Gonaives again urgently requests gunboat for the protection of town.

Blanchard.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.00/1008.

[Document 538]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 31, 1914.

Your October 30. When Kansas arrives make similar dispositions for protection of life and property in Gonaives and Saint March that you have for Port au Prince.

When de facto government is established, Department contemplates conversations looking toward customs convention and a free election under supervision of United States commissioners.

Continue to keep Department fully advised and include your recommendations,

Lansing.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/1009.

[Document 539]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, October 31, 1914.

President Zamor, wife and child, sailed last night. Charles Zamor and ministers remain in French Legation. Terrific firing last night. Absolute calm in the city to-day. Hancock arrived this morning. Conferred with commander, and under the circumstances no occasion for landing troops. The city is under martial law commanded by General Redmond Polynice, Acting Commandant of Arrondissement, who is the sole authority for order.

Blanchard.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.00/1157b.

[Document 540]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

No. 17.] Department of State,
Washington, November 4, 1914.

Sir: The attached memorandum regarding the establishment of constitutional government in the Republic of Haiti as a result of fair elections is sent to you for your information. Affairs in Haiti have reached such a state of confusion that the Department believes that only some arrangement similar to that outlined in the memorandum will insure the maintenance of public order in the future and permit recuperation from the losses sustained through revolutionary disturbances.

The Department regards the matter of holding elections under the supervision of the United States as of equal importance with the negotiations of the customs convention, draft of which was contained in the Department’s instruction of July 2, 1914. The plan given in the memorandum attached hereto is the same as that successfully put into operation in the Dominican Republic by the American commissioners in October, 1914.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

[Inclosure.]

memorandum.

The Government of the United States desires nothing for itself from Haiti and no concessions or advantages for its citizens which are not accorded citizens of other countries. It desires only to prove its sincere and disinterested friendship for the republic and its people and to fulfill its responsibilities as the friend to whom in such crises as the present all the world looks to guide Haiti out of its difficulties.

It, therefore, makes the following earnest representations not Only to the existing de facto government of the Haitian republic, but also to all who are in any way responsible for the present posture of affairs there: I. It warns everyone concerned that it is absolutely imperative that the present hostilities should cease and that all who are concerned in them should disperse to their several homes, disbanding the existing armed forces and returning to the peaceful occupations upon which the welfare of the people of the republic depends. This is necessary, and necessary at once. Nothing can be successfully accomplished until this is done.

II. It is also necessary that there should be an immediate reconstitution of political authority in the republic. To this end the Government of the United States very solemnly advises all concerned with the public affairs of the republic to adopt the following plan: 1. Let all those who have any pretensions to be chosen President of the Republic and who can make any sufficient show of exercising a recognized leadership and having an acknowledged following agree upon some responsible and representative man to act as provisional President of the republic. If the candidates can agree in this matter, the Government of the United States will recognize and support the man of their choice as provisional President. If they cannot agree, the Government of the United States will itself name a provisional President, sustain him in the assumption of office, and support him in the exercise of his temporary authority. The provisional President will not be a candidate for President.

2. At the earliest feasible date after the establishment and recognition of the provisional government thus established let elections for a regular President and Congress be held under the authority and direction of the provisional President, who will, it must, of course, be understood, exercise during his tenure of office the full powers of President of the republic; but let it be understood that the Government of the United States will send representatives of its own choosing to observe the election throughout the republic and that it will expect those observers not only to be accorded a courteous welcome, but also to be accorded the freest opportunities to observe the circumstances and processes of the election.

3. Let it be understood that if the United States Government is satisfied that these elections have been free and fair and carried out under conditions which enable the people of the republic to express their real choice, it will recognize the President and Congress thus chosen as the legitimate and constitutional government of the republic and will support them in the exercise of their functions and authority in every way it can. If it should not be satisfied that elections of the right kind have been held, let it be understood that another election will be held at which the mistakes observed will be corrected.

III. A regular and constitutional government having thus been set up, the Government of the United States would feel at liberty thereafter to insist that revolutionary movements cease and that all subsequent changes in the government of the republic be effected by the peaceful processes provided in the Haitian constitution. By no other course can the Government of the United States fulfill its tacitly conceded obligations as the nearest friend of Haiti in her relations with the rest of the world.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/1019.

[Document 541]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, November 6, 1914.

Your October 30. General Vaugues, in command of revolutionary forces which have been coming into Port au Prince for the past two days to the number of three thousand, named for Minister for Foreign Affairs in de facto Government, announced his visit yesterday and called immediately thereafter as special delegate of Theodore to give me the most formal assurance that order would be maintained at Port au Prince, of which I told him I took good note.

General Polynichi still acts as Commandant of Arrondissement and has also given me renewed assurances of his ability to maintain order and that he would call for assistance from the Legation in case of need.

Theodore, whose arrival has been announced for the past two days, now entering city amid ringing of bells and firing of Presidential salute.

Blanchard.

[Untitled] File No. 838.00/1020.

[Document 542]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, November 7, 1914.

The National Assembly met this afternoon and elected Davilmar Theodore constitutional President of the Republic. No other candidates.

Blanchard.

[Untitled] File No. 838.00/1022.

[Document 543]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, November 10, 1914.

The President was inaugurated this morning.

Blanchard.

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.00/1020.

[Document 544]

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 12, 1914, 2 p.m.

Your November 7, and previous relevant correspondence. If in your opinion government headed by Theodore is de facto, you are instructed to inform him that recognition by the United States will be granted him as provisional president when a commission to be named by the Haitian Government with full powers to act upon certain questions of interest to this Government and to the Republic of Haiti is in position to give necessary assurances.

Department desires this commission to consist of three persons who will come to Washington to negotiate a convention or conventions with the United States covering following questions, and that de facto government instruct them accordingly: First. Customs convention between United States and Haiti in accordance with Department’s instructions to you dated July 2.

Second. Settlement of all matters outstanding between Government of Haiti and the American railroad.

Third. Settlement of questions outstanding between Government of Haiti and the bank.

Fourth. Agreement by Haiti to give full protection to all foreign interests in Haiti.

Fifth. Agreement by Haiti never to lease any Haitian territory at Mole St. Nicholas or anywhere else in the country to any European Government for use as a naval or coaling station.

Bryan.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/1024.

[Document 545]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, November 18, 1914, 3 p.m.

Your November 12, 2 p.m. and my November 7. Theodore regularly elected President by Senate and House in National Assembly in accordance with Haitian Constitution. Cabinet ministers appointed. Official notice of President’s election received last evening from Joseph Justin, Minister Foreign Affairs. Under these circumstances is it desired that I carry out your instruction of November 12, 2 p.m.?

Blanchard.

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.00/1024.

[Document 546]

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 16, 1914, 11 a.m.

Your November 13, 3 p.m. Department desires you to carry out instructions contained in its November 12, 2 p.m. Add paragraph sixth, Haitian commission to be empowered to sign a protocol for the settlement by arbitration of pending claims of American citizens against Haiti.

Bryan.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/1028.

[Document 547]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, November 18, 1914.

Had an interview this evening by appointment with President Theodore at which Minister of Foreign Affairs and Chief of Protocol and later Minister of the Interior were present. Complied with your instructions of November 12, 2 p.m. and November 16, 11 a.m. The President seems quite disposed to appointment of commission but insists in such case on recognition, not as Provisional President but as President, having been, as stated in my November 13, 3 p.m., regularly elected by the National Assembly in accordance with Haitian Constitution. His views emphatically sustained by members of Cabinet present. Under these circumstances strongly recommend granting recognition as President upon appointment of commission as outlined. Respectfully submit advisability early favorable opinion to avail of their present seemingly good disposition.

Blanchard.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.00/1028.

[Document 548]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 21, 1914, 7 p.m.

Your November 18. If the election of Theodore as President of Haiti by the National Assembly is in strict conformity with the Constitution of that country, the Government of the United States will formally recognize Theodore as President of Haiti, but not until after the arrival in Washington of duly appointed commission bearing credentials of the Haitian Government for the adjustment of the matters stated in the Department’s telegrams dated November 12, 2 p.m., and November 16, 11 a.m. There must be no equivocation in the character of the credentials in question, and they must be satisfactory to the Department before recognition will be extended to Théodore by the Government of the United States.

Use expedition in formation and departure of the commission and keep the Department advised of the progress made.

Lansing.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.002/31.

[Document 549]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, November 24, 1914, 2 p.m.

Bill introduced in Chamber of Deputies for the issue of 16,000,000 gourdes, paper currency.

Blanchard.

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.00/1028.

[Document 550]

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 24, 1914, 5 p.m.

In order that there may be no misconstruction of the Department’s November 21, 7 p.m., the Government of the United States will formally recognize Theodore as President of Haiti as soon as Haitian Commission in Washington has signed satisfactory protocols covering all matters mentioned in Department’s November 12, 2 p.m. and November 13, 3 p.m.6

Bryan.

6 There is no such instruction on file. The telegram of Nov. 16, 11 a.m., in reply to the Minister’s Nov. 13, 3 p.m., is doubtless the one meant.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/1039.

[Document 551]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, November 25, 1914, 3 p.m.

Before receipt of your November 24, 5 p.m., this morning, Department’s instruction of November 21, 7 p.m., had already been complied with in an interview with the Minister of Foreign Affairs, who expressed gratification at the decision. Particular stress was laid by me as to the character of credentials and it was well understood that they must be satisfactory to the Department before recognition of Theodore as President would be extended. Minister of Foreign Affairs advised President Theodore accordingly and arranged an audience for me this evening. I was informed of the good disposition of President Theodore for the appointment of the commission as desired and was told that he already had in mind the names of persons to serve thereon.

On receipt of Department’s November 24, 5 p.m., I caused postponement of interview with the President until receipt of further instructions.

Blanchard.

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.51/367.

[Document 552]

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 27, 1914, 5 p.m.

Your November 24, 2 p.m. You are instructed discreetly to use your influence to discourage the issue of any paper currency at this time. This is one of the matters which, in the opinion of the Department, had best be taken up when the Haitian Commission arrives in Washington. Department is informed Bank of Haiti will refuse to receive this proposed issue as legal tender.

Bryan.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.00/1039.

[Document 553]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 28, 1914, 8 p.m.

Your November 25, 3 p.m. You may inform Theodore that the Department is ready to use its good offices with the Bank to secure, first, a small loan to cover legitimate traveling expenses of the commission; second, as soon as you report that the credentials of the commission are satisfactory, a further loan to take care of the running expenses of the Government during the time that the commission is in session.

Department’s November 24, 5 p.m., was drafted to prevent any possibility of bad faith on the part of Théodore.

Lansing.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/1040.

[Document 554]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, December 1, 1914, 9 a.m.

I respectfully request earliest possible instructions whether I am to negotiate recognition of Theodore in conformity with instructions November 21, 7 p.m., or November 24, 5 p.m.

Blanchard.

[Untitled] File No. 838.51/359.

[Document 555]

[Untitled]

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, December 2, 1914, 10 a.m.

The Department’s November 27, 5 p.m., I had an interview with Minister for Foreign Affairs last evening and endeavored to discourage the issue of paper currency and strongly advocated your views. Minister for Foreign Affairs said this issue would not dispose of financial question to be taken up in Washington on arrival of the commission, but as the bank had refused any assistance and the Government unable to place a loan and without funds it was compelled to take this course to meet pressing immediate needs.

Blanchard.

[Untitled] File No. 838.00/1041.

[Document 556]

[Untitled]

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, December 2, 1914, 3 p.m.

Your November 28, 8 p.m. and my December 1, 9 a.m.* * * Minister of Foreign Affairs informed me last evening that as a result of campaign being made by the Senate and public against control of customs by foreign power, the Haitian Government finds it impossible to empower its commission to carry on negotiations under this head, but that there has been prepared a counter project for financial control granting certain concessions and privileges which is thought to be a fair substitute therefor, avoiding the irritating and offensive idea of customs control. It may be well to remark that to-morrow Minister of Foreign Affairs is to be interpellated by the Senate regarding his negotiations with this Legation with regards to commission and customs control. Minister of Foreign Affairs showed me a part of a draft of this counter project. This may or may not be acceptable to the Department as it does not cover strictly Article I of your November 12, 2 p.m.

However, I would respectfully suggest that the commission be accepted with credentials empowering its members to negotiate but in view of changed circumstances to avoid possible misunderstanding that recognition will not be granted until satisfactory conclusion of negotiations. Urgent, reply requested.

Blanchard.

[Untitled] File No. 838.00/1044.

[Document 557]

[Untitled]

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, December 4, 1914, 9 a.m.

Yesterday Minister for Foreign Affairs was interpellated by the Senate as to foreign policy of the Government and notably regarding recognition, appointment of commission and customs control. In the course of the proceedings the Provisional Government8 the Senate rose in a body, denounced Minister for Foreign Affairs, accused him of endeavoring to sell the country to the United States and a concerted attempt was made to [omission] him severe blows. He was rescued through the efforts of Senators and Cabinet Members and under their protection left the Senate amidst the wildest excitement. Minister for Foreign Affairs has since presented his resignation.

Blanchard.

8 Corrupted in transmission.

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.51/369.

[Document 558]

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 4, 1914, 11 a.m.

Your December 2, 10 a.m. You may inform Theodore that an issue of paper money at this time might compel the Department to cancel its offer contained in first paragraph of its November 28, 8 p.m. Continue to keep Department fully advised.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 838.00/1040.

[Document 559]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, December 4, 1914, noon.

Your December 1, 9 a.m. and December 2, 3 p.m. Department interprets last paragraph of your December 2, 3 p.m., to indicate that you are in accord with Department’s November 24, 5 p.m. You are therefore instructed to inform Théodore: 1. That the Department will extend provisional recognition upon the appointment of a commission with full powers, satisfactory to you, in accordance with Department’s telegraphic instructions dated November 12, 2 p.m., and November 16, 11 a.m. At the same time the Department is ready to use its good offices with the Bank in accordance with the first paragraph of its November 28, 8 p.m.

2. Formal and complete recognition of Theodore as President will only be extended after commission has signed satisfactory protocols at Washington in accordance with Department’s November 24, 5 p.m.

Report whether you consider additional United States naval forces desirable in Haitian waters at the present time. Department desires to be guided as far as may be possible by your recommendations.

Bryan.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.51/371.

[Document 560]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, December 7, 1914, 3 p.m.

Your December 4, 11 a.m., only received to-day. No Minister of Foreign Affairs. Unable so far to obtain an interview with the President. Most urgently request earliest possible instruction solicited in my December 1, 9 a.m., and December 2, 3 p.m., as to conditions for recognition of Theodore. Cable still interrupted.

Blanchard.

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.51/369.

[Document 561]

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 7, 1914, 5 p.m.

Your December 2, 10 a.m. You are instructed to inform Theodore that the United States will refuse to regard as legal any such issue of paper money as he proposes.

French and German Ambassadors in Washington have been advised in this sense, in order that their nationals in Haiti may be informed. You may show this telegram to your French and German colleagues.

Bryan.

The National Bank of the Republic of Haiti to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.516/13.

[Document 562]

The National Bank of the Republic of Haiti to the Secretary of State.

New York,
December 8, 1914.

Sir: It is very urgent that the National Bank of the Republic of Haiti, Port au Prince, transfer to New York $110,000 in gold. Due to the virtual stoppage of communication by merchant vessel, it is practically impossible to bring this gold here at the moment. We would therefore very much appreciate it if you would arrange to have this gold brought up by the first United States warship sailing from Port au Prince, and advise us in due course what ship will bring the gold and when she sails, so that we may effect the necessary insurance.

As we have been advised that the cable has been cut, we take the liberty of enclosing a message to the National Bank of the Republic of Haiti, with the request that you have the same forwarded for our account to Guantánamo and from there by wireless to a United States warship at Port au Prince, and beg to express our appreciation of your courtesy in the matter.

Yours very truly,

National Bank of the Republic of Haiti,
Henry H. Wehrhane, Vice President.

[Inclosure.]

[Untitled]

Ban que Nation ale de la Republique d’Haiti,
Port au Prince.

Have hundred and ten thousand dollars gold packed for shipment to Hallgarten by United States warship. You will be advised later name of ship and date of sailing.

Henry H, Wehrhane, Vice President.

[Untitled] File No. 838.516/14.

[Document 563]

[Untitled]

[Telegram.]

New York, [undated ; received December 10, 1914.]

Referring to our letter of December 8 and telegram to Haiti bank attached to said letter, please substitute for said telegram the following: From total gold you hold, retain four hundred thousand dollars there. Have balance packed for shipment uninsured to Hallgarten by United States warship. You will be advised later name ship and date sailing. Cable immediately amount you will ship. Send by first mail all statements condition bank, also statements customs receipts since June 30.

Wehrhane.

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.516/13.

[Document 564]

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 10, 1914, 1 p.m.

Please transmit following telegram to National Bank of the Republic of Haiti:

[Telegram quoted in above telegram.]

Bryan.

The National Bank of the Republic of Haiti to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.516/15.

[Document 565]

The National Bank of the Republic of Haiti to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

New York, [undated ; received December 11, 1914.]

Will you kindly have the following telegram transmitted to Port au Prince for our account: Ban que Nation ale de la Republiqtte d’Haiti,
Port au Prince.

Referring to our previous message, you are authorized to deliver gold to Captain United States Ship Machias due Port au Prince fifteenth. Wire immediately amount you are shipping.

Wehrhane.

National Bank of the Republic of Haiti

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.516/15.

[Document 566]

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 12, 1914.

Please transmit the following to National Bank of Haiti: [Telegram quoted in the above.]

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.51/379a.

[Document 567]

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 12, 1914, 5 p.m.

Please say to the Government that this nation has no desire to assume responsibilities in regard to Haiti’s fiscal system except in accordance with the wishes of the Government. In expressing a willingness to do in Haiti what we are doing in Santo Domingo, this Government was actuated wholly by a disinterested desire to render assistance. If for any reason the Government thinks it best not to consider this proposition further you will not press the matter. If the Government again intimates a desire to consider the subject you may proceed in accordance with the instructions already received.

You may further say to the Government that the question of recognition will be considered on its merits and that recognition will be granted whenever this Government is satisfied that there is in Haiti a government capable of maintaining order and meeting the country’s obligations to outside nations. Such a government is impossible however unless it rests upon the consent of the governed and gives expression to the will of the people. It will be necessary, therefore, for us to have information as to the fiscal standing and general plans of the Government and as to its attitude toward foreigners and the obligations which it owes to the citizens of other nations, including its attitude on the subjects relating to the Mole of St. Nicholas.

W. J. Bryan.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/1063.

[Document 568]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, December 12, 1914, 11 p.m.

In the course of Foreign Minister’s interpellation in the Senate reported in the telegram of December 4, 9 a.m., the interpolator, on the refusal of Minister of Foreign Affairs to give any information as to the negotiations at that time which he considered premature, produced and read a draft of our convention for the customs control as well as the counter-project referred to in my telegram of December 2, 3 p.m. which contemplated financial control and had appeared to me as possibly acceptable. This was the cause of the manifestation against the Minister for Foreign Affairs resulting in his resignation and the abandonment of that counter-project by the Government.

On December 10 I asked for a private audience with Theodore, which was granted me last evening. At this interview—which Doctor Bobo, Minister of the Interior, Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, Minister of Public Works, Chief of Protocol and several Generals attended—I stated the conditions on which recognition as President would be granted, expressing regret that interruption of the cable had caused a delay in receipt of my Government’s instruction as to this.

I recalled the offer previously made to the former Minister for Foreign Affairs of the good offices of my Government with the Bank for a loan for the traveling expenses of the commission and the running expenses of the Haitian Government during the negotiations in Washington which offer I stated my Government might be compelled to withdraw should the contemplated issue of paper money be made. I protested as to this issue as being in violation of the contract with the Bank and a matter which it was contemplated should be taken up by the commission and asked the decision of the President as to the appointment of desired commission in conformity with stated conditions.

Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon the request of Theodore, who talks very little, replied. He regretted it was impossible for the Haitian Government to send a commission authorized to negotiate in any manner a control of customs and added that a second counter-project which had been approved by the entire Cabinet had been prepared, which he thought had been submitted to me on November 24 by Mr. Justin in accordance with a decision of the Cabinet, which I assured him I had never seen. He admitted that this project did not comprise customs control but contemplated greater concessions and advantages to Americans and upon their most urgent and pressing appeal I finally consented to submit this counter project to my Government when the same should be presented to me by Dr. Bobo stating however that if it did not provide for all the conditions set forth in your November 12, 2 p.m. and November 16, 11 a.m., I greatly feared it would prove unacceptable.

This afternoon Dr. Bobo delivered to me this counter project and during our interview I again impressed upon him your instruction December 4, 11 a.m., and December 7, 5 p.m., which latter I had previously made the subject of a note to the Foreign Office and had communicated to my French and German colleagues.

Below is a résumé of the proposed convention—which contains no provision for either financial or customs control, but it is agreed that Article V of your November 12, 2 p.m. will be added—which, in fulfillment of my promise, I submit to the consideration of the Department, respectfully requesting an early decision.

Haitian Government’s counter project to Department’s proposed convention.

Provides for the appointment of three commissioners to the United States to negotiate as to: 1. Appointment of three American and three Haitian engineers for the prospecting, etc., of mines in Haiti.

2. Salaries and expenses of the engineers to be borne by Haiti during preliminary investigations.

3. The Haitian Government will concede to the Government of the United States or to Americans or American companies approved of by the Government the exploitation for twenty years of the mines designated by the engineers.

4. Exploitation by a corporation. All expenses of installation, exploitation etc. of the same to be borne by the concessionaire.

5. One third of the stock to be the property of the Republic of Haiti.

6. The shares of the Government of Haiti to be registered and inalienable during the life of the concession.

7. Assistance from the United States in obtaining for Haiti a loan the amount to be determined, to enable it to consolidate its debt, meet its obligations past and future and reform its monetary system.

8. In return for advantages granted by Article 7, the Haitian Government will grant preference to the Government of the United States and citizens in commercial and industrial affairs while giving full protection to foreign interests in Haiti. (a) Under equal conditions in a concession to be awarded, to give preference to the United States should it desire it.

(b) Settlement at the earliest possible moment by arbitral commission appointed in accordance with commercial law of Haiti of all questions pending between the United States Legation at Port au Prince and the Department of Foreign Affairs of Haiti.

9. Good offices of the United States to Haiti to secure modification of contract between Haitian Government and Bank.

Convention to continue in force for a period of (blank) years from and after its ratification by the contracting parties in accordance with their respective laws.

The bill for the issue of sixteen million paper money has passed the Chamber of Deputies and has been sent to the Senate and by it referred to its finance committee.

Louis Borno has been appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs.

Blanchard.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.516/17.

[Document 569]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, December 14, 1914, 11 a.m.

Please transmit following message to Wehrhane, care Hallgarten and Company, New York: Can ship five hundred thousand dollars gold. Must advise you that transportation from the bank to the wharf presents serious danger owing to the state of mind of the population. We are sending you statements asked for. Doctor Heraux has been appointed Minister of Finance vice Montreuil.

Bank of Haiti.

Blanchard.

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.516/17.

[Document 570]

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 15, 1914, 6 p.m.

Your December 14, 11 a.m. Request Commanding Officer Hancock to land as many marines as necessary to furnish safe escort for gold from bank to Machias.

Bryan.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 833.00/1065.

[Document 571]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, December 15, 1914, 11 p.m.

New Minister for Foreign Affairs called by appointment at the Legation yesterday evening and after a two hours interview during which the points of your November 12, 2 p.m., and your November 16, 11 a.m., were discussed and their adoption pressed by me, the following conclusions were reached:

He had no knowledge of Doctor Bobo’s counter-project cabled under date of December 12, 11 p.m.

As to one [first point in the telegram November 12, 2 p.m.], Customs Convention: it was an impossibility.

Two, National Railroad Company of Haiti: stay of proceedings to December 28 could be extended and question settled at Washington through the good offices of the Department between the Company and Menos, Haitian Minister, who would receive full power to that end in lieu of a commission of three members.

Three, Bank: the Haitian Government has no desire to issue paper money but it was compulsory, a case of force majeure. The bill would be adopted but would contain a clause specifying that in case of agreement with the Bank the issue would not be made. (This was confirmed by Minister for Foreign Affairs during my visit this afternoon to return his call.) Proposition of agreement had been made by the Government to the Bank. Should they fail, the Haitian Government would be willing through the good offices of the Department to have the question settled in Washington by the Bank and Minister Menos, specially accredited above.

Four: accepted.

Five: accepted.

Six: accepted.

The above was confirmed in a lengthy note verbale received late this afternoon.

I respectfully submit the above to Department’s favorable consideration and request instruction as to recognition under changed conditions.

Blanchard.

[Untitled] File No. 838.516/23.

[Document 572]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, December 18, 1914, 10 a.m.

Your December 15, 6 p.m. Gold embarked yesterday Machias by unarmed marines. No disturbance. Machias sailed at two and Hancock at five p.m. Wheeling in port.

Blanchard.

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.00/1065.

[Document 573]

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 19, 1914, 4 p.m.

Your December 12, 11 p.m. and your December 15, 11 p.m. Counter proposition seems based upon a misunderstanding of this Government’s position. While we desire to encourage in every proper way American investments in Haiti, we believe that this can be better done by contributing to stability and order than by favoring special concessions to Americans. American capital will gladly avail itself of business opportunities in Haiti when assured of the peace and quiet necessary for profitable production. Capital will not flow into Haiti except upon exorbitant terms and for speculative profits unless there is an assurance of peace and orderly government. If United States can, as a neighbor and friend, assist the Government and people of Haiti as it has assisted the Government and people of Santo Domingo, it will gladly do so provided that assistance is desired; but, as stated in our telegram December 12, 5 p.m., this Government does not care to assume these responsibilities except on request of the Haitian Government. The Government of the United States does not deem it proper to enter into such arrangements as those outlined in the proposition just submitted. The counter-proposition does not give any assurance that the Government of Haiti is stable or any promise of a reign of peace and prosperity. When American investors seek, to secure concessions we should be informed of the name and address of such Americans and of the terms or advantages asked, so that we may acquaint ourselves with the whole subject. Our obligation to the American people requires that we shall give all legitimate assistance to American investors in Haiti, but we are under obligations just as binding to protect Haiti, as far as our influence goes, from injustice or exploitation at the hands of Americans. Therefore, in order to perform our duty completely we must be fully informed as to the facts in each case.

Bryan.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/1068.

[Document 574]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, December 21, 1914, 9 a.m.

My telegram December 15, 11 p.m. Instructions your December 12, 5 p.m. complied with verbally morning of December 17 and in writing on the 19th upon request of Minister of Foreign Affairs.

Blanchard.

The Minister of Haiti to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.516/27.

[Document 575]

The Minister of Haiti to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Legation of Haiti,
Washington, December 22, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: In continuation of the interview you so kindly granted me this afternoon, I have the honor to lay before you the following:

In 1910 the Government of the Republic of Haiti entered with the “Banque de l’Union Panisienne” into: (1) a grant contract for the establishment and operation of a State Bank to be styled “Banque Nationale de la République d’Haiti”; and (2) a foreign loan contract. The loan was to be for 65,000,000 francs face value and to be represented by 130,000 bonds of 500 francs each bearing interest at the rate of 5 per cent, per annum. The Banque de l’Union Parisiehne undertook, to take up the 130,000 bonds for the contractual lump sum of 47,000,000 francs out of which 10,000,000 of francs were to be held in reserve to carry out a program of monetary reform including the withdrawal of all the paper money turned in by the Haitian Government.

I bring to mind, in passing, that the Department of State had seen fit to protest against those contracts, going so far as to say that they seriously affected the commercial and financial interests of the United States as well as the economic and political prosperity of Haiti.

I will also mention incidentally, that on the 5th of January, 1914, a Central Commission for the Supervision of Redemption having called at the main office of the said Banque Nationale de la République d’Haiti for the purpose of verifying the presence in the bank of the money reserved for the withdrawal of paper currency and yielded by the drafts drawn by the Haitian Government on the 10,000,000 francs allotted for the monetary reform as well as by the taxes provided by the Haitian law of August 13, 1903, was excusably surprised at finding that the Bank with which $558,548.88 had been deposited, only had $320,000 in its strong boxes.

That same bank, charged with the duties of State Treasurer of Haiti and responsible holder of the public funds, prevailed upon the forces of the United States warship, in violation of its engagements and the most positive constitutional and fiscal laws, to land on Haitian territory and remove from its strong boxes to that ship funds allotted for the redemption of paper money and unquestionably and exclusively belonging to the Haitian nation.

My Government deeply deplores an arbitrary and offensive intervention which carries a flagrant invasion of the sovereignty and independence of the Republic of Haiti. In forwarding to you its protest which is guided by the unanimous sentiment of the Haitians I firmly hope that you will have it at heart to disown so excessive an action and to order such restitutions and amends as may be necessary.

Be pleased to accept [etc.]

Solon Ménos.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.516/26.

[Document 576]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, December 22, 1914, midnight.

Referring to my cable of December 18, 10 p.m. [a.m.], and previous relevant cables, the following note verbale was received this morning from the Foreign Office: [Translation.]

The Department of Foreign Relations has learned with inexpressible surprise that, at the very hour that courteous negotiations were being carried on between the Legation of the United States and it with a view to resuming normal diplomatic relations between the two Governments, American officers and marines had lent their assistance to the National Bank of the Republic to take from its safes and embark on board a United States warship funds which are the property of the Republic of Haiti and which were on deposit at the bank in trust “affected” [sic] for a monetary reform.

The material fact that the funds embarked are, In part, taken from this deposit is formally admitted by the bank itself in an official statement annexed to the present note.

The Department of Foreign Relations remains convinced that the good faith of the Government of the United States has been imposed upon (surprise) on this occasion, and hopes to be confirmed in its conviction by explanations to reassure (qui rassurent) the Haitian people, justly alarmed.

Annexed to this note verbale are two official reports: one from the central committee of control of the retrait delegated by Minister of Finance dated December 17, stating that the director of the bank had refused to permit them to verify the gold on deposit at the bank for the retrait, adding that he had shipped that afternoon a large sum of gold on an American warship in pursuance of telegraphic instructions from the principal office, and that he had also refused to show them the above telegraphic instructions or to state the amount of gold shipped, admitting that part of it was of the retrait fund lent, declining to state the amount; and the second from the above-mentioned committee and other Government officials with a justice of peace as required by law, dated December 18, stating that in the absence of the director the employee of the bank in charge had declared that he had been specially instructed to state that the bank refused categorically to permit verification of the gold intended for the retrait, and as to the particular points referred them to the director’s statement of the 17th.

Instructions for reply to the note verbale respectfully requested.

Blanchard.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.51/381.

[Document 577]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

No. 23.] American Legation,
Port au Prince, December 24, 1914.

Sir: Referring to my December 2, 10 a.m., and December 12, 11 p.m., I have the honor to forward herewith copy of the note dated December 10 which this Legation addressed to the Department of Foreign Relations in compliance with the cable instructions of the Department of State of December 7, 5 p.m., with reference to the refusal of the United States to regard as legal the proposed issue of paper money, together with a copy and translation of the note verbale received in reply thereto under date of December 15, 1914.

I have, [etc.]

A. Bailly-Blanchard.

[Inclosure 1.]

Minister Blanchard to the Foreign Office.

American Legation,
Port au Prince, December 10, 1914.

The American Minister, in accordance with instructions from his Government, has the honor to inform the Department of Foreign Affairs that the United States will refuse to regard as legal the proposed issue of paper money.

[Inclosure 2—Translation.]

The Foreign Office to Minister Blanchard.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Port au Prince, December 15, 1914.

note verbale.

The Department of Foreign Affairs has had the honor to receive the note verbale of December 10 by which the American Minister, in accordance with instructions from his Government, informs the Department that the Government of the United States will refuse to regard as legal the proposed issue of paper money.

The Department of Foreign Affairs begs the American Legation to be good enough to observe that no law, properly speaking, prohibits in Haiti the issue of paper money; that, quite to the contrary, several laws have, in the past, authorized such issues.

It is true that according to the terms of Article 13 of the contract of concession of the National Bank of the Republic of Haiti “from the establishment and during the life of the concession, the Government can neither issue paper money, fiduciary money nor nickel”; but, although the contract has been sanctioned by a law, the conventional character, synallagmatic of the act as found in Article 13, remains without doubt. And this act binds the Government of Haiti as much as it binds the National Bank of the Republic of Haiti. Now, if it can be established that the Bank has openly violated this contract, how can it complain that the Government, on its part, does not believe itself more obligated to it?

Article 23 states thus: “All diplomatic intervention is formally prohibited.”

Article 3 stipulates: The Bank shall be constituted a French Stock Company in accordance with French laws on such companies.” And now the Department finds itself in the presence not only of a diplomatic intervention, but further of an intervention produced by the American Legation to the benefit of a personne morale of French nationality.

The Department is therefore able to estimate, from a double point of view, that the intervention of the Legation of the United States in favor of the Bank is not legal, and, in consequence, begs the Legation to recognize that there is reason for desisting from this intervention. It limits itself, in this respect, to place its reserves [reservations].

And, as a matter of information, by a cordial deference to the Government of the United States—of which the special assistance has always been in the past so highly useful to the Republic of Haiti, so highly appreciated by her, and whose moral support is called to render to this country and to her Government services so eminent—the Department of Foreign Affairs does not hesitate to state here the positive reason, so clear as to be evident, which justifies in law and in fact the eventual issue of paper money.

In accordance with Article 9 of the contract of concession of the National Bank of the Republic of Haiti, the withdrawal of one-half of the paper money ought to be put in execution 15 months, at the latest, after the commencement of operations. And in accordance with Article 12 the law of withdrawal ought to be executory, i. e., promulgated and published, within one year after the commencement of operations.

These delays, thus determined, necessarily suppose the normal continuity of the existing situation. But this continuity has failed. Happenings constituting cases of force majeure have come to impede the strict execution of Articles 9 and 12 as to the time prescribed; they have deeply altered the original situation, and caused to miscarry the attempts made to put them in execution with a view to realize the monetary reform; and today we find ourselves in the presence of economic and financial conditions completely upset less by the political events of the country than by the formidable event of the European war.

Whether it is impossible to execute the last law on the retrait, on account of the grave economic and financial perturbations, is a question already settled, and by the National Bank itself. This is established, in effect, by the terms of its letter of August 1, 1914 to the Secretary of State of Finance (Moniteur of October 21 and 24, 1914): The perturbations provoked by the international situation in all the foreign markets begin to have their repercussion in Haiti. The demands for gold flow in since this morning and the funds reserved for the retrait threaten to escape from us. It appears to us dangerous that the exchange of gold against notes, prescribed by the law of August 26, 1913, continue in these conditions.

The same case of force majeure is invoked equally by the Bank to suspend the execution of the current Budgetary Convention.

It has taken this measure, it writes on August 27 last, “by reason of the moratorium existing in France and of the impossibility of securing funds for the service of the Budgetary Convention.” It repeats on September 2: “This measure has been imposed upon us by exterior circumstances and the moratoria which they have provoked in all parts of the world.” It has again repeated on September 9: “The serious reasons which you have invoked, in justification of the measures taken by us, exists; no one can doubt it.” And it added: “They have even become stronger during these days by the aggravation of the European crisis and the forced stopping of business which has resulted in the entire world.”

To sum up—and from the acknowledgment of the Bank itself—as consequences produced by the European conflict, not only the law of the retrait of 1913 cannot be executed, but besides it is also impossible to procure funds.

There is evidently a very grave situation. But is it without issue? By no means.

The Republic of Haiti, which possesses on deposit in the vaults of the National Bank more than one and a half million dollars in gold coin and silver ingots, cannot be reduced to fold its arms and perish from hunger. The Republic of Haiti, which gave itself the trouble of founding a State Bank, confided to it the service of the Treasury and endowed it with the considerable privilege of the issue of notes, cannot but find the loyal cooperation of this Bank at the difficult hour where outside circumstances, that we have not created, bind painfully the nation.

It is by this same contract which binds the two parties that this cooperation is imposed upon it. In fact, by Articles 12 and 16 of the contract of the concession, the Bank has formally accepted the following obligations towards the Haitian State: 1. To give all its assistance for the elaboration of a law relative to the plan of the monetary reform.

2. To give all its assistance for the application of this law.

3. To lend its ass stance for the establishment of a budgetary convention.

It is this triple assistance that the Government, in the face of present difficulties which result from a case of force majeure, comes today to claim from the Bank.

To a new situation must correspond new measures. The retrait can no longer be made as has been foreseen; it is necessary to seek another system. The budgetary convention can no longer rely upon exterior funds; it is necessary to find others.

And if it is possible, from a double point of view, to imagine between the State and the Bank a new understanding which may conciliate the parties in the limits of justice to the dignity and respective interest honestly understood, the Bank would have absolute obligation, moral and contractual at the same time, to accept fully. Now, this is possible.

The Secretary of State for Finance has been authorized to present to the Bank the basis of a similar agreement. In case this State institution refuses it its adhesion, it will be definitely and manifestly established that it intends, by a plan of which the future would reveal the purpose, to drive us to the only resource that remains to meet urgent necessities as much of the public administration as of the Haitian people—to the emission of paper money, an emission for which full justification will appear from thence evident.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.51/374.

[Document 578]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, December 24, 1914, 4 p.m.

Bill for issue of eight million gourdes paper money promulgated. It does not contemplate participation or assistance by the Bank in advance of reversion. There is no clause providing that in case of an agreement with the Bank the issue will not be made. Extra session of Congress closed yesterday.

Blanchard.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/1092.

[Document 579]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

No. 24.] American Legation,
Port au Prince, December 28, 1914.

Sir: Referring to the Department’s December 12, 5 p.m., and December 19, 4 p.m., and my December 15, 11 p.m., and December 21, 9 a.m., I have the honor to forward herewith copy of the note dated December 19 which, at the request of the Minister of Foreign Affairs, I addressed to him in confirmation of the interview which I had had with him on the morning of December 17 in pursuance of your instructions of December 12, 5 p.m.

The letter was addressed to him as [a] private note with no mention of his official title, and to my great surprise I received in reply the official communication under date of December 23, a copy and translation of which I herewith enclose.

I at once called to the attention of the Minister the fact of the form of my letter to which he had replied by an official communication; that my letter in no way implied recognition of the present Government. In answer, he said that there was no misunderstanding and it was perfectly well understood that my Government had not recognized Davilmar Theodore as President of Haiti, but he considered I was the official Representative of the United States to the de facto Government and it was for this reason that he had addressed me as above, but that hereafter communications, as had been in the past, would be in the third person from and to the Legation and the Department of Foreign Relations.

I have [etc.]

A. Bailly-Blanchard.

[Inclosure 1.]

Minister Blanchard to Mr. Louis Borno, Minister of Foreign Affairs.

American Legation,
Port au Prince, December 19, 1914.

Your Excellency: In conformity with the wish which your excellency expressed, I have the honor to confirm herewith what, in accordance with the instructions of my Government, I had the honor of saying in our interview of the day before yesterday.

The American Nation has no desire to assume the responsibilities in regard to Haiti’s fiscal system except in accordance with the wishes of the Government of Haiti. In expressing a willingness to do in Haiti what it is doing in Santo Domingo, the Government of the United States was actuated wholly by a disinterested desire to render assistance.

Your excellency having again stated to me that it was an impossibility for the Haitian Government to consider this proposition further, my Government does not insist.

With regard to the question of recognition, it will be considered on its merits, and recognition will be granted whenever the Government of the United States is satisfied that there is in Haiti a government capable of maintaining order and meeting the country’s obligations to outside nations. Such a government is impossible, however, unless it rests upon the consent of the governed and gives expression to the will of the people. It will be necessary, therefore, for the Government of the United States to have information as to the fiscal standing and general plans of the Government of Haiti as to its attitude toward foreigners and the obligations which it owes to the citizens of other nations, including its attitude on the subjects relating to the Mole St. Nicolas. Please accept [etc.]

A. Bailly-Blanchard.

[Inclosure 2—Translation.]

The Minister of Foreign Affairs to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State for Foreign Relations,
Port au Prince, December 23, 1914.

Mr. Minister: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of the official communication dated December 19, by which you have been good enough to announce to me that the Government of the United States did not insist on the proposition which it had made to the Government of Haiti of a customs convention similar to that which exists in Santo Domingo.

In taking note of your declaration, the Haitian Government is happy to recognize, once more, the admirable height of principles and noble disinterestedness which inspire the policy of the United States. The Republic of Haiti rejoices sincerely in being able to count on the active sympathy of the Government at Washington with a view to aiding the greatest possible development of cordial and fruitful relations between the two countries, by the development of our national resources obtained through the powerful aid of American capital and American industry.

Referring, Mr. Minister, to the last part of your important communication of December 19, please permit me to refer you, for confirmation, to the declarations contained in the two notes which the Department of Foreign Relations had the honor to address to you on the fifteenth of this month.

The Government of President Theodore, constitutionally and freely elected by the Representatives of the nation, presents to the foreign Governments, as much by this constitutional origin as by the force of its organization and by the firm principles of order which characterize it, all the guaranties and all the rigorous conditions of a normal and stable government.

In renewing to you here this formal assurance, I am happy to seize this occasion [etc.]

Louis Borno.

The Minister of Haiti to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.516/37.

[Document 580]

The Minister of Haiti to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Legation of Haiti,
Washington, December 29, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: Referring to my letter dated December 22 last and to our conversation on Saturday last, December 26, I think that it may not be superfluous, in the presence of the disclosures and comments of the press of the United States, accurately to define the object of the communication which I have been instructed by my Government to make on the subject of the shipment of the funds deposited with the National Bank of Haiti. That institution in so doing assuredly acted most unlawfully and clearly made itself liable to the State which had entrusted it with its Treasury service. The act is all the more reprehensible as the institution could not misunderstand the absolute interdiction placed upon it as to the removal of the funds which, in the express language of the law of August 11, 1903, constituted a sacred deposit in the vaults of the National Bank of Haiti. It was so well aware of the condition of things in this respect, that, when on January 5, 1914, the Central Commission for the Supervision of Redemption, presided over by the Secretary of State for Finance, discovered the shortage mentioned in my last letter, Messrs. John Allen and H. Desrue, joint managers, had no other recourse than a promise to make good the deficiency as soon as the gold the Bank expected from New York arrived, as shown by the protocol which the joint managers unhesitatingly signed and which contains the following positive statement of the aforesaid Central Commission: “We protested against the proceeding of the Bank and declared to the managers of the institution that the funds allotted for redemption constitute a sacred deposit which it is forbidden to touch under any pretext for any use other than that assigned to it by law.”

I may add that it was the Bank itself which in a letter addressed by Mr. H. Desrue to the Secretary of State for Finance on August 1, 1914, reverted to the consideration that had already been presented by his main office on June 26 last, and, averring that those considerations were “reenforced by the present European crisis,” deemed it advisable for the Haitian Government to take prompt measures toward stopping the exchange of gold for exchange notes as required by the law of August 26, 1913, under existing conditions.

It is therefore inconceivable that it could have believed itself authorized to withdraw from its strong boxes and put on board a ship valuables that did not belong to it and are the property of the Republic of Haiti. Furthermore if it thought itself competent to enter into a controversy with the Haitian Government on the subject, all it had to do was to resort to the arbitral jurisdiction provided by Article 23 of the grant contract with that French corporation which article concludes as follows: “Any diplomatic claim is positively barred.”

At all events the Haitian nation was intensely surprised and pained at the Government of the United States passing judgment on internal measures enacted by the Legislature of the Republic of Haiti and lending the cooperation of its sailors in an act which cannot in any way be defended and might prove to be such as to rekindle misunderstandings and apprehensions that had been so happily dispelled by the honest application of the principle of equality among States.

That is the proceeding of which the Haitian Government has just reason to complain while continuing in the conviction that the traditional sense of justice and equity of the United States justifies the expectation of becoming reparation.

Be pleased to accept, [etc.]

Solon Ménos.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File 838.516/55.

[Document 581]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

No. 25.] American Legation,
Port au Prince, December 30, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to forward herewith copy and translation of a further communication received from the Department of Foreign Relations under date of December 28, with regard to the identity of the gold removed from the Bank on December 17 and which the Haitian Government contends is part of the retrait fund.

The information referred to in the last paragraph of the enclosed note verbale, according to the statement made to me by Mr. Borno, Minister of Foreign Relations, was received by him from Dr. Menos, Haitian Minister to Washington.

I have [etc.].

A. Bailly-Blanchard.

[Inclosure—Note verbale—Translation.]

The Department of Foreign Relations to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State for Foreign Relations.
Port au Prince, December 29, 1914.

The Department of Foreign Relations has the honor to inform the Legation of the United States that the juge d’instruction, O. Leger, having communicated to the Commissioner of the Government, for the purpose of preparing a charge, the documents in the case of the taking of the public funds perpetrated, December 17th, at the National Treasury of the Republic, the commissioner has presented to the Department of Justice a detailed report where he analyzed the examinations of the director and high employees of the bank, charged with the service of this Treasury. From these examinations it appears as follows:

Mr. Emanuel Dryfus, accountant, in charge of the special account of the withdrawal of paper money, declared to the juge d’instruction that the deposit of gold pledged to this withdrawal amounted, on November 30th last and until December 17th, to the sum of $907,800.20 (dollars gold).

On his side, Mr. Henri Desrue, director of the bank, declared to the juge d’instruction that of the deposit in question there remains at this time a difference which amounts to $388,000 (dollars).

Comparing these two depositions of the director and accountant of this Bank which, one cannot hold in too close attention, does the service of the National Treasury, it follows with conclusive evidence that the sum embarked on the Machias on the 17th of December last, has been diverted or deducted from the funds devoted to the withdrawal of paper money, that is to say, from a fund which is the property not at all of the Bank, but of the Haitian State, and which could not therefore go out of the Haitian Treasury at Port au Prince except with the formal consent of the Haitian Government.

The Department of Foreign Relations, from the beginning has expressed to the Legation of the United States its absolute conviction that the good faith of the Department of State has been abused.

And so the Haitian Government has learned without any surprise that the Department of State has spontaneously decided in case its information should reveal to it the legitimateness of our rights, to cause the funds to be put back at Port au Prince in the cash of the Haitian Treasury intrusted to the National Bank of the Republic of Haiti.

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.516/40.

[Document 582]

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 30, 1914.

Following telegram received from Wehrhane with request that it be forwarded through you and that you also make known verbally its contents to the Haitian Minister of Finance: Davilmar Theodore,
President of Haiti,
Port au Prince.

On behalf of the Paris and New York Committees of the National Bank of the Republic of Haiti, we wish to suggest that the present financial embarrassment of your Government, which we regret as much as you, may be happily settled with small delay if you will delegate Dr. Hereaux, your Minister of Finance, for whom we entertain great respect, with such colleagues as you may select, to immediately proceed to New York for the purpose of discussing with the representatives here of the National Bank of the Republic of Haiti means whereby the present financial difficulties of your country may be adjusted with the result of putting your Government in immediate possession of sufficient funds to take care of its imperative requirements and possibly arrange a new budgetary convention. Because of the present interrupted cable and mail communications we feel it is impossible to satisfactorily carry on any negotiations except in the form suggested; that is, a personal visit of the Minister of Finance and associates to New York. We assure you that no delay will be admitted in our conference with your representatives and they will be able to quickly conclude a satisfactory arrangement and return to Port au Prince. If you favor this suggestion and no regular steamship will be leaving for some time, we will endeavor to provide suitable transportation for your envoys. We hope you will receive this suggestion in the same friendly spirit in which it is made as we are equally desirous with you of seeing Haiti’s usual prosperity restored.

Henry H. Wehrhane,
Vice President, National Bank of the Republic of Haiti.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Haiti. File No. 838.516/27.

[Document 583]

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Haiti.

No. 2.] Department of State,
Washington, December 31, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 22d instant in continuation of your interview with me on that date relative to the withdrawal of certain funds from the Banque Nationale de la Republique d’Haiti by the officers of that institution, which, it has been ascertained, is a private bank.

In reply I have the honor to recall to your attention that the gold in question lying in the vault at Port au Prince—between $900,000 and $1,000,000—had been deposited in that bank under the loan agreement of 1910 for use in retiring the existing paper money and the nickel in circulation in Haiti. The Department is advised that the revolutionary authorities then in control of the Government’ made several attempts to have the gold at Port au Prince placed in their hands for purposes other than those provided for in the agreement with the bondholders who furnished the gold. Upon the refusal of the bank to take these steps conditions became such that the safety of the gold was precarious. The officials of the bank therefore deemed it advisable to have some of this gold transferred to a place of safety, and as it was not drawing interest, to a place where it might draw interest pending its use for the retirement of the Haitian currency. As there were no merchant vessels suitable or available for carrying the gold to the United States the officers of the bank made application to this Government for the use of the gunboat Machias, which was then on its way to the United States, to take $500,000 of the amount in the vaults of the bank at Port au Prince to New York. On the 17th instant, as a protective measure merely, in behalf of American interests which were gravely menaced, the Machias took on board, under an escort of unarmed marines, and conveyed to the United States, the before-mentioned $500,000.

It is hardly necessary to state that if it had happened that the gold had been taken from the bank by revolutionary authorities, or by irresponsible rioters, the bank, through its negligence to place the gold in safety, might have become liable later on to some duly established government of Haiti for any losses of the specie in its safe keeping,

This Government is advised that there remains in the vaults of the bank at Port au Prince $400,000 in gold which will be applied to the retirement of the currency when the conditions in Haiti render the resumption of this procedure advisable. The $500,000 brought to New York and deposited there at interest will be also available when required for the same purpose.

The facts as herein recounted and as understood by the Department, indicate merely a withdrawal of funds by the authorities of a private bank in Port au Prince from the jurisdiction of Haiti as a measure of precaution for their security and the placing of such funds on board a gunboat of the United States in the absence of other craft for transportation to a place of safety. The Department is at a loss to perceive, therefore, how such circumstances constitute “an arbitrary and offensive intervention which carries a flagrant invasion of the sovereignty and independence of the Republic of Haiti,” which you call upon this Government “to disown “and” to order such restitutions and amends as may be necessary.” Furthermore, it is not clear to the Department upon what practical ground your Government bases its objection to the withdrawal of the $500,000; for if it is the desire of your Government to have the retirement of the currency resumed, there are, so the Department is advised, now on deposit at Port au Prince $400,000 ready for that purpose; or, on the other hand, if your Government has no intention of continuing the retirement at the present time, the placing of a portion of the funds in a position to draw interest during the period of suspension would seem to be a wise measure. Such a measure seems the more obvious to the Department in that since the receipt of your note, above referred to, it has received information which it considers reliable, to the effect that a new revolutionary movement has been set on foot in the north of the Republic of Haiti, so that it conceives the steps taken by the bank officials to protect the bank’s gold holdings to have been wholly justifiable.

I should be glad, therefore, to be further informed by your Government as to the reasons for its protest regarding the withdrawal of the $500,000 in gold referred to herein.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Vice President Wehrhane of the National Bank of Haiti. File No. 838.516/32.

[Document 584]

The Secretary of State to Vice President Wehrhane of the National Bank of Haiti.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 31, 1914.

Department has received cable from Port au Prince with request to forward to you, which it does, paraphrased, as follows: The Haitian Government took from our vaults $65,000. It claims this action to be in the execution of the judgment following the law of August 14th.

Williams.

W. J. Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 838.516/32.

[Document 585]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, December 31, 1914.

Department has received a cable from Port au Prince with request that it be forwarded you, which it does, paraphrased, as follows: Judge of Federal authority came and verified cash, placing seals on safes which contain cash as balance of retrait. Suspension of operations compulsory. Shall we close bank? We wait instructions from you. Government promulgated liberal issue of paper, also law authorizing creation of a new bank by the Government and interior loan 1,200,000 gourdes guaranteed by all free duties at time of issue.

Bank Haiti.

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.516/32.

[Document 586]

The Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 31, 1914, 2 p.m.

You are instructed to protest to the Haitian authorities against any interference with the Bank of Haiti in view of the fact that it is owned and operated by Americans and other foreigners. In case the bank is forced to close and cease operations by the present Haitian Government, this Government will not recognize any forfeiture of the charter of the bank resulting from such enforced closure. You may add that this Government is deeply concerned over the reports which have reached it as to the arbitrary conduct of the authorities in dealing with foreign interests in the Republic.

Bryan.

Ineffective blockade of Cape HaitienIneffective blockade of Cape Haitien

[587] Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, February 12, 1914.

File No. 838.00/834.

[588] The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

Department of State, Washington, February 13, 1914.

File No. 838.00/834.

[589] Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, February 17, 1914.

File No. 838.00/847.

[590] [Untitled]

American Legation, Port-au-Prince, February 20, 1914.

File No. 838.00/871.

[591] [Untitled]

Amercan Legation, Port au Prince, February 28, 1914.

File No. 838.00/879.

[592] The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

Department of State, Washington, March 12, 1914.

File No. 838.00/871.

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/834.

[Document 587]

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, February 12, 1914.

Diplomatic Corps notified by Haitian Government of the blockade of Cape Haitien by a Haitian war vessel. Matter discussed by Diplomatic Corps, which will await the action of the Government of the United States. German Minister is disposed to recognize the blockade as effective but will not act at once.

Smith.

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith. File No. 838.00/834.

[Document 588]

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 13, 1914.

If blockade of Cape Haitien by Haitian gunboat is effective, recognize blockade.

Bryan.

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/847.

[Document 589]

Minister Smith to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, February 17, 1914.

The Department’s February 13. Because of doubt as to the effectiveness of the Cape Haitien blockade and the question of whether recognition of the blockade would not be a partial recognition of the Zamor Government and of Theodore as a belligerent, the entire matter is held in abeyance.* * * Foreign representatives continue to act in complete accord with the Legation, awaiting our action as to recognition.

Smith.

[Untitled] File No. 838.00/871.

[Document 590]

[Untitled]

No. 57.] American Legation,
Port-au-Prince, February 20, 1914.

Sir: Referring to my February 12, the Department’s February 13, and my February 17, relative to the blockade of Cape Haitien by the Haitian Government, I have the honor to report as follows:

This Legation and all others were notified of the blockade in notes from the Haitian ‘Secretary for Foreign Affairs, dated February 11, 1914. On the morning of February 12, notice of the blockade was also communicated to the Diplomatic Corps as a whole by the Secretary for Foreign Affairs.

The question of the blockade was discussed at length at the meeting of the Diplomatic Corps the morning of February 12. The Minister for Germany evinced a disposition to recognize the blockade, but I was considerably in doubt as to his real position. Pending accurate information as to the effectiveness of the blockade, the Corps decided to take no action.

The sense of the Department’s instructions to me on February 13 was communicated to Secretary Leger in an informal note, February 14. Secretary Leger the same day sent a note to me in which he referred to his former note of February 11. Inasmuch as this note mentioned the Haitian gunboat Vertieres as the vessel which would attempt to make the blockade effective, and as I knew that the Vertieres was lying at anchor in the harbor of Port au Prince, there was not much assurance in Mr. Leger’s notes that the blockade was effective. From other sources I had been informed that the Haitian gunboat Nord Alexis had departed for the north to establish a blockade of Cape Haitien. Consequently, I asked Consul Livingston to report the establishment of the blockade, if it should be established. On February 16, Consul Livingston notified me that there was no Haitian gunboat at Cape Haitien, but that the Nord Alexis was approaching. As to whether or not the Nord Alexis has attempted to establish a blockade of the port of Cape Haitien, or attempted to so do, I have as yet been unable to ascertain positively. I am of the personal opinion that the blockade is effective at times and at other times is not effective.

Consequently, in view of this uncertainty, and the further fact that other foreign representatives, in particular the English Minister, held that recognition of the blockade would be looked upon as recognition of the Haitian Government as well as recognition of Davilmar Theodore as a belligerent, this Legation refrained from action in the matter, pending certainty as to the effectiveness or noneffectiveness of the blockade.

Had it been ascertained that the blockade was effective, this Legation would have recognized the blockade in absolute conformity to the Department’s cablegram of February 13, 1914, and I trust that my action, in view of the circumstances, may not be disapproved. The uncertainty of the Haitian Government itself, as displayed by Secretary Léger’s notes, was, in my opinion, sufficient ground for withholding action.

At present the Nord Alexis, according to information from the north, is chiefly engaged in operations against Theodore, and is sometimes at Cape Haitien and sometimes away from there. Accordingly, action as to the blockade is yet held in abeyance.

I have [etc.]

Madison R. Smith.

[Untitled] File No. 838.00/879.

[Document 591]

[Untitled]

No. 60.] Amercan Legation,
Port au Prince, February 28, 1914.

Sir: Referring to my despatch No. 57 of February 20, 1914, relative to the blockade by the Haitian Government of the various ports in the Republic, including that of Cape Haitien, the second port in importance in Haiti, I have the honor to enclose herewith copy of an unsigned communication9 from the Haitian Foreign Office dated February 27, 1914, announcing the lifting of the blockade by the Haitian Government.

I have [etc.]

Madison R. Smith.

9 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith. File No. 838.00/871.

[Document 592]

The Secretary of State to Minister Smith.

No. 23.] Department of State,
Washington, March 12, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your No. 57, of the 20th ultimo, in regard to the blockade of Cape Haitien by the Haitian Government.

In reply the Department desires to say that as your doubts that the blockade was effective appear to be well founded, your action in not recognizing the blockade is approved.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
John E. Osborne.

Haitian aid to revolutionists in the Dominican Republic; attitude of the United States.Haitian aid to revolutionists in the Dominican Republic; attitude of the United States.

(See Dominican Republic: Political and financial affairs, etc.: pp. 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 310, Doc. 311, and Doc. 312], 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 314, Doc. 315, and Doc. 316], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, and Doc. 321], 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, and Doc. 343].)

Protection of Haitian officials and their families by American diplomatic and consular officersProtection of Haitian officials and their families by American diplomatic and consular officers

[593] Consul Livingston to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Cape Haitien, [received February 16, 1914 ; undated.]

File No. 838.00/843.

[594] The Secretary of State to Consul Livingston.

Department of State, Washington, February 16, 1914.

File No. 838.00/843.

[595] Consul Livingston to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Cape Haitien, February 17, 1914.

File No. 838.00/846.

[596] The Secretary of State to Consul Livingston.

Department of State, Washington, February 17, 1914.

File No. 838.00/846.

[597] Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Port au Prince, November 3, 1914.

File No. 838.00/1014.

[598] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, November 4, 1914.

File No. 838.00/1014.

[599] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, November 4, 1914.

File No. 838.00/1017.

Consul Livingston to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/843.

[Document 593]

Consul Livingston to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Cape Haitien, [received February 16, 1914 ; undated.]

Just received cablegram from President of Haiti requesting protection of family here of Minister of Interior Charles Zamor. Have conferred with Commanders of San Francisco and Wheeling and we advise acceptance.

Livingston.

The Secretary of State to Consul Livingston. File No. 838.00/843.

[Document 594]

The Secretary of State to Consul Livingston.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 16, 1914.

Until Department receives more detailed information concerning persons composing family of Charles Zamor and manner of protection requested, it cannot give definite instructions. The Department’s regulations caution its officers against interfering in the internal political affairs of the country in which they are stationed. No government in Haiti has been recognized by the United States.

Bryan.

Consul Livingston to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/846.

[Document 595]

Consul Livingston to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Cape Haitien, February 17, 1914.

Wife of Charles Zamor with four children under twelve years wish to come into Consulate in case of necessity.

Livingston.

The Secretary of State to Consul Livingston. File No. 838.00/846.

[Document 596]

The Secretary of State to Consul Livingston.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 17, 1914.

You may afford shelter to women and children mentioned if necessary to shield them from violence.

Bryan.

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 838.00/1014.

[Document 597]

Minister Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Port au Prince, November 3, 1914.

The French Minister called on the part of Charles Zamor and Delancourt, ex-acting Minister of the Interior, who are refugees at his Legation, to request, if possible, their removal to the Hancock, to remain there until transferred to first south-bound steamer. After a conference with Commander Willard as to right of asylum, I informed French Minister, as I had intimated to him, that this was not possible under our regulations. Although refugees safe in his Legation, the Minister, in view of their importance and great number, fearing possibility of mob attack, requested a means of calling for assistance from our Legation in case we only [sic] expected to have a war vessel here. Commander Willard approving, a detail of signalmen at my request were installed last night at the French Legation for that purpose. Our Legation in wireless communication with the Hancock. Trust that Department will approve of this action.

Blanchard.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard. File No. 838.00/1014.

[Document 598]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Blanchard.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 4, 1914.

Your November 3. Action approved. You are authorized to take all necessary measures for the protection of Charles Zamor and Cabinet.

Lansing.

[Untitled] File No. 838.00/1017.

[Document 599]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, November 4, 1914.

Haitian Minister at Washington has received from Charles Zamor telegraphic request that United States protect his departure from Port au Prince. This was communicated to the Department unofficially. In accordance with this request you are instructed to protect Charles Zamor and other Cabinet ministers together with their families and personal belongings and insure unmolested departure for them from the country, should they desire to leave. Protection may also be afforded them in Port au Prince should they decide to remain.

Lansing.

Honduras:Honduras:

Contents

Message of the President, Francisco Bertrand, to the Congress (Documents 600-600)

Message of the President, Francisco Bertrand, to the CongressMessage of the President, Francisco Bertrand, to the Congress

[600] Minister Ewing to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Tegucigalpa, January 24, 1914.

File No. 815.032/8.

Minister Ewing to the Secretary of State. File No. 815.032/8.

[Document 600]

Minister Ewing to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 3.] American Legation,
Tegucigalpa, January 24, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith copies of the message read at the opening of the National Congress on January 1 by the President of the Republic, Dr. Francisco Bertrand.* * *

I have [etc.]

Jno. Ewing.

[Inclosure—Translation—Extract.]

[Untitled]

There is not at present in the country any international difficulty of importance.* * * Omitting mention of concrete data in this connection, * * * I must however say that the most enthusiastic and sincere applause is due to every movement toward the altruistic and humanitarian purpose of perfecting universal peace. To this noble end, important treaties have been concluded, and special mention should be made of the Arbitration Treaty recently signed at Washington, which reveals and confirms the lofty aim of the Government of the United States of America towards continental peace and the harmony of all nations.

Italy:Italy:

Contents

Arbitration agreement between the United States and Italy, extending the duration of the Convention of March 28, 1908Arbitration agreement between the United States and Italy, extending the duration of the Convention of March 28, 1908

Signed at Washington, May 28, 1913; ratification advised by the Senate, February 21, 1914; ratified by the President, April 13, 1914; ratified by Italy, March 12, 1914; ratifications exchanged at Washington, April 13, 1914; proclaimed, April 15, 1914.

[601] By the President of the United States of America.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this fifteenth day of April in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-eighth.

Treaty Series No. 588.]

By the President of the United States of America. Treaty Series No. 588.]

[Document 601]

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas an Agreement between the United Sates of America and Italy extending, for a further period of five years, the arbitration convention concluded between them on March 28, 1908, was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Washington on the twenty-eighth day of May, one thousand nine hundred and thirteen, the original of which Agreement, being in the English and Italian languages, is word for word as follows:

Agreement Extending the Duration of the Arbitration Convention of March 28, 1908.

The Government of the United States of America and the Government of His Majesty the King of Italy, being desirous of extending the period of five years during which the Arbitration Convention concluded between them on March 28, 1908, is to remain in force, which period is about to expire, have authorized the undersigned, to wit: the Honorable William Jennings Bryan, Secretary of State of the United States, and His Excellency The Marquis Cusani Confalonieri, Commander of the Order of Saint Maurice and Saint Lazarus, Grand Cordon of the Order of the Crown of Italy, etc., etc., His Majesty’s Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary at Washington, to conclude the following agreement:

Article I.

The Convention of Arbitration of March 28, 1908, between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of His Majesty the King of Italy, the duration of which by Article III thereof was fixed at a period of five years from the date of the exchange of ratifications of said Convention, which period will terminate on January 22, 1914, is hereby extended and continued in force for a further period of five years from January 22, 1914.

Article II.

The present Agreement shall be ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by the Government of His Majesty the King of Italy, in accordance with its Constitution and laws, and it shall become effective upon the date of the exchange of ratifications, which shall take place at Washington as soon as possible.

Done in duplicate, in the English and Italian languages, at Washington this twenty-eighth day of May, one thousand nine hundred and thirteen.

[seal.] William Jennings Bryan

[seal.] Cusani

And whereas, the said Agreement has been duly ratified on both parts, and the ratifications of the two Governments were exchanged in the City of Washington, on the thirteenth day of April, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Agreement to be made public, to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this fifteenth day of April in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-eighth.
Woodrow Wilson.

By the President:
W. J. Bryan
Secretary of State.

Liability to military service, upon return to Italy, of (1) naturalized American citizens of Italian birth; (2) persons born in the United States of Italian parents before the naturalization of the parents; (3) persons so born after such naturalization. Dual citizenship. Correspondence relating to negotiation of a naturalization conventionLiability to military service, upon return to Italy, of (1) naturalized American citizens of Italian birth; (2) persons born in the United States of Italian parents before the naturalization of the parents; (3) persons so born after such naturalization. Dual citizenship. Correspondence relating to negotiation of a naturalization convention1

1 For a summary of the early history of the subject see Moore’s Digest, vol. 3, pp. 608–616. See also For. Rel. 1913, pp. 1290 et seq. And see the similar entry in this volume under France, p. 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 440]. See also the circular, ante, p. 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19].

[602] The Secretary of State to Ambassador White.

Department of State, Washington, February 11, 1907.

File No. 711.654.

[603] Ambassador Griscom to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Rome, June 5, 1907.

File No. 711.654/1–3.

[604] The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Griscom.

Department of State, Washington, June 29, 1907.

File No. 711.654/1–3.

[605] Ambassador Griscom to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Rome, June 19, 1908.

File No. 711.654/4–5.

[606] The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé Garrett.

Department of State, Washington, August 1, 1908.

File No. 711.654/4–5.

[607] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Leishman.

Department of State, Washington, April 6, 1911.

File No. 711.654/4–5.

[608] Ambassador Leishman to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Rome, September 15, 1911.

File No. 711.654/6.

[609] The Secretary of State to Ambassador O’Brien.

Department of State, Washington, May 26, 1913.

File No. 365.117/8.

[610] Ambassador O’Brien to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Rome, June 11, 1913.

File No. 365.117/9.

[611] The Secretary of State to Ambassador O’Brien.

Department of State, Washington, July 15, 1913.

File No. 365.117/9.

[612] Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Rome, November 4, 1913.

File No. 365.117/11.

[613] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

Department of State, Washington, December 19, 1913.

File No. 365.117/11.

[614] Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Rome, January 5, 1914.

File No. 365.117/18.

[615] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

Department Of State, Washington, June 19, 1914.

File No. 711.654/7.

[616] Consul Shank to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Palermo, September 2, 1914.

File No. 365.117/32.

[617] Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Rome, September 9, 1914.

File No. 711.654/8.

[618] Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Rome, September 15, 1914.

File No. 711.0012/526.

[619] The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

Department of State, Washington, September 21, 1914.

File No. 365.117/29a.

[620] Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Rome, September 22, 1914.

File No. 365.117/30.

[621] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

Department of State, Washington, September 23, 1914.

File No. 365.117/27.

[622] Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Rome, October 2, 1914.

File No. 365.117/34.

[623] The Secretary of State to the Honorable Charles B. Smith.

Department of State, Washington, October 5, 1914.

File No. 711.654/8.

[624] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

Department of State, Washington, October 6, 1914.

File No. 365.117/34a.

[625] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

Department of State, Washington, October 7, 1914.

File No. 711.0012/526.

[626] Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Rome, October 8, 1914.

File No. 365.117/35.

[627] The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Shank.

Department of State, Washington, October 14, 1914.

File No. 365.117/32.

[628] The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

Department of State, Washington, October 14, 1914.

File No. 365.117/35.

[629] Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Rome, October 14, 1914.

File No. 365.117/45.

[630] Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Rome, November 3, 1914.

File No. 711.654/9.

[631] The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

Department of State, Washington, November 20, 1914.

File No. 365.117/45.

[632] Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Rome, December 14, 1914.

File No. 365.117/56.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador White. File No. 711.654.

[Document 602]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador White.

No. 173.] Department of State,
Washington, February 11, 1907.

Sir: Naturalizations have been conferred since the beginning of the present month in accordance with the provisions of the Naturalization Law approved June 29, 1906; and the inauguration of the more rigid system which that law requires makes the present an appropriate time, in the opinion of this Government, to open negotiations with certain foreign Governments looking to conventional agreements similar to those which the United States now has with several European countries, defining the rights of their citizens, or subjects, respectively, when they return to the country of their origin. Under the new law it is required that the Federal government shall receive notice of all naturalizations pending and accomplished, and adequate means are provided for setting aside naturalizations improperly granted in the past as well as in the future, while general control of all naturalization matters is lodged with the Federal Government. Copies of the Act of June 29, 1906, are herewith enclosed for your use.

In calling the attention of the Italian Government to these facts, you are instructed to present to it the considerations which follow, supplementing them, if you deem it opportune to do so, by any additional statements which in your judgment will be likely to effect the purpose which this instruction seeks to accomplish.

The volume of emigration from Italy to the United States has in recent years become so large that it forces itself upon the consideration of this Government. Many of the Italians who thus come to this country intend to remain and establish their homes in the United States. In due season they seek naturalization as citizens of the United States and when they have become naturalized they enjoy the same civil and political rights as attach to native citizens of the United States; and if they proceed abroad they receive under our laws the same protection of person and property as native American citizens receive. In conferring naturalization upon them the laws of the United States do not require them to show consent to such naturalization on the part of the Italian Government, and in this particular our laws are similar to those of Italy, which, as this Government understands, also confer naturalization without requiring the previous consent of the country to which the person naturalized may owe original allegiance. Some of these naturalized citizens, drawn by a natural affection for their parent country, desire to revisit it and do revisit it, and their status is at present ill-defined and the cause of misunderstandings which, as this Government believes, could be removed and rendered improbable of recurrence by a conventional agreement defining their status and their rights.

The status of those Italian subjects who come to the United States and subsequently return to Italy without having acquired citizenship of the United States is not the subject of this instruction, for this Government disclaims any inclination to regard them as having a right to the consideration of the United States when they return to Italy. This remark applies also to those Italian subjects who make the declaration of their intention to become citizens of the United States which is required by our law as a preliminary step to naturalization. Whatever their status may be in the United States or in a third country, it is recognized that in Italy it may be properly claimed that they have not yet divested themselves of Italian subjection. The following provision of the first article of the Naturalization Convention between the United States and Sweden and Norway 1 is also contained in the other naturalization treaties to which the United States is a party: The declaration of intention to become a citizen of [one or] the other country has not for either party the effect of citizenship legally acquired.

Article XI, clause 2, of the Italian Civil Code provides: Italian citizenship is lost by the following persons.* * * 2. He who has acquired citizenship of a foreign country.

It is this principle of Italian law, so consonant with the polity of enlightened nations, which the United States would be gratified to see incorporated in the agreement between the United States and Italy, carrying with it the corollary that when the citizenship ceases obligations consequent upon such citizenship cannot equitably be held to arise thereafter.

But under Italian law, as this Government understands it, the naturalization of an Italian in a foreign country without the consent of the Italian Government is no bar to liability to military service, and this provision seems to qualify materially the provision quoted above, which declares that Italian citizenship is lost to one who becomes a citizen of another country; nor is it apparent that a right can equitably be claimed to punish a man for non-performance of a citizen’s duties when it has been declared that the citizenship upon which the duties depend has been lost.

It should be distinctly understood that this Government has no inclination to intervene to protect any citizen of Italian origin from the consequences of his having broken Italian military law before his emigration to the United States. The language of Article II of the Naturalization Convention of May 26, 1869, between the United States and Sweden and Norway, which appears in varying form in all of our naturalization treaties or conventions with foreign powers, may be cited here as setting forth this Government’s position in this regard: Article II. A recognized citizen of the one party, on returning to the territory of the other, remains liable to trial and punishment for an action punishable by the laws of his original country, and committed before his emigration, but not for the emigration itself, saving always the limitation established by [the] laws of his original country, and any other remission of liability to punishment.

Nor has this Government any desire to intervene in behalf of any Italian who has remained in the United States only long enough to secure naturalization and then has returned to Italy in the hope of there residing as an American citizen, exempt from the operation of Italian military law. Such an one has sought to evade the laws of both countries. His naturalization in the United States is now, in fact, made unlawful, as the law specifically forbids the naturalization of any one who does not intend “to reside permanently within the United States.” Such is the letter of the new law, and it appears to be in full accord that [with?] that part of the emigration law of Italy of January 2, 1901, which provides, in Article 36, for the naturalization of a foreigner “provided such person declares his intention of establishing his domicile in the Kingdom.” This Government holds, however, that those who secured naturalization under the old naturalization laws of the United States violated their spirit if they did so intending to reside permanently abroad. It was never designed to confer American citizenship upon those who intended to use that citizenship merely as a cloak to protect them from performing the duties of citizenship of any country, and the policy of the Government of the United States is opposed to enabling them to effect that purpose.

Article IV of our treaty with the North German Confederation,1 which, in substance, is repeated in several of our treaties with other powers, says: If a German naturalized in America renews his residence in North Germany, without [the] intent to return to America, he shall be held to have renounced his naturalization in the United States. Reciprocally, if an American naturalized in North Germany renews his residence in the United States, without [the] intent to return to North Germany, he shall be held to have renounced his naturalization in North Germany. The intent not to return may be held to exist when the person naturalized in [the] one country resides more than two years in the other country.

Mere liability to military service by arriving at military age should not involve punishment; for in that case no actual or accrued duty has been left unperformed. Desertion is evasion after military duty has accrued and after an Italian has been actually summoned to perform duty or is in the army.

This Government holds that one who has become a citizen of the United States cannot properly be punished for the non-performance of a duty which is alleged to grow out of the allegiance which he has cast off. If he deserted from the army he may be punished; but if he was not in the army he may not equitably be molested upon his return as an American citizen. The first article of our treaty with the North German Confederation, which is similar to corresponding articles of other naturalization conventions negotiated by the United States, provides as follows: Citizens of the North German Confederation who become naturalized citizens of the United States of America and shall have resided uninterruptedly within the United States five years shall be held by the North German Confederation to be American citizens and shall be treated as such.

Reciprocally, citizens of the United States of America who become naturalized citizens of the North German Confederation, and shall have resided uninterruptedly within North Germany five years, shall be held by the United States to be North German citizens and shall be treated as such.

The Government of the United States accordingly suggests as the basis for the negotiations with the Italian Government the article just cited from the treaty between the United States and the North German Confederation, and the second article of the treaty between the United States and Sweden and Norway, previously cited.

It is believed that these two articles, the one providing for mutual recognition of naturalizations under definitely prescribed conditions, the other securing immunity to a naturalized citizen from punishment in his native land for offenses committed after his emigration, will afford a basis for a treaty which will promote the continuance of those cordial and friendly relations which have so happily existed between the United States and Italy.

I am [etc.]

Elihu Root.

1 Malloy’s Treaties, vol. 2, p. 1759.

1 Malloy’s Treaties, vol. 2, p. 1299.

Ambassador Griscom to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.654/1–3.

[Document 603]

Ambassador Griscom to the Secretary of State.

No. 82.] American Embassy,
Rome, June 5, 1907.

Sir: I have the honor to report that on May 25, in pursuance of your instruction No. 173 of February 11 last to my predecessor Mr. White, I addressed to the Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs a note, a copy of which is enclosed herewith, proposing that negotiations be entered into with a view to agreeing upon a naturalization convention based upon Article 2 of our treaty with Norway and Sweden, and Article 1 of our treaty with the North German Confederation.

I presented this note personally to his excellency Mr. Tittoni, the Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs, and supported it verbally by such arguments as occurred to me. Mr. Tittoni received the suggestion most favorably and said that hitherto the Government of Italy had been disposed to regard the Civil Code as almost unalterable. He, on the contrary, believed that the national code of laws should be altered to meet changed conditions. He thought that an agreement between the United States and Italy about naturalization would be a useful and necessary measure, and therefore he was entirely willing to begin negotiations, and would at once appoint a commission to study the matter and report to him.

Referring to his willingness to change the Civil Code to meet conditions determined by treaty, he adverted to Article 35 bis, of the new project for an emigration law, which would modify the present code with regard to the method by which Italian subjects who have abandoned Italian citizenship may again acquire it. I enclose for your information a translation of this article. Mr. Tittoni said that he himself was the author of the proposed law, and from this fact I might judge that the possibility of having to change the code to meet a convention of naturalization with the United States did not alarm him. One of my predecessors, General Draper, informed me recently that when in 1894 he conducted negotiations on this very subject, the Italian Government refused to enter into a naturalization treaty, giving as a principal objection that it would require changes in the organic law of Italy.

I am therefore able to report to you that your suggestion of a naturalization convention could hardly have had a more encouraging reception than that which has been accorded it by Mr. Tittoni. It remains to be seen, however, just how it will be viewed by the Italian Ministers of War and Justice.

I have [etc.]

Lloyd C. Griscom.

[Inclosure 1.]

Ambassador Griscom to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

American Embassy,
Rome, May 25, 1907.

Excellency: I have the honor to invite your excellency’s attention to the fact that in the United States since the beginning of the month of February last naturalizations have been conferred in accordance with the provisions of a new naturalization law approved June 29, 1906. I beg to send herewith enclosed for your possible interest a copy of this act. The inauguration of the more rigid system which that law requires makes the present an appropriate time, in the opinion of my Government, to open negotiations with the Government of Italy looking to conventional agreements similar to those which the United States now has with several European countries, defining the rights of their citizens or subjects, respectively, when they return to the country of their origin. Under the new law it is required that the Federal Government shall receive notice of all naturalizations pending and accomplished, and adequate means are provided for setting aside naturalizations improperly granted in the past as well as in the future, while general control of all naturalization matters is lodged with the Federal Government.

I am directed by my Government to bring these facts to your excellency’s notice and at the same time to present to you certain further considerations.

[At this point the note incorporates the text of the Department’s instruction No. 173 of February 11, 1907, beginning with the third paragraph thereof and continuing to its end with no alteration of the text except the omission of the words “upon those who intended to use that citizenship “from the last sentence in the paragraph beginning “Nor has this Government, etc.”; and except such other alterations as “note “for “instruction,” “my Government” for “this Government,” etc.]

I renew [etc.]

Lloyd C. Griscom.

[Inclosure 2—Translation.]

Article 35 bis of a project for a new Italian emigration law.

Article 35 bis. Article 13 of the Civil Code at present in force is modified as follows: A citizen who has lost his citizenship for any reason set forth in Article 11 regains it, provided that: 1. He returns to the Kingdom.

2. He declares before the official of the civil bureau his intention to renounce the foreign citizenship and to fix and establish within one year his domicile in the Kingdom.

The above declaration will not be necessary for those who have reestablished and had in the Kingdom their domicile for more than three years.

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Griscom. File No. 711.654/1–3.

[Document 604]

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Griscom.

No. 47.] Department of State,
Washington, June 29, 1907.

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your despatch No. 82, of the 5th instant, with reference to the proposed naturalization treaty between the United States and Italy.

This Government notes with great gratification the encouraging reception of its proposition looking to a naturalization convention between the two countries, and you will avail yourself of the earliest opportunity to so inform the Minister of Foreign Relations.

I am [etc.]

Alvey A. Adee.

Ambassador Griscom to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.654/4–5.

[Document 605]

Ambassador Griscom to the Secretary of State.

No. 389.] American Embassy,
Rome, June 19, 1908.

Sir: Referring to your instruction No. 173 of February 11, 1907, directing me to enter into negotiations with the Italian Government for the conclusion of a treaty of naturalization between Italy and the United States, I have the honor to transmit to you herewith inclosed a copy and translation of the reply1 of the Minister of Foreign Affairs to my note to him of May 25, 1907, a copy of which accompanied my dispatch to you, No. 82, of June 5, 1907.

Mr. Tittoni referred the proposal to a committee which has reported to him substantially as follows:

Italy contributes emigrants to many countries other than the United States, with all of which frequent difficulties arise as to the treatment of those Italians who become naturalized therein. For Italy to make a convention with each of these States would not be easy of execution, and a number of different clauses adapted to the laws of each country would be necessary. It is of paramount interest for Italy to come to some agreement regarding the conditions of persons born in a foreign country of Italian fathers, where the laws of the country of birth impose that country’s citizenship. Up to the present all such agreements have failed, with the result that in several foreign countries the children of Italian parents are born and grow, up with a dual nationality. The subject being so complicated, it is deemed advisable to regulate it, not by means of international agreements, which would necessarily vary and be incomplete in substance, but rather by means of provisions of national legislation, which should grant uniform and special advantages and impose special obligations on Italian emigrants according to the different conditions which exist in the foreign countries where they reside.

Mr. Tittoni declares that he accepts the conclusions of the committee, and in view of its report, has taken steps to have begun at once the study of regulations which will be submitted for the approbation of Parliament. He requests me to express to you the Italian Government’s regret at being compelled to decline our offer to open negotiations for the conclusion of a naturalization treaty.

Yesterday I called upon Mr. Bollati, the Secretary General of the Italian Foreign Office, and pointed out to him that Mr. Tittoni’s note leaves unanswered all the questions of principle involved in my note of May 25, 1907. I stated that I hesitated to transmit to you such a reply without having some further explanation of the position and intentions of the Italian Government. Mr. Bollati said that the refusal was not owing to principle, but solely because the moment is considered inopportune in view of the fact that the Italian Government is about to appoint a commission to consider and propose changes in the Italian laws regarding citizenship and particularly affecting the obligations of military service of Italian subjects who became naturalized abroad. The Italian Government is beset by frequent difficulties arising under the present laws, not only with the United States, but also with several other countries; consequently, instead of negotiating a series of treaties with them, it is proposed to settle the matter by altering the Italian domestic law. I suggested that this might take a long time to accomplish; to which Mr. Bollati replied that he could guarantee me that it would be quickly put through, not in one or two months, but in a fairly short time. He added that when the Italian law has been altered, and if international questions continue to arise, it will be time to consider the advisability of a treaty with the United States.

Mr. Bollati satisfied me that the Italian Government will make a serious attempt at an early date to remedy the existing evils by legislation. However unsatisfactory this reply may be from our point of view, I am afraid that little would be accomplished by the presentation of further arguments at the present moment. I shall be glad to learn of the view which the Department takes of Mr. Tittoni’s answer, and if it is desired that I press the matter further.

I have [etc.]

Lloyd C. Griscom.

1 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé Garrett. File No. 711.654/4–5.

[Document 606]

The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé Garrett.

No. 185.] Department of State,
Washington, August 1, 1908.

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of Mr. Griscom’s No. 389, of the l9th ultimo [June], stating that he has been advised by the Foreign Office that it will not be advisable to consider the negotiation of a naturalization treaty with the United States until certain proposed changes have been made in the Italian citizenship law.

In reply I have to say that this Government regrets the decision of the Italian Government not at this time to enter upon negotiations looking to a conventional agreement on the subject of the rights of the respective naturalized citizens of the two countries who return to the country of their original allegiance.

The proposed legislation foreshadowed by the Italian Government is noted, and it is hoped will result in an amelioration of the provisions of Italian law which now [provide?] that one who has lost Italian nationality by naturalization in a foreign country is still liable for the performance of military service in Italy.

I am [etc.]

Alvey A. Adee.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Leishman. File No. 711.654/4–5.

[Document 607]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Leishman.

No. 185.] Department of State,
Washington, April 6, 1911.

Sir: Referring to the correspondence beginning with the Department’s instruction of February 11, 1907, and ending with the instruction of August 1, 1908, in regard to the negotiations for a naturalization treaty with Italy, the Department desires that you ascertain and report whether the proposed Italian citizenship laws mentioned in Mr. Garrett’s despatch of June 19, 1908, have been passed or, if not, whether they will be passed in the near future. If circumstances seem propitious it is desired that you avail yourself of the first opportunity to present this matter to the attention of the Italian Government again and urge the conclusion of a treaty, using the arguments set forth in the instruction of February 11, 1907.

I am [etc.]

P. C. Knox.

Ambassador Leishman to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.654/6.

[Document 608]

Ambassador Leishman to the Secretary of State.

No. 446.] American Embassy,
Rome, September 15, 1911.

Sir: Referring to the Department’s instruction No. 186 [185] of April 6 last, directing me to ascertain whether the proposed Italian citizenship laws mentioned in Mr. Garrett’s despatch of June 19, 1908, had been passed or, if not, whether they would be passed on in the near future; and further directing me to avail myself of the first opportunity to present this matter to the attention of the Italian Government again and urge the conclusion of a naturalization treaty, I have the honor to enclose herewith duplicate copies and translations of the Embassy’s note on the subject and of a note from the Italian Foreign Office replying thereto.

I have [etc.]

John G. A. Leishman.

[Inclosure 1.]

Ambassador Leishman to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

No. 331.] American Embassy,
Rome, July 31, 1911.

Excellency: Referring to a note from this Embassy dated May 25, 1907, in regard to the conclusion of a naturalization treaty between the United States and Italy, and to subsequent conversations on the subject, I have the honor to inform your excellency that I have again been instructed by my Government to inquire whether the Royal Government would be disposed to consider the conclusion of such a convention at the present time.

I avail [etc.]

John G. A. Leishman.

[Inclosure 2—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Ambassador Leishman.

No. 17.] Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Rome, August 22, 1911.

Mr. Ambassador: In your note of July 31 last, your excellency, acting under instructions from your Government, requested to know if the Government of the King were now disposed again to take into consideration the proposal made as far back as 1907 for the conclusion of a naturalization treaty between the two countries.

In this connection, I must refer to the Ministerial note of May 27, 1908, No. 48. In it, my predecessor had the honor to explain to your excellency’s predecessor the reasons for which the Government of the King, after an accurate study of the proposition, was forced into the conclusion that, given the different currents of our emigration and the disagreement of various kinds which not infrequently arise regarding the treatment to be accorded to Italians naturalized in foreign countries and having obligations of military service in the Kingdom of Italy, it would not be possible to regulate the complex question of nationality in the relations with different countries by means of international treaties, which would necessarily be different among them and incomplete in substance, but it would be more expedient instead to work out the solution of the arduous problem by means of internal legislation which uniformly grants special favors and imposes special obligations to Italians according to the circumstances in which they find themselves in the country of their residence.

My predecessor concluded begging the Embassy to be good enough to express to its Government the regret of that of the King to have to decline the offer courteously made to it to negotiate a naturalization treaty.

In response to the esteemed note of July 31, 1911, I can only confirm what my predecessor then had the honor to reply: but I believe it opportune to add that a project of law on citizenship has been actually presented to the Senate. Its discussion, however, was deferred from time to time on account of the two Ministerial crises which supervened after its presentation; the project itself, for that matter, has been already the subject of an accurate examination by that high assembly, and there is room to hope that it will be made a law at a not distant date, with such amendments as the two Chambers will believe necessary to introduce.

Be good enough [etc.]

A. di San Giuliano.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador O’Brien. File No. 365.117/8.

[Document 609]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador O’Brien.

No. 139.] Department of State,
Washington, May 26, 1913.

Sir: The Department sends you herewith a copy of its printed circular of March 18, 1901, entitled “Notice to American Citizens formerly Subjects of Italy who contemplate returning to that Country”1 in which it is said that Italian subjects are liable for the performance of military duty between the ages of twenty and thirty-nine years. You will also find enclosed a copy of a letter2 of May 29, 1913, from Mr. Michael Tornillo, of Bridgeport, Connecticut, in which he says that the Italian military law has recently been changed and that the age limit is now thirty-two years.

You will please ascertain from the Italian Government and inform the Department as to the true age limit under the Italian military law.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
J. B. Moore.

1  For. Rel. 1901, p. 282.

2 Not printed.

Ambassador O’Brien to the Secretary of State. File No. 365.117/9.

[Document 610]

Ambassador O’Brien to the Secretary of State.

No. 254.] American Embassy,
Rome, June 11, 1913.

Sir: With reference to the Department’s No. 139 of the 26th ultimo, concerning the age limit for military service in Italy, I beg to inform you that the law of the Kingdom provides that Italian subjects shall be liable for the performance of military duty as follows:

From 20 to 28 years of age, in the active army;

From 29 to 31 years of age, in the reserve army, which is liable for foreign service;

At the option of the Minister of War, an entire class may be retained in the above category up to the age of 32;

From 31 or 32 to 39 years of age, in the territorial reserve army.

The Law of December 24, 1911, on Recruitment, Article 91, provides not only for inscription in this latter body, but provides also that members of the territorial reserve may, when deemed necessary, be called on to receive military instruction. There has been no case, however, of a summons made under this article.

After the age of 32, while a subject is still liable for military service in the territorial reserve, he is not punishable for past failure to appear for service.

I have [etc.]

Thomas J. O’Brien.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador O’Brien. File No. 365.117/9.

[Document 611]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador O’Brien.

No. 143.] Department of State,
Washington, July 15, 1913.

Sir: The Department has received your despatch No. 254 of June 11, 1913, in reply to its instruction No. 139, of May 26 last, concerning the age limit for military service in Italy.

In the Department’s printed circular entitled “Notice to American Citizens Formerly Subjects of Italy Who Contemplate Returning to that Country,” dated March 18, 1901, a copy of which was enclosed with the instruction mentioned above,’ appears the following statement: A former Italian subject may visit Italy without fear of molestation when he is under the age of 20 years; but between the ages of 20 and 39 he is liable to arrest and forced military service, if he has not previously reported for such service. After the age of 39 he may be arrested and imprisoned (but will not be compelled to do military duty) unless he has been pardoned. He may petition the Italian Government for pardon, but this Department will not act as the intermediary in presenting his petition.

You will please inform the Department, after such further inquiry as may be necessary, whether the paragraph just quoted is correct or should be amended. This paragraph does not appear to agree with the following statement in your despatch of June 11:

After the age of 32, while a subject is still liable for military service in the territorial reserves, he is not punishable for past failure to appear for service.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
J. B. Moore.

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State. File No. 365.117/11.

[Document 612]

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

No. 17.] American Embassy,
Rome, November 4, 1913.

Sir: In reply to the Department’s No. 143 of July 15, 1913, relating to the subject of military service in Italy, I have the honor to enclose a copy of a memorandum sent by this Embassy to the Minister of War on the 26th of August, and a copy and translation of the Minister of War’s commentaries on the said memorandum.

From these commentaries it would appear that the age limits at present are sixteen and thirty-two.

Although the communication of the Minister of War touches upon other matters not mentioned in the Department’s instruction, it seemed worth while to transmit it in full as an authoritative statement on the subject of evasion of military service, and, as such, of possible use for future reference.

I have [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

[Inclosure 1.]

The American Embassy to the Ministry of War.

memorandum.

A former Italian subject who returns to Italy after the age of thirty-two is liable for service only in the Territorial Reserve Army. However, his exemption from punishment for past failure to appear is contingent upon his having complied with certain formalities (which it is provided may be performed at an Italan embassy or consulate aboard). These formalities are laid down in. Articles 31 and 33 of the Law of March 20, 1907, on the Military Service of Italians abroad, and include:

1. A demand, made in due time before the date of recruitment of the class to which he belongs, by the said Italian subject upon the diplomatic or consular authorities for medical examination to establish ability or non-ability to serve.

2. If this examination be waived, the said Italian subject, presuming himself able to serve, a demand made by him upon the said authorities that, he be enlisted in the category to which he is entitled to belong, and granted exemption from military service in time of peace so long as his foreign residence continues. This exemption, however, is not granted to one who left Italy to settle in the United States after he reached the age of sixteen.

3. If the said Italian subject presumes himself to be able to serve, and to be entitled to inscription in the category of those exempt, both at home and abroad, from service in time of peace, the transmission to the Council of Recruitment (Consiglio di Leva) either directly or through the mayor of his commune, of the documents necessary to prove the right claimed.

Note.—A demand for exemption from service may be made by the elder of the two brothers on the ground of the substitution of the service of the younger. This demand must be explicitly supported by the younger and service accepted by him.

These formalities must be gone through in order to gain immunity from penalty on a return to Italy. The Italian subject who does not comply with them is liable to be declared a deserter, and in this circumstance the law provides that he shall be liable to punishment at any time within a period (which varies according to the penalty prescribed) of from five to twenty years from the date when the desertion became effective, or from the date when the offender was sentenced, and in no case before he shall have reached the age of fifty.

(Articles 62, 63 and 67 of the Penal Military Code.)

American Embassy,
Rome, November 4, 1913.

[Inclosure 2—Translation.]

The Ministry of War to the American Embassy.

Ministry of War,
Rome, September 16, 1913.

This Ministry, in returning the memorandum herewith enclosed, has the honor to state the following as a completion and partial amendment of the matter contained in the same:

An Italian citizen (cittadino) born abroad in any country, or one who left Italy before his sixteenth year, to go to some country across the ocean (therefore to the United States), residing there uninterruptedly, shall be entitled to the provisional exemption from military service as long as his residence abroad lasts, in pursuance of Article 90 of the revised text of the laws on recruitment.

The recognition of the right to provisional exemption from service can be obtained at any time, both during the period of recruitment and afterwards. This recognition can be sought from the diplomatic or consular authority in whose jurisdiction the subject resides.

The Italian diplomatic or consular authority, having recognized the physical fitness of the citizen for military service (by means of a medical examination, or after a statement by the interested person that he considers himself fit, without submitting himself to the medical examination), and after having ascertained that all of the conditions required by the law have been complied with, shall pronounce, in regard to the citizen, a decision of enlistment, and of temporary exemption from the service with regard to the said cit zen, issuing a statement relative to the provision adopted to the interested person, and advising the competent Council of Recruitment in the Kingdom thereof.

A citizen who is already guilty of the crime of failure to enlist (renitenza), because he omitted to have his right to the temporary exemption from service, at the time of the enlistment of his class, duly recognized, shall be administratively acquitted from the crime imputed to him (and consequently relieved from punishment) as soon as the above-mentioned right be recognized in his favor.

The citizen admitted to the temporary exemption from the service shall not be obliged to serve under arms in time of peace as long as his residence abroad lasts. If he returns to Italy before the end of his thirty-second year of age he loses the benefit of the exemption and is bound to serve for the whole time prescribed for him. If he returns to Italy after the end of the thirty-second year of age, he is exempted from serving and shall be inscribed in the Territorial Reserves.

As an explanation of the note appended to the memorandum, the following is to be noted:

It is true that an application for exemption from service may be made by the elder of the two brothers, with a view to having his younger brother substituted for him.

This application shall be explicitly confirmed by the younger brother, and contain his acceptation of the obligation to serve in the army.

This institution is designated, in the law on recruitment, by the name of Substitution of a Brother (Surrogazione di fratello). It is necessary, however, to bear in mind that the substitution of a brother, under the recruitment law now in force, will not produce the effect for which it was generally demanded, namely, to exempt from all obligations of service in the army of the first line (prima categoria) the applicant who intends to be substituted, because the elder brother, who afterwards represents the younger brother in the call of the class to which the latter belongs, will not find any grounds for his exemption (according to the limitations introduced in the number of cases for assignment to the second and third category) and should therefore be enlisted again in the first category.

An Italian citizen shall be guilty of desertion if, without a justified motive, he does not present himself for enlistment, and will consequently be denounced to the judicial authority.

If condemned in his absence, he cannot profit by the prescription before the end of his fiftieth year of age.

For the Minister:
[Signature illegible.]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page. File No. 365.117/11.

[Document 613]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

No. 18.] Department of State,
Washington, December 19, 1913.

Sir: The Department has received your despatch No. 17 of November 4, 1913, in reply to its instruction No. 143 of July 15 last, concerning military service in Italy, with reference especially to the liability of naturalized citizens of the United States of Italian origin.

I enclose herewith a proposed amendment1 to the Department’s circular2 of March 18, 1901, entitled “Notice to American Citizens Formerly Subjects of Italy who Contemplate Returning to that Country You will notice that several changes have been made in this circular in view of the information contained in the memorandum and note from the Italian Foreign Minister, copies of which accompanied your despatch. Please inform the Department, after such further study and inquiry as may be necessary, whether the circular with the proposed amendments appears to be correct and fairly comprehensive.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
J. B. Moore.

1 Not printed.

2  For. Rel. 1901, p. 282.

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State. File No. 365.117/18.

[Document 614]

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

No. 52.] American Embassy,
Rome, January 5, 1914.

Sir: In reply to the Department’s instruction No. 18 of the 19th ultimo, I have the honor to state that a careful study and comparison has been made of the language of the proposed circular with the military laws of Italy as at present in force, and that the statements contained in the circular appear to be comprehensive and correct.

In connection with this general subject I should be glad to know whether the Department would like me to sound the Italian Foreign Office in regard to the possibility of our concluding a naturalization convention with Italy similar to our Convention of 1870 upon the same subject with Austria-Hungary.

I have [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page. File No. 711.654/7.

[Document 615]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

No. 65.] Department Of State,
Washington, June 19, 1914.

Sir: With reference to the last paragraph of your despatch No. 52, of January 5, 1914, concerning the Department’s “Notice to American Citizens Formerly Subjects of Italy who Contemplate Returning to that Country,” 1 send you herewith a copy of a letter of June 5, 1914, from the Honorable Charles B. Smith, a Representative in Congress from the State of New York, concerning the introduction in Congress of a proposed resolution asking the Department to negotiate for a treaty of naturalization with Italy. I also enclose a copy of the Department’s reply of this day, calling your special attention to the references therein to previous correspondence with your office concerning the negotiation of a naturalization treaty between this country and Italy.

As a step preliminary to the formal opening of further negotiations with the Italian Government, looking to the conclusion of a treaty of naturalization, the Department desires to be informed as to what changes, if any, have been made in the Italian laws since the correspondence with your office in the year 1911, which would seem to make the conclusion of a naturalization treaty more feasible than before.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

[Inclosure 1.]

The Honorable Charles B. Smith to the Secretary of State.

House of Representatives,
Washington, June 5, 1914.

My dear Mr. Secretary: I have had under consideration the introduction of a resolution asking the State Department to negotiate for a further treaty with Italy. The purpose I have in mind is to obtain from the Italian Government a concession which will permit Italians who have become American citizens to return to their homes in Italy to make a visit without being in danger of arrest for violating the laws in regard to military duty. One of my friends, a professional man, who was two years old when he left Italy, would like to visit his old home in his native country. He is a citizen of the United States and a most estimable young man. But he does not dare to visit his relatives in Italy owing to the fear of the conscription regulations of the Italian Government.

I have a population of more than thirty thousand Italian-Americans in my Congressional District. Those who are affected in this particular have been persistent in their desire that something be done to make it possible for them to visit Italy. I will be glad to have your views on this subject.

Very sincerely yours,

Charles B. Smith.

[Inclosure 2.]

The Secretary of State to the Honorable Chas. B. Smith.

Department of State,
Washington, June 19, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your letter of June 5, 1914, concerning the proposed introduction in Congress of a resolution asking the Department to negotiate for a treaty of naturalization with Italy, for the purpose of obtaining from the Italian Government “a concession which will permit Italians who have become American citizens to return to their homes in Italy to make a visit without being in danger of arrest for violating the laws in regard to military duty.”

This Government has repeatedly approached the Government of Italy for the purpose of obtaining a naturalization treaty, the last time in the year 1911. I enclose, for your information, copies of the Department’s instructions to the Embassy at Rome, Nos. 173, of February 11, 1907, and 185 of April 6, 1911, directing the Embassy to negotiate for the conclusion of a treaty of naturalization, and stating the reasons therefor; and copies of despatches from the Embassy, Nos. 389, of June 19, 1908, and 446, of September 15, 1911, giving the grounds upon which the Italian Government declined to conclude such a treaty. You are also referred to Moore’s International Law Digest, Volume 3, page 614, and the volume of Foreign Relations of the United States for 1896, pages 422 et seq.

In view of the repeated attempts of this Government to obtain a treaty of naturalization with Italy, through the Embassy at Rome, it may reasonably be presumed that the Italian Government is aware of the desire of this Government to conclude such a treaty. Perhaps a joint resolution of Congress asking the Department to open further negotiations for a naturalization treaty would impress the Government of Italy with the importance which is attached to this matter by the people of the United States, I may add that the Department has recently had under consideration the question of instructing the Embassy at Rome to approach the Italian Government again with regard to the conclusion of the desired treaty. It is the understanding of the Department that the principal obstacle to the conclusion of a naturalization treaty is found in Article 12 of the Italian Civil Code, which provides that the law of Italian citizenship through the naturalization of an Italian as a citizen of another country “does not work exemption from the obligations of the military service, nor from the penalties imposed on those who bear arms against their country.” The Department, as a step preliminary to the formal opening of further negotiations for a naturalization treaty with the Italian Government, has this day forwarded to the Ambassador at Rome a copy of your letter under acknowledgment, with instructions to ascertain and inform the Department as to what changes, if any, have been made in the laws of Italy since the correspondence in the year 1911, mentioned above, which would seem to make the conclusion of a naturalization treaty more feasible than before. I shall be glad to inform you of the Ambassador’s reply, and would like to be informed of your final decision as to the introduction of the proposed resolution.

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Consul Shank to the Secretary of State. File No. 365.117/32.

[Document 616]

Consul Shank to the Secretary of State.

No. 10.] American Consulate,
Palermo, September 2, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to say that the emigration authorities claim that children born abroad of Italian parents are Italians unless the parents had become naturalized prior to the birth of the child. In this they are no doubt correct, but it is my understanding of international law that when a person is claimed as a citizen of two countries he has the right to elect to which one he will give his allegiance. In the absence of any written declaration on his part I understand that his acts will determine to which country he belongs.

In the case of Mr. Vincent Macaluso the facts are: he was born on August 6, 1887; his father has lived in the United States for 27 years but has never been naturalized; Vincent Macaluso has lived all his life in the United States and came to Italy for the first time in July, 1914, and has never claimed allegiance to any other Government than that of the United States.

The Inspector of Emigration has informed him that he will not be allowed to depart as he is liable to military service in Italy. He appealed to me and I wrote to the Inspector protesting that they had no right to detain native-born citizens. The Inspector replied as follows: The position of Vincenzo Macaluso in respect to his duties of citizenship is as follows: He was born in America of Italian parents, they still being Italians. Although he subsequently became an American citizen, he cannot be exempted from military service in pursuance of Articles 4, 11 and 12, Civil Code. This is absolutely explicit under our laws. I consequently regret your protest, especially so because it is generally known that this office has always a scrupulous respect for the rights of all citizens and that is always first, whenever occasion arises, to raise its voice in behalf of aliens, of whatever nationality.

I add that, having communicated with the Commissioner of Emigration in Rome, I have his approval. I regret therefore that for the present Macaluso cannot leave.

I have reported this case to the Ambassador at Rome and asked his assistance.

In another case the Inspector changed his decision on the ground that the father had become naturalized while the son was still a minor. Many other cases have arisen and in some instances the persons have been able to avoid the authorities and have departed.

The authorities also object to the fact that our passports are the same for native and naturalized citizens and they have insisted on having birth certificates and many other proofs of identity.

Nearly all naturalized Italian-Americans are detained even when they have previously been excused from military service. This is an especial hardship for some who have businesses and positions in America and are not able to return. They are not mustered into the army but are merely prevented from leaving in case Italy should have war.

In view of these facts I think Americans intending to visit Italy should be advised of the trouble they are liable to meet.

I report the above that the Department may take such action as it may deem advisable to relieve Americans of the embarrassments which they may have if they come to Italy.

I have [etc.]

Samuel H. Shank.

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.654/8.

[Document 617]

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

No. 142.] American Embassy,
Rome, September 9, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s instruction No. 65, dated June 19, 1914, enclosing a copy of a letter of June 5, 1914, from the Honorable Charles B. Smith, a Representative in Congress from the State of New York, concerning the introduction in Congress of a proposed resolution asking the Department to negotiate for a treaty of naturalization with Italy.

In compliance with your instructions, the Embassy on July 3, 1914, addressed a note to the Minister for Foreign Affairs requesting to be informed as to what changes, if any, have been made in the Italian naturalization laws since the correspondence with the Embassy in the year 1911.

In his reply, dated July 30, 1914, the Minister informed Mr. Jay that the new citizenship law of Italy was approved on June 13, 1912, and that on August 2, 1912, a royal decree was promulgated which approved the regulations for the application of the law. A copy of the new law, and of the decree were enclosed.

The Embassy has carefully examined the new law, in order to ascertain the principal differences between it and the laws preceding it.

It appears that until the month of June, 1912, questions of Italian nationality, the loss of nationality, the resumption of nationality and the naturalization of foreigners in Italy were regulated by the Italian Civil Code, Arts. 4 to 15.

The greatest difficulty heretofore experienced by countries desirous of negotiating naturalization treaties with Italy consisted in Art. 12 of the old Civil Code, worded as follows: The loss of nationality (in the cases mentioned in the preceding article) does not work exemption from the obligation of military service, nor from the penalties imposed on those who bear arms against the country.

The new Italian Citizenship Law of June 13, 1912, abrogates all preceding ones, and especially Arts. 4 to 15 of the Civil Code.

In as far as obligatory service is concerned, the new law contains the following provision: Art. 8. (last paragraph) Loss of nationality (in the cases provided for by this Article) does not work exemption from the obligation of military service except in cases provided for by special laws.

It appears, therefore, that, by the addition of the words “except in cases provided for by special laws,” Italy reserves the right to negotiate treaties of naturalization with other countries in which the fact of the foreign naturalization of an Italia subject so operates as to exempt such subject from the obligation of military service.

The operation of the existing laws referred to cause much dissatisfaction among our naturalized citizens of Italian birth who return to Italy on visits or for business purposes, and are liable to cause friction. We have had one or two cases of our seamen being held here; several cases of priests and clergymen being held; and one just now of a native-born citizen being forced in the army.

In the opinion of the Embassy, therefore, it would appear to be opportune to introduce legislation with a view to opening negotiations for a treaty of naturalization with Italy.

I have [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.0012/526.

[Document 618]

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

[Extract]

No. 247.] American Embassy,
Rome, September 15, 1914.

Sir: I have recently had several cases of American citizens, naturalized, held here by the Italian Government under their military regulations, and one of an American-born citizen held in the same way, which have occasioned some trouble; but as they are apparently in process of speedy settlement, I will not burden you with the details until I can make a final report on them.

Three of the former are priests or clergymen, having parishes in the United States, and their detention here is a great hardship on them. One is a Roman Catholic priest, the Reverend Raymond Carrá, having a parish in New Orleans; another is a Presbyterian clergyman, the Rev. G. G. Danchise of New York; the other is an Episcopal clergyman, the Reverend Mr. Cassetta, having a parish in New York city.

The fourth case is that of an American-born citizen [Spediacci] whose father, an Italian, had become naturalized before his birth. This case I feel sure I shall succeed in having acted on affirmatively, if the facts stated by the young man can be established.

These are only illustrations of cases which are constantly being brought to my attention, in which I have to inform our naturalized citizens that we are powerless to help them; and they would seem to render it important that a naturalization treaty should be negotiated at the first opportune moment between our two Governments.

I have [etc.]

Thos. Nelson Page.

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Page. File No. 365.117/29a.

[Document 619]

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 21, 1914.

30. Inform Italian Government Department has learned with deep regret of arrest and detention in Italy, for military service, of numerous naturalized American citizens of Italian birth who are domiciled in this country and temporarily visiting Italy. Most of them have dependent wives and children in the United States.

Ask that arrangements be made for their release and permission to return to their families in this country.

Mention provisions of Section 2. Expatriation Act, March 2, 1907, and Section 15, Naturalization Act, June 29, 1906, and say this Government has no desire to intervene for persons whose naturalizations were not obtained in good faith, or who have expatriated themselves by protracted residence in Italy.

Ask whether distinctions cannot be made in applying military service law. Emphasize fact that great distress will be caused wives and children in this country of American citizens impressed into Italian army.

Mention particularly case of John Ciappone, naturalized September 24, 1902; went to Italy to visit parents two months ago, leaving wife and five children in Berlin, Connecticut, without support. He is detained at Palermo. Particulars concerning other cases will be telegraphed shortly.

Lansing.

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State. File No. 365.117/30.

[Document 620]

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Rome, September 22, 1914.

14. Your 30, September 21. Have pressed matter repeatedly without receiving other reply than verbal promise to investigate. See my despatch 247, September 15. Many cases great hardship.

Nelson Page.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page. File No. 365.117/27.

[Document 621]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

No. 79.] Department of State,
Washington, September 23, 1914.

Sir: I enclose a copy of a letter1 from Mr. Redfield, Secretary of Commerce, communicating a copy of one received by him from the Bishop of Long Island regarding the Reverend Dominic Cassetta, a clergyman of Long Island, who, on his return to Italy on a visit, has been held to serve in the Italian Army.

In view of the fact that Mr. Cassetta came to the United States when of very tender years, that his father became a naturalized citizen, that Mr. Cassetta visited Italy for purposes of study, and in view of his religious calling, the Department thinks that you may make a special appeal to the Italian Government in his behalf, stating that this Government would much appreciate action on the part of the Italian authorities permitting Mr. Cassetta to return to the United States.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

1 Not printed.

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State. File No. 365.117/34.

[Document 622]

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Rome, October 2, 1914.

34. You telegram 30, September 21. Have repeatedly written, also made personal visits, Foreign Office without reply or other result than promise to consider in one case only. Am continuing efforts. Please instruct.

Nelson Page.

The Secretary of State to the Honorable Charles B. Smith. File No. 711.654/8.

[Document 623]

The Secretary of State to the Honorable Charles B. Smith.

Department of State,
Washington, October 5, 1914.

Sir: Referring to your letter of June 5, 1914, and the Department’s reply of June 19,1 regarding your proposal to introduce in Congress a resolution looking to the negotiation by this Department of a naturalization treaty with Italy with the object of permitting Italians who have become naturalized American citizens to return to their native land for a visit without the liability of arrest for a violation of the laws of that country with regard to military duty, I beg to quote for your information the following, which has just been received from the American Ambassador at Rome under date of September 9 in reply to the Department’s instruction of June 19 with which a copy of your letter of June 5 was enclosed:

[Quotes Mr. Page’s September 9, 1914.]

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

1 Inclosures 1 and 2 with the Department’s June 19, 1914, to the Ambassador.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page. File No. 365.117/34a.

[Document 624]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 6, 1914.

51. Your 34, October 2, concerning detention naturalized American citizens in Italy. In absence of naturalization treaty all you can do is to express earnestly this Government’s interest in persons concerned and desire for their release, especially in view of destitute condition, in most cases, of their families here. Emphasize fact that this Government is interested only in bona fide citizens and not in those who have expatriated themselves by protracted residence abroad or whose naturalization was procured in bad faith.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page. File No. 711.0012/526.

[Document 625]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

No. 81.] Department of State,
Washington, October 7, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your No. 247 of the 15th ultimo and, referring to the last paragraph thereof, pointing out the importance of the conclusion of a naturalization treaty between the United States and Italy at the first opportunity, desires to say that it does not regard the present as a favorable time to approach the Italian Government on the subject of a naturalization treaty.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State. File No. 365.117/35.

[Document 626]

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Rome, October 8, 1914.

38. Your number 30, September 21. War Office requests date and place of birth and parent’s name John Ciappone. Give similar information concerning all other cases.

Government finds it most difficult to reply officially permitting subjects, naturalization America, to escape military service without granting similar privileges to certain other countries.

Page.

The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Shank. File No. 365.117/32.

[Document 627]

The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Shank.

No. 9.] Department of State,
Washington, October 14, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your despatch No. 10, of September 2, 1914, concerning the detention in Italy, for military service, of Vincent Macaluso, who was born in this country August 6, 1887, of Italian parents, and has resided during all his life in the United States until July last, when he went to Italy for a visit. It appears that you appealed to the Inspector of Immigration to permit Mr. Macaluso to leave Italy, but that he declined to do so because of the fact that this man was born an Italian subject under the law of Italy, and cannot be exempted from military service in Italy, according to Articles 4, 11 and 12 of the Civil Code.

Your action in endeavoring to obtain permission for Mr. Macaluso to leave Italy and return to the United States is approved, and similar action should be followed in all such cases which come to your attention where it is clear that the persons concerned are domiciled in this country, and have made practical election of American rather than Italian nationality. However, in the absence of a treaty between the United States and Italy governing such cases, this Government is not in a position to press the matter to a satisfactory conclusion in case the Italian authorities are unwilling to recognize the persons concerned as American citizens.

I am [etc.]

For the Acting Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Page. File No. 365.117/35.

[Document 628]

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 14, 1914.

60. Your 38, October 8. Department endeavoring obtain desired information. Where possible please obtain it directly from persons held in Italy.

Lansing.

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State. File No. 365.117/45.

[Document 629]

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 162.] American Embassy,
Rome, October 14, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your instruction No. 79 of September 23. The matter of securing the consent of the Italian Government to the return to America of naturalized American citizens of Italian birth, detained here by the Italian authorities as subject to their military regulations, has been engaging my constant attention. I have written no less than nine notes to the Foreign Office expressing the great interest that we feel in this important matter, and those communications have been followed up by several personal visits, in which I have urged our views upon the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

The Italian Government indicates some willingness to grant the permission requested in certain cases. It states, however, that: In order that the. Italian authorities may be able to ascertain the possibility of allowing these several Italians to return to the country of their adoption in spite of the prohibition against their departure as set forth in Royal Decree No. 803 of August 3 last, it is necessary that the War Department be informed, in each of the cases, not only as to the general antecedents of each individual, but in addition the commune from which they came originally, as well as the social position, i. e., the business, occupation or profession of their parents at the time of their birth.

In view of the foregoing, it seems to me essential that some action should be taken to have a naturalization treaty negotiated between our two Governments. Our naturalized citizens of Italian origin do not seem to understand in the least dual citizenship. It is one of the subjects which appears to me likely, unless some agreement can be arrived at, to cause friction in the future between our Governments.

I shall continue to use every proper effort to get these citizens released.

I have the honor [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.654/9.

[Document 630]

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

No. 177.] American Embassy,
Rome, November 3, 1914.

Sir: In reply to your instruction No. 81 of October 7 I have the honor to inform you that I shall await instructions before taking any further steps in relation to a naturalization treaty between the United States and Italy.

I submit for your consideration, however, the following facts which induced me to believe that even although the present general conditions would indicate that this would be an unfavorable time for such a treaty to meet with approbation here, it might possibly prove otherwise, owing to this fact:

Italy is at present greatly concerned at the absence of all foreign tourists, including particularly those from America. The travelling American public is one of the important sources of income in Italy, and the sudden cessation of this revenue is being sensibly felt throughout Italy, where hotels, pensions, shop-keepers, etc., find themselves facing tremendous losses. They are making every effort, accordingly, to meet this situation, and have even secured the aid of the Government in applying to this Embassy, requesting that American consuls in Italy be instructed not to do anything which could cause alarmist rumors that would induce Americans either to leave Italy or refrain from coming here.

To this I have replied that our consuls have only gone to the extent of following their instructions in regard to persons who have applied for aid, or would be likely to require aid should they remain in Italy, and I have called the Government’s attention pointedly to the fact that their detention of American citizens of Italian birth here in Italy, especially of the class represented by the priests and clergymen and married men, because of Italy’s military regulations, has done more to arouse an uncertainty of feeling in the minds of our people as to Italy’s future attitude than any statement which consuls or other Americans have made.

This argument has had a manifest effect, and it was owing to this that I first felt I was making an impression on their minds. It appeared to me, therefore, that this desire to have Americans come here might induce them to make concessions in relaxing the strictness of their military regulations.

I have [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Page. File No. 365.117/45.

[Document 631]

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

[Extracts.]

No. 93.] Department of State,
Washington, November 20, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your despatch No. 162 of October 14, 1914, in reply to its instruction No. 79, of September 23, 1914, concerning your efforts to gain the consent of the Italian Government for various naturalized American citizens of Italian origin who are being held by the Italian authorities as subject to the military regulations of Italy, to leave Italy and return to the United States. You mention having had considerable correspondence with the Italian Foreign Office concerning this matter, but do not enclose with your despatch copies of the correspondence referred to. Please forward to the Department copies of all correspondence which you have had with Italian officials concerning the matter above mentioned.

The Department has been informed that some of the naturalized Italians detained in Italy have been released and allowed to return to the United States, and it is to be hoped that your efforts in behalf of others will meet with success, especially in the case of those who have dependent families in this country. The Department’s views coincide with your own as to the great desirability of concluding a naturalization treaty with Italy. It is believed that such a treaty will be the only means of solving the vexed question of disputed nationality. In this relation attention is called to the Department’s instruction No. 65 of June 19, 1914, and previous correspondence mentioned therein.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State. File No. 365.117/56.

[Document 632]

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

No. 221.] American Embassy,
Rome, December 14, 1914.

Sir: In compliance with the Department’s instruction No. 93 of November 20, I have the honor to enclose copies of all the correspondence had with the Minister for Foreign Affairs on the subject of the detention for military service of naturalized American citizens of Italian birth, and also of two persons claiming to be native-born citizens.1

Besides this correspondence I have had a number of conversations, probably half a dozen or more, with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, and with the Under Secretary of Foreign Affairs. The former has intimated to me that he personally felt substantially as I do as to the desirability of having, at such time as may appear feasible, a convention between our two Governments in regard to naturalization, which would relieve a situation that, as I had suggested, contained a possibility of friction between our two countries in the future.

It had appeared to me that inasmuch as Italy is now endeavoring to interest Americans to come abroad, and is establishing closer commercial relations with us than have heretofore existed, the present might be a good time to move with a view to initiating proceedings for such a convention. The status has, however, apparently changed so much that in my last conversation on the subject I received a different impression.

I have [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

Ambassador Page to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

[Inclosure 1.]

No. 228.] American Embassy,
Rome, September 2, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to ask your excellency’s attention to the following case of an American citizen which it seems to me, and I hope to you, may possibly come within an exception of your Government’s rules in regard to the exactions of the military service, even in cases of former Italian subjects who have become citizens of our country.

The Reverend Dominic A. Cassetta, a priest of the Protestant Episcopal Church in the State of New York, and specifically Curate of St. Augustin’s Chapel, Trinity Parish, in the City of New York, is desirous of returning home with his wife and child; but has been stopped by the authorities in Naples, although holding a passport as an American citizen.

It seems that he went to America when a child five years old and has lived there ever since. When his father became a naturalized American citizen the son was thirteen years of age and became himself an American citizen by that fact and on coming of age exercised his right of election.

I have received a letter from several distinguished priests of the Protestant Episcopal Church asking my attention to his case and I venture to hope that your excellency may find that, as a clergyman who has lived since he was five years old in the United States, the Reverend Cassetta’s case may be considered exceptional enough to entitle him to the consideration which is asked in his behalf.

I avail [etc.]

Thos. Nelson Page.

[Inclosure 2.]

[Untitled]

No. 241.] American Embassy,
Rome, September 6, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to call your excellency’s attention to the action of the Italian military authorities in notifying Joseph Spediacci, a native-born American citizen, that he must appear for military service September 8 next.

Spediacci was born at Amsterdam, in the State of New York, in 1893, his parents being at the time of his birth naturalized citizens of the United States. He is now at Aulla, Tuscany.

I have the honor to request your excellency to use your good offices to the end that the order issued by the Italian military authorities be rescinded.

I avail [etc.]

Thos. Nelson Page.

[Inclosure 3.]

[Untitled]

No. 242.] American Embassy,
Rome, September 7, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to ask your excellency’s attention to the case of another American citizen which I hope may appear to you, by reason of its exceptional circumstances, to come within an exception of your Government’s rules in regard to the exactions of military service, even in regard to Italian subjects who have become citizens of our country.

The Reverend Father Raymond Carrá, Pastor of St. Patrick’s Church, New Orleans, Louisiana, was taken by his parents to America when he was ten years old, and since that time, that is for 24 years, he has resided uninterruptedly in Louisiana, where he became a priest and eventually the pastor of the church above mentioned.

He duly took out naturalization papers as an American citizen and having returned to Italy on a leave of absence for three months to visit his relatives, finds himself detained as subject to your military laws.

His case is almost similar to that of the Reverend Dominick H. Cassetta to which I had the honor to ask your excellency’s attention on September 2, and, like that case, the exceptional situation is so different from the ordinary one of an American naturalized citizen who returns to Italy while he is of an age covered by your military laws, that I very much hope that your Government may be able to consider his case quite exceptional.

I believe that in exceptional cases this privilege has been accorded in the past. I find that such an exception was made in 1896 in the case of Vittorio Gardella, and I have some hope that your Government may think these two good priests would be more useful if allowed to return to their flocks than if they should be held here as subject to the strict letter of your military law.

In bespeaking your excellency’s good offices in this case,

I avail [etc.]

Thos. Nelson Page.

[Inclosure 4.]

[Untitled]

No. 244.] American Embassy,
Rome, September 9, 1914.

Excellency: I have received a telegram from the Department of State to the effect that the Reverend Gustav G. Danchise, a Presbyterian clergyman of New York City, and an American naturalized citizen of Italian birth, who is held for military service under notice by Mayor of Sarzana, province of Genoa.

It appears that he returned to Italy in February last owing to ill health.

The Department of State desires me to bring his case to your excellency’s attention and to say that in view of his calling and circumstances, my Government would appreciate his discharge and permission to return to the United States.

I have already had the honor to bring two other similar cases to your excellency’s attention, namely, that of the Reverend Dominic A. Cassetta and the Reverend Father Raymond Carrá, in which permission was desired for these naturalized American priests to return to America; and I trust, in view of the interest taken in the subject by my Government, that it may be found possible to grant them the desired privilege, these being very exceptional cases.

In bespeaking your excellency’s good offices [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

[Inclosure 5.]

[Untitled]

American Embassy,
Rome, September 18, 1914.

My dear Marquis: I beg to renew the request contained in my official note of September 6, No. 241, in regard to Joseph Spediacci, a native-born citizen of the United States who, while sojourning in Italy, has been called to the colors by the military authorities of the Kingdom.

At the same time I would greatly appreciate your reply in regard to the-three priests and clergymen, naturalized American citizens of Italian birth, who have been refused permission to return to the United States and on whose behalf I appealed to you in my notes of September 2, 7, and 9, numbered respectively 228, 242 and 244.

As regards the Spediacci case, I feel convinced that the Ministry for Foreign Affairs will have recognized the absolute justice of my contention.

The other cases mentioned are in a somewhat different class, and while I have not an equal right in the matter, yet I cannot but hope that, owing to the exceptional circumstances of these cases as explained, you may be able to inform me that my requests will be granted.

Believe me to be [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

[Inclosure 6.]

[Untitled]

No. 255.] American Embassy,
Rome, September 22, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to inform your excellency that I have received today the telegram given below from my Government, and to which I beg earnestly to ask your attention.

Your excellency is aware that I have already brought several cases of this nature to your attention, cases which have appeared to me exceptional enough to give promise of favorable considerable consideration; these include three priests or clergymen and one young man clearly an American-born citizen.

[Here follows Department’s telegram No. 30 of September 21, 1914, printed ante.]

In soliciting your excellency’s good offices [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

[Inclosure 7.]

[Untitled]

No. 258.] American Embassy,
Rome, September 24, 1914.

Excellency: Referring to my note of the 22d instant in regard to the detention in Italy of naturalized American citizens of Italian origin and to my previous notes and conversations on the subject, I have the honor to inform your excellency that I have received today telegraphic instructions to request that permission to return to the United States be granted to the following additional naturalized citizens: Salvatore Capone, at Mirabella (his wife and children are destitute in the United States); and Ben Miraglia, Palermo.

I avail [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

[Inclosure 8.]

[Untitled]

No. 262.] American Embassy,
Rome, September 27, 1914.

Excellency: Referring to my note of the 22d instant in regard to the detention in Italy of naturalized American citizens of Italian origin, and to my previous notes and conversations on the subject, I have the honor to inform your excellency that I have received today telegraphic instructions to request that permission to return to the United States be granted to Joseph Rocco Casazza, a naturalized American citizen, detained at Genoa, accompanied by his wife and child. It is understood that Casazza has tuberculosis and came to Italy for his health.

I avail [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

[Inclosure 9.]

[Untitled]

No. 263.] American Embassy,
Rome, September 29, 1914.

Excellency: Referring to my previous notes in regard to the detention in Italy of naturalized American citizens of Italian origin, and to conversations on the subject, I have the honor to inform your excellency that I have received today telegraphic instructions to request that permission to return to the United States be granted to: Michael Aquilino. a naturalized American citizen, who has been detained for military service at Serra di Falco, in the Province of Caltanisseta, Sicily; it is stated that he was excused from military service, being the eldest son of a widow; and O. L. Signore, a naturalized American citizen who is reported to be detained at Pardi Celideo Chieti.

I avail [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

[Inclosure 10.]

[Untitled]

No. 264.] American Embassy,
Rome, September 29, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to call your excellency’s attention to my personal note to you of the 2d instant and to my subsequent official communications to you: No. 242 of the 7th instant; No. 243 of the 9th instant;1 No. 244 of the 9th instant; No. 255 of the 22nd instant; No. 258 of the 24th instant; No. 262 of the 27th instant; and No. 263 of the 29th instant—all relating to American citizens who have been detained here in Italy.

These notes were followed up by two personal visits to the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, with a view to explaining how earnestly my Government has impressed upon me its desire to have these persons, whose cases are quite exceptional, permitted to return to their homes.

I beg to point out that I have received no reply whatever to any of these notes, and I can only hope that this silence signifies a desire on the part of your excellency’s Government to further the wishes expressed.

Inasmuch as your excellency, according to the press, has expressed a desire that the citizens of other countries should feel satisfied that Italy will continue to present, as it has presented in the past, a pleasant and secure place of sojourn for visiting strangers, I hope that I may count on such assistance as your excellency feels you can properly render in a matter which will do much to give the assurance of security to American citizens, and which will be promotive of much good feeling.

I avail [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

[Inclosure 11—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Ambassador Page.

Foreign Office,
Rome, September 30, 1914.

Mr. Ambassador: In reply to your note of September 9, I hasten to inform you that the Ministry of War telegraphs me that the necessary enquiries are being made to establish the position of the Rev. Gustavo Danch se regarding his obligations as to conscription, and as soon as possible this Ministry will hasten to inform you of the outcome of these enquiries.

Accept [etc.]

Borsarelli.

[Inclosure 12.]

Ambassador Page to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

No. 269.] American Embassy,
Rome, October 2, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to thank your excellency for your kind attention to the request preferred in my note to you No. 244 of the 9th ultimo in regard to the Reverend Mr. Danchise.

In this connection I hope your excellency will permit me to call your attention to my personal note of the 2nd ultimo in regard to the Reverend Dominic A. Cassetta, a pastor of the Protestant Episcopal Church of New York; to my note No. 242 of the 7th ultimo in regard to the case of the Reverend Raymond Carra, pastor of St. Patrick’s Church in New Orleans, and to my subsequent official communications to you: No. 255 of the 22nd ultimo; No. 258 of the 24th ultimo; No. 262 of the 27th ultimo; and No. 263 of the 29th ultimo—all relating to American citizens who have, been detained here in Italy, touching which I have as yet received no reply.

The two priests or clergymen above named are men who have never served in the Army, and have most important affairs in the United States which require their presence there, thus coming, as I understand it, within one of the provisions of the law of Italy, which permits such persons to leave the Kingdom in order to attend to their imperative affairs at home.

I should add that this matter of the detention in Italy of naturalized American citizens of Italian origin is engaging considerable attention in the United States, and in soliciting your excellency’s kindly attention and early response to the cases above cited, I avail [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

[Inclosure 13—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Ambassador Page.

Foreign Office,
Rome, October 5, 1914.

Mr. Ambassador: In reply to your note of the 6th September last No. 241 and to your letter of the 18th of the same month, I hasten to communicate to your excellency that the Ministry of War has just informed me that it had not yet been able to take a determination concerning the cancellation from the lists of conscripts, on the ground of American citizenship, of the young man Giuseppi Spediacci, recruit of the 1st Class, 1894, some information being still awaited.

On the other hand, after examination of the documents already furnished, it has been provided that Spediacci, having already presented himself for service, be granted temporary leave awaiting the solution of the matter.

Accept [etc.]

Borsarelli.

[Inclosure 14—Translation.]

Foreign Office, Rome, October 5, 1914.

Mr. Ambassador: I have the honor to inform your excellency that I did not fail to communicate to my honorable colleague, the Minister of War, as being within his province, the requests which your excellency presented in the name of your Government for Italian citizens naturalized in America, referred to in your various notes and lastly enumerated in your note of September 29 last, No. 264.

Whilst I look forward to communicating to your excellency, as they shall reach me, the replies of General Grancli, I beg to remind your excellency that the acquisition of a foreign nationality on the part of subjects of the Kingdom cannot exempt them from the military obligations which the law in effect in the Kingdom imposes and maintains even in regard to those who abandon their original Italian nationality.

Ignorance of these obligations, which at one time were compended in the 12th Article (now abrogated) of our Civil Code and reconfirmed in the last paragraph of the 8th Article of the new law of citizenship (13 May, 1912) cannot be recognized on the part of subjects of the kingdom.

However, I can assure your excellency that the Ministry of War, after having ascertained the situation with regard to our laws as applicable to the individuals whom you have mentioned to me, will not fail to examine with all benevolence where these laws can respectively be applied to these individuals so as to permit them to return to the United States.

Herewith I reply also to your note No. 255 under date September 22 last, in which your excellency communicated to me the instructions given you by telegraph by the Federal Government concerning the question of principle referred to regarding the American legislation touching the case of a certain John Ciappone.

As concerns this I bee your excellency in conclusion to communicate to me with all promptitude the circumstances, especially the commune of origin in the Kingdom and the date and place of birth, because these indications are asked of me by telegraph by the Ministry of War, which states that without these it is impossible to ascertain what may be the position of conscription of Ciappone.

Accept [etc.]

Borsarelli.

[Inclosure 15—Translation.]

[Untitled]

Foreign Office,
Rome, October 9, 1914.

Mr. Ambassador: In reply to your esteemed note of September 7 last, No. 242, I have the honor to communicate to your excellency that, according to information just received from my colleague of the War Department, and as a result of his inquiries, it has been found that, according to the conscription lists for the year 1880, Raimondo Carrá, the son of Domenico Carrá of the Commune of Vicari, is a renitente, that is to say, stands upon the military records of his country as one who has refused to perform his military duties, for the reason that the said Carrá has not, up to the present time, complied with the laws of Italy with respect to conscription.

The fact that he has become in the mean time a naturalized citizen of the United States of America does not lessen nor mitigate this offense according to the military laws of Italy.

Mr. Carrá must therefore, first of all, present himself before the military authorities for a personal examination and for enrollment, either before the Council of Enlistment (Consiglio di Leva) at Termini Imerese or by delegation before the Consiglio di Leva at Rome, where he now actually resides. Instructions in this sense have already been forwarded to the Royal Under Prefect at Termini Imerese.

In view of the fact, however, that it has been found that Mr. Carrá left Italy when he was ten years old for New Orleans, where he has lived uninterruptedly until his recent return to Italy, it has been ordered that, in case he shall be considered to carry arms and perform the duties of a soldier, he shall be admitted to provisional relief from military service in accordance with Article 93 of the Italian recruiting laws, which excuses him from serving out his enlistment, he having passed his thirty-second year.

With respect to your excellency’s request that Mr. Carrá be allowed to return to the United States, I beg to inform your excellency that as soon as Mr. Carrá shall have regularized his status before the military authorities of the Kingdom as above set forth, in conformity with the conscription laws of the country, he will be able to obtain a passport in accordance with recent instructions issued by the Royal Ministry of the Interior to the prefectual authorities, who have been authorized to make that concession notwithstanding the prohibition contained in the Royal Decree of August 6 last No. 803, applicable to all those belonging to the Terza Categoria as well as to those inscribed in the Territorial Army—in which latter category the young man in question will be obliged to enroll, because of his age, in the event that he shall be considered as fit to carry arms and to be enrolled in that army.

Accept [etc.]

Marchese Luigi Borsarelli di Rifreddo.

[Inclosure 16—Translation.]

[Untitled]

Foreign Office,
Rome, October 10, 1914.

Mr. Ambassador: In further reference to my note of September 30 last, I have the honor to inform your excellency that I am today in receipt of a telegram from the Royal Ministry of War to the effect that Mr. Gustave Danchise did not respond to the call for enlistment in the Commune of Sarzana for any of the three classes for the year 1892, 1893 or 1894, as appears from the official military records.

Such being the case, the Ministry of War has informed me that until it is known the exact class to which Mr. Danchise properly belongs and the commune from which he originally came, it will not be possible to establish his position with respect to his military obligations and status under the conscription laws of the Kingdom nor to make a decision, consequently, with respect to his application to be allowed to return to the United States.

In requesting that this further information be supplied in this case, I avail [etc.]

Borsarelli.

[Inclosure 17—Translation.]

[Untitled]

Foreign Office,
Rome, October 10, 1914.

Mr. Ambassador: In further reference to my note of the 5th instant, I now have the further honor to inform your excellency that I have just been advised by the Royal Ministry of War that in order that it may be able to ascertain the possibility of allowing several Italians to return to the country of their adoption (in spite of the prohibition against their departure as set forth in Royal Decree No. 803 of August 3 last) it is necessary that the War Department be informed, in each of the cases to which your excellency has called attention, not only the general antecedents of each individual, but in addition the commune from which they came originally as well as the social position, business, occupation or profession, of their parents at the time of their birth.

This information is required to enable the military authorities to ascertain the exact position of each individual with respect to his military obligations and status, under the conscription laws of the Kingdom.

I therefore find myself obliged to request your excellency to furnish this Ministry with the information above indicated in each of the cases of the men mentioned in your excellency’s notes to this Ministry dated the 24th, 27th and 29th of September and numbered respectively 258, 262 and 263, namely: Salvatore Capone,

Domenico Francesco Saraceno,

Ben Miraglia,

Giuseppe Rocco Casazza,

Michele Aquilino,

O. L. Signore.

Accept [etc.]

Borsarelli.

[Inclosure 18.]

Ambassador Page to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

No. 280.] American Embassy,
Rome, October 14, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your esteemed notes of the 5th and 10th instant relating to the subject of Italian-born naturalized American citizens who are detained in Italy subject to your military regulations.

Immediately upon receipt of this reply I conveyed to those mentioned by you in the latter note, the necessity of their furnishing me promptly with the information called for by the Royal Italian Government.

I regret not to find in this last the name of the Reverend Dominick Cassetta, to whose case I again have the honor to ask your excellency’s particular attention, for the reasons which are set forth in my note to you of September 2.

I am in receipt of a letter from the Secretary of State of my Government expressing much interest in this case and authorizing me to make a special appeal in his behalf, and to say that action on the part of the Italian authorities permitting Mr. Cassetta to return to the United States would be highly appreciated.

I avail [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

[Inclosure 19.]

[Untitled]

No. 288.] American Embassy,
Rome, October 19, 1914.

Excellency: Referring to the note of the Royal Minister for Foreign Affairs of October 10, I have the honor to transmit the following information in regard to Mr. Ben Miraglia: he is the son of Filadelfio, whose occupation is that of an agricultural engineer; the name of his mother before marriage was Rubina Rosolia; Miraglia states that he belongs to the class of 1870, the 70th regiment of infantry, 9th company; he was born in San Fratello on January 12, 1877.

I avail [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

[Inclosure 20.]

[Untitled]

No. 289.] American Embassy,
Rome, October 21, 1914.

Excellency: Referring to the note of the Royal Minister for Foreign Affairs of October 10, I have the honor to transmit the following information in regard to Joseph Rocco Casazza, permission for whose return to the United States the Embassy desires.

Casazza is the son of Giovanni and Antonette Capelli; he was born on August 16, 1879, at Bertuzzi, Commune of Ottone, and he left Italy the same year in which he was born; he is now confined in the military hospital at Piacenza.

I avail [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

[Inclosure 21.]

[Untitled]

No. 291.]

note verbale.

With reference to the esteemed note verbale of the Royal Ministry for Foreign Affairs of October 10, the American Embassy has the honor to transmit the following information relative to Domenico Francesco Saraceno of Cartale, Province of Catanzaro, permission for whose return to the United States the American Embassy very much desires.

The young man was born on March 8, 1889, at Cartale; his parents were Giovanni Saraceno and Migliaccio Angela; he belongs to the 49th regiment of infantry stationed in the city of Turin, and is now in the military hospital of that city.

American Embassy,
Rome, October 21, 1914.

[Inclosure 22—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Ambassador Page.

Foreign Office,
Rome, October 24, 1914.

Mr. Ambassador: In reference to the last part of my note of the 10th inst., I hasten to inform your excellency that, with a view to aiding in the achievement of your desires, the Royal Minister of War telegraphs me that, in so far as concerns the obligations to the conscription laws of the Kingdom, of Rocco Casazza, that whenever Casazza considers himself not liable or unfit for military service, he can be given the privilege of regularizing his status before the military authorities. If it develops that he is a renitente, that is, a man who has failed to respond to the call to join the army, he must appear before the Consiglio di Leva (Recruiting Commission) of his district. If he is a deserter he must appear before the Commandant of the military district to which he properly belongs.

In the event that he is discharged by either of those bodies, he would thus prima facie be absolved from any military crimes with which he may have been charged, and as a result he could return to his adopted country without further delay or hindrance.

Accept [etc.]

Borsarelli.

[Inclosure 23—Translation.]

[Untitled]

Foreign Office,
Rome, October 24, 1914.

Mr. Ambassador: In response to your esteemed note of the 2nd instant No. 269 I have the honor to inform your excellency that my colleague of the War Department has just advised me, with respect to the case of the Reverend Dominic Cassetta, that in order that the military authorities of the Kingdom may consider and decide just what provisions can be adopted by them in his ease, the Ministry of War must have the usual particulars regarding his exact status with respect to the military and conscription laws of the Kingdom; and as soon as this information is placed in its possession, the Minister of War will immediately provide such measures for his relief as may be possible under the circumstances of his case.

In conveying to your excellency the foregoing response of the War Department I beg to add that I shall not fail to make known to your excellency immediately whatever decision may be reached by the War Department in the case of the Reverend Mr. Cassetta.

Accept [etc.]

Borsarelli.

[Inclosure 24.]

Ambassador Page to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

No. 294.] American Embassy,
Rome, October 24, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to inform your excellency that the American Consul at Palermo has informed me that the Royal authorities at that place have refused permission to Mr. Vincent Macaluso permission to return to the United States.

Vincent Macaluso was born at New Orleans, in the State of Louisiana, August 6, 1887. He is the son of Antonino Macaluso and Maria Rosa di Palermo, both formerly of Campofiorito, Province of Palermo.

Macaluso states that he belongs to no class in the Italian army as he has never been called upon for service by the Italian Consul of the district in which he resides in America and that, never having been in Italy before this year, the Royal Italian Government was naturally ignorant of his existence.

In view of the foregoing facts, I beg that your excellency will cause the necessary instructions to be given the Royal authorities at Palermo, who are in full possession of all the facts in the case, to permit this young man’s immediate return to the United States.

I avail [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

[Inclosure 25.]

[Untitled]

No. 297.] American Embassy,
Rome, October 25, 1914.

Excellency: In response to your esteemed note of yesterday’s date transmitting the request of the Royal Ministry of War that it be furnished with full details regarding the military record of the Reverend Dominic Cassetta, I now have the honor to inform your excellency that I am just in receipt of a telegram from the Department of State at Washington containing the information desired, which is as follows:

His name originally was Domenico A. Cascetta; but as frequently happens in the case of foreigners in the United States, slight changes in the spelling of original names are made in order to render them easier of pronunciation.

Mr. Cassetta was born on May 30, 1878, at Auleta, Mandamento de Caggiano, Circondario di Salaconsolina, Province of Salerno. His father’s name is Aniello Cascetta; born in the same place.

Cassetta’s father emigrated to the United States in 1882. His mother, with Dominic, followed two years later, in 1884. His father and the uncle of Mr. Cassetta procured from the proper Italian authorities a congedo for Dominic in 1898 upon the grounds that he was an only son. His mother has been a widow for the past eleven years. The last known address of Mr. Cassetta was care of French, Lemon and Company, Nos. 2 and 4 via Tornabuoni, Florence, Italy.

I am directed in this telegram to convey to your excellency an intimation of the pleasure which my Government would feel at receiving a favorable decision in this, as well as in several other cases of a like nature, which I have had the honor to submit to the Royal Italian authorities for their consideration.

I avail [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

[Inclosure 26.]

[Untitled]

No. 299.] American Embassy,
Rome, October 26, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s esteemed note of the 24th instant [inclosure 22] and to thank you most cordially for the disposition therein displayed to aid this Embassy in its efforts to obtain favorable consideration in the cases of several American citizens who are held in Italy for the performance of military duties.

With respect to the particular case of Rocco Casazza, now in the military hospital at Piacenza, of which your excellency’s note above referred to treats, I fear that it crossed my note to you No. 289 of the 21st instant, which contained the information desired by the Ministry of War regarding this young man.

I beg that your excellency will refer to that note and transmit the information therein contained to the military authorities, so that an early decision may be reached in this young man’s case.

I avail [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

[Inclosure 27—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Ambassador Page.

American Embassy,
Rome, October 30, 1914.

Mr. Ambassador: In further reference to my note of the 5th instant, I have the honor to inform your excellency that my colleague of the Ministry of War in his dispatch of the 12th instant addressed to the Prefect at Massa has provided for the annulment of the enlistment in the First Category as previously ordered by the Recruiting Commission (Consiglio di Leva) with respect to the American citizen Guiseppe Spediacci, the son of the late Luigi Spediacci.

In view of the fact, however, that this young man, whose father was by birth an Italian citizen and who has resided for nearly ten years in the Kingdom, finds himself to be in the exact position contemplated by the last paragraph of Article 3 of the Italian Laws on Citizenship No. 555 of June 13, 1912, he will, according to that law, acquire Italian citizenship if, within the 22nd year of his age, he does not officially declare that he wishes to retain his foreign citizenship.

The Minister of War, therefore, has issued orders that his name be not taken from the recruiting lists; but that he be sent back for conscription until he shall have completed the 22nd year of his age, in order to be afterwards either dismissed definitely and finally or once more called up for examination and for enlistment, according to the result of such examination.

Accept [etc.]

Borsarelli.

[Inclosure 28.]

Ambassador Page to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

No. 328.] American Embassy,
Rome, November 21, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to inform your excellency that the American Consul at Leghorn has brought the following case to my attention:

An American citizen by name Mario Ugo da Prato, born at Boston, in the State of Massachusetts, August 25, 1895, a son of Antonio da Prato, a naturalized American citizen, has been called upon for military service by the authorities of the military district of Lucca. The father, Antonio da Prato, who was born at Barga, Province of Lucca, in 1859, was naturalized at Boston on March 19, 1892, three years prior to the birth of his son Mario, who would therefore appear, even under the Royal Italian Government’s interpretation of the law of dual nationality, to be clearly exempt from military service as a native-born American citizen.

The father and son arrived in Italy in 1911 for the purpose of the latter’s education. Mario da Prato is now attending the art school at Lucca and intends to return to the United States with his father when he has finished his studies. His post office address as reported by the Consul is 139 Via Mazzini, Viareggio.

As your excellency will perceive, this case is not one of the numerous cases in which I have requested the good offices of your excellency’s Government on behalf of naturalized citizens, and I therefore feel confident that you will cause the necessary instructions to be sent with as little delay as possible to the local military authorities at Lucca to rectify their error, in thus claiming for service a native-born American, the son of parents naturalized in America prior to his birth.

I avail [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

[Inclosure 29—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Ambassador Page.

Foreign Office,
Rome, November 27, 1914.

Mr. Ambassador: In reference to your esteemed note of October 26, No. 299, I have the honor to inform your excellency that his excellency the Minister of War has telegraphed me that the young man Rocco Guiseppe Casazza has been pronounced permanently incapacitated for military service and consequently he is at liberty to leave Italy whenever he so desires.

With respect, however, to the case of Francesco Saraceno, my colleague of the War Department tells me that he is still confined to the military hospital at Turin with a complicated fracture of the right leg and consequently, owing to his present physical condition, it has not been found possible to take the necessary legal and medical measures requested.

I have [etc.]

Borsarelli.

[Inclosure 30.]

Ambassador Page to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

No. 341.] American Embassy,
Rome, December 9, 1914.

Excellency: Referring to previous correspondence in regard to the detention in Italy of the Reverend Dominic A. Cassetta (Domenico A. Cascetta) by the military authorities, I should be very greatly obliged if your excellency would cause me to be informed as to how much longer it will be necessary for him to await permission to return to the United States, which I understand was about to be granted to him.

In soliciting the favor of an early reply regarding this case, in which my Government, as you are aware, is much interested,

I avail [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page.

1 The inclosures relating to American-born citizens (Spediacci, Macaluso, and Da Prato) are those numbered 2, 5, 13, 24, 27 and 28; the other inclosures relate to Italian-born naturalized citizens.

1 Not inclosed.

Japan:Japan:

Contents

Arbitration agreement between the United States and Japan, extending the duration of the Convention of May 5, 1908Arbitration agreement between the United States and Japan, extending the duration of the Convention of May 5, 1908

Signed at Washington, June 28, 1913; ratification advised by the Senate, February 21, 1914; ratified by the President, March 12, 1914; ratified by Japan, May 19, 1914; ratifications exchanged at Tokyo, May 23, 1914; proclaimed, May 20, 1914.

[633] By the President of the United States of America.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this twenty-sixth day of May in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-eighth.

Treaty Series No. 591.]

By the President of the United States of America. Treaty Series No. 591.]

[Document 633]

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas an Agreement between the United States of America and the Government of His Majesty the Emperor of Japan extending, for a further period of five years, the arbitration convention concluded between them on May 5, 1908, was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Washington, on the twenty-eighth day of June, one thousand nine hundred and thirteen, the original of which Agreement, being in the English and Japanese languages, is word for word as follows:

The Government of the United States of America and the Government of His Majesty the Emperor of Japan, being desirous of extending the period of five years during which the Arbitration Convention concluded between them on May 5, 1908, is to remain in force, which period is about to expire, have authorized the undersigned, to wit: The Honorable William Jennings Bryan, Secretary of State of the United States, and Viscount Sutemi Chinda, His Majesty’s Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary at Washington, to conclude the following agreement:

Article I.

The Convention of Arbitration of May 5, 1908, between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of His Majesty the Emperor of Japan, the duration of which by Article III thereof was fixed at a period of five years from the date of the exchange of ratifications, which period will terminate on August 24, 1913, is hereby extended and continued in force for a further period of five years from August 24, 1913.

Article II.

The present Agreement shall be ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by His Majesty the Emperor of Japan, and it shall become effective upon the date of the exchange of ratifications, which shall take place at Tokyo as soon as possible.

Done in duplicate at Washington, this 28th day of June, one thousand nine hundred and thirteen, corresponding to the 28th day of the sixth month of the second year of Taisho.

[seal.] William Jennings Bryan

[seal.] S. Chinda.

And whereas the said Agreement has been duly ratified on both parts, and the ratifications of the two Governments were exchanged in the City of Tokyo, on the twenty-third day of May, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Agreement to be made public, to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this twenty-sixth day of May in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-eighth.
Woodrow Wilson.

By the President:
W. J. Bryan
Secretary of State.

memorandum.

Arbitration Agreement between United States and Japan, signed June 28, 1918, extending the duration of the Arbitration Convention of May 5, 1908.

The Department of State acknowledges the receipt of the Memorandum of the Japanese Embassy, dated May 8, 1914, stating that: “1. The Japanese Embassy construes Article I to mean that the Arbitration Convention of May 5, 1908, terminated at the end of the 23rd day of August, 1913, and that the term of its extension was to commence from the 24th day of the same month, that is, from after midnight of the aforesaid 23rd day.

2. Despite the provision in Article II to the effect that the Extension Agreement shall become effective upon the date of the exchange of ratifications, the United States Government proposes, according to the understanding of the Japanese Embassy, to render the Agreement retrospective in so far as to make it operative on and from August 24, 1913 as provided in Article I above referred to.”

The Department of State concurs in the views of the Japanese Embassy, as stated above, regarding the termination of the Arbitration Convention of May 5, 1908, and the retroactivity of the Agreement signed June 28, 1913.

Department of State,
May 9, 1914.

Protest of Japan against certain land laws of the State of CaliforniaProtest of Japan against certain land laws of the State of California1

1 Continued from For. Rel. 1913, pp. 625–653.

[634] The Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs to the Japanese Ambassador.

Foreign Office, Tokio, June 9, 1914.

File No. 811.52/292.

[635] The Secretary of State to the Japanese Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, June 23, 1914.

File No. 811.52/292.

[636] The Japanese Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Japanese Embassy, Washington, November 25, 1914.

File No. 811.52/271.

The Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs to the Japanese Ambassador. File No. 811.52/292.

[Document 634]

The Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs to the Japanese Ambassador. 2

[Telegram.]

Foreign Office,
Tokio, June 9, 1914.

Among the more important pending questions that confronted me when I assumed charge of this Department, was the issue resulting from the enactment last year of the Legislature of California respecting alien real property ownership. The measure, as you are aware, undertook in effect to draw a distinction in the matter of such ownership between aliens belonging to different races. The avowed purpose of the law was, on the one hand, to annul the then existing right of ownership so far as Japanese subjects were concerned and, on the other, to continue the right in favor of aliens of the white and black races.

I have given the subject my most serious consideration and am consequently well satisfied that the enactment in question is not only in disregard of the letter and spirit of the existing treaty between Japan and the United States of America, but is essentially unfair and invidiously discriminatory against my countrymen and inconsistent as well with the sentiment of amity and good neighborhood which has always presided over the relations between the two countries. Nor can I escape the conviction that the said enactment which was intended to have international effect is also in excess of the authority of the State of California for the reason that the separate States of the United States are, internationally speaking, wholly unknown and entirely without responsibility. In any case, the Imperial Government are confident that such action as complained of stands without historical parallel, and they are happy to believe that the legislation in question forms no part of the general policy of the Federal Government, but is the outcome of unfortunate local conditions. I therefore fully concur in the views which you, in pursuance of instructions from my predecessor, presented to the Honorable the Secretary of State on the subject.

I also cordially appreciate the motives which in the interest of international conciliation and good will induced Baron Makino to give favorable consideration to the idea of concluding a convention regarding the matter. But the project, as it stands at the present time, instead of composing existing misunderstandings, would, I fear, tend to create new difficulties. Accordingly, you are instructed to inform Mr. Bryan that the Imperial Government are disinclined to continue the negotiations looking to the conclusion of a convention on the lines of the project which has been under discussion, but that they prefer to recur to the correspondences which were interrupted by the ineffective negotiations, and that they will now look for an answer to the note which you handed to Mr. Bryan on the 26th August last, hoping that in a renewal of the study of the case a fundamental solution of the question at issue may happily be found.

The negotiations looking to an adjustment of the matter in dispute by means of a convention having failed, the advantage of still withholding from the public the correspondences that have passed between the two Governments on the subject is no longer apparent. You are consequently also instructed to announce to the Secretary of State that the Imperial Government desire to make public the correspondences in question, believing that fuller and more accurate information regarding the matter will contribute to the final settlement of the controversy.

You are authorized in carrying out the above instructions to hand a copy of this note to Mr. Bryan.

2 A copy delivered to the Secretary of State on June 10, 1914.

The Secretary of State to the Japanese Ambassador. File No. 811.52/292.

[Document 635]

The Secretary of State to the Japanese Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, June 23, 1914.

Excellency: You were good enough to hand to me on the 10th instant a communication which you had received from your Government relative to the question resulting from the law enacted last year by the Legislature of California respecting alien land tenures in that State.

In the communication you were informed that the Imperial Government are disinclined to continue the negotiations looking to the conclusion of a convention on the lines of the project which has been under discussion, but that they prefer to recur to the correspondences which were interrupted by these negotiations.

The Government of the United States, without discussing the advisability of the course pursued in withdrawing the project which had formed the basis of the pending negotiations, defers to the express desire of the Imperial Government to bring to an end the negotiations for a conventional settlement of the controversy.

The Imperial Government, in expressing its preference to recur to the correspondence which the negotiations interrupted, add that they will now look for an answer to the note which you handed to me on the 26th August last.

Your excellency will recall that prior to the 26th August, you had submitted to me for consideration the project of a conventional agreement, which was, in the month of December following, superseded by another project, the one now withdrawn. Your note being delivered after the first project had been submitted, it was natural to conclude that it was intended only as a formal answer to my note and aide-memoire of July 16, 1913, and not an answer upon which the Imperial Government relied to meet the arguments and contentions contained in my communications. A reexamination of your note confirms that conclusion in that little matter is introduced and no reasons are advanced which had not already been presented in your excellency’s note of June 4, 1913. After a general summary of the grounds of complaint by your Government, you stated in the note of 26th August: “The Imperial Government reserve for the present the further discussion of the question at issue.” But one inference, in view of the circumstances, is to be drawn from that statement. It is that, since negotiations had been instituted to settle the dispute by treaty stipulations, the Imperial Government did not think it opportune to traverse in detail the contentions urged in my note and aide-mémoire, but considered it sufficient for the time to restate their grounds of complaint and to advert to certain assertions in my aide-mémoire, which in their opinion, tended to weaken those grounds.

In view of the desire now expressed by the Imperial Government to reopen the study of the question and in view of the reservation made in your excellency’s note of August 26, 1913, it is the opinion of this Government that the Imperial Government should submit a detailed answer to my note and aide-mémoire of July 16, 1913, in order that this Government may be fully advised as to those contentions and arguments advanced by it, to which the Imperial Government take exception.

In the reopening of the correspondence, which was interrupted last August by the submission by your excellency of the project for a conventional settlement of the dispute, the Government of the United States considers that its note and aide-memoire of July 16, 1913, remain substantially unanswered, and it will, therefore, be pleased to receive such comments as the Imperial Government may desire to make upon the position of this Government as set forth in those documents, reciprocating the hope of the Imperial Government that in renewing the study of the case a solution of the question at issue may happily be found.

I cannot conclude this note without giving expression to the sincere regret which I feel that the Imperial Government should lay so much emphasis on the element of racial discrimination in this discussion. I desire in behalf of my Government to repeat the assurance made in the previous correspondence that the legislation of which your Government complain rests upon an economic basis, as does legislation of other countries, including your own, affecting immigration and the ownership of land by aliens.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Japanese Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 811.52/271.

[Document 636]

The Japanese Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Japanese Embassy,
Washington, November 25, 1914.

Sir: The contents of your note under date of June 23 last and relative to the question of the alien land tenure in the State of California have duly been communicated by me to the Imperial Government.

In that note you have been good enough to inform me that the United States Government concur in the proposition of the Imperial Government to terminate the negotiations looking to the conclusion of a convention on the lines of the project which has been under discussion. With regard, however, to the expectation of the Imperial Government to receive a reply to the note which I had the honor of delivering to you on August 26, 1913, I understand that it is the opinion of the United States Government that your note and aide memoire of July 16, 1913, remain, as yet, substantially unanswered, and that, therefore, a reply to the same should be forwarded by the Imperial Government, so that you may be advised as to the contentions advanced in the documents to which the Imperial Government take exception.

I may here mention that, pending the aforesaid negotiations for the conclusion of a convention, an immediate answer to my note of August 26, 1913, may not have been regarded as essential by the Imperial Government, but now that the negotiations have been brought to a termination they deem it imperative that the question at issue may further be discussed to the end that a solution satisfactory to both parties may be reached at as early a date as possible.

Although, it is true, certain reservation has been made in the telegram of Baron Makino to me, transmitted to you on August 26, 1913, I should consider that the attitude of the Imperial Government towards the statements contained in your note and aide memoire of July 16, 1913, has been made substantially clear to the United States Government. In view, however, of the opinion expressed in your note of June 23 last, I am now instructed by Baron Kato, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, to reiterate the contentions of the Imperial Government and to bring to your notice more fully the following observations upon your recent communications.

In the opinion of the United States Government that the California Enactment is not indicative of a national discriminatory policy, the Imperial Government gladly concur, for they have at no time regarded the question in that light, as has been pointed out by Baron Makino in his telegram to me sent on August 23, 1913.3 At the same time, however, the incentive which prompted the measure and the circumstances which culminated in the legislation are of so apparent a nature that there seems to be no denial of the fact that the enactment was an outcome of a local policy of discrimination against Japanese subjects qua Japanese subjects, and that it was a manifestation of racial antagonism. Although, no doubt, pains have not been spared to avoid a positive expression to that effect, this phase of the law is of an evident character, and the fact that the statute has been aimed at my countrymen is very thinly veiled and even is widely admitted. In this connection I may refer to the telegram which, I am informed, the President forwarded to the Governor of California on April 22, 1913, and which contains the following passage:

“If they (the people, the Governor and the Legislature of California) deem it necessary to exclude all aliens who have not declared their intention to become citizens from the privileges of land ownership, they can do so along lines already followed in the laws of many of the other states and of many foreign countries, including Japan herself. Invidious discrimination will inevitably draw in question the treaty obligations of the Government of the United States. I register my very earnest and respectful protest against discrimination in this case.” Without expressing any views on the proposition contained in this message, one can clearly conceive the opinion of the President himself on the character of the legislation.

The Imperial Government are unable, likewise, to sympathize with the contention offered in extenuation of the statute that the act is the emanation of economic conditions. The number of my compatriots as well as the area of land effected [affected] by the new law is so very small that the actual facts appear to the Imperial Government neither to confirm the existence of such conditions nor to warrant the necessity for such legislation, in view, especially, of the fact that since the enforcement by the Imperial Government of their policy of regulating labor emigration to the United States the Japanese population in this country has shown a conspicuous decrease. Moreover, even granted that such conditions do actually exist in California, the same may undoubtedly be said of other nationalities finding home in that state, and the Imperial Government are still unable to associate themselves with the view that they constitute a just ground for such an invidious discrimination and the wholesale exclusion of Japanese landowners.

In this connection your recent note calls attention to the existence in Japan of the Imperial Ordinance No. 352 promulgated in 1899.4 The Imperial Government, however, fail to find any precise analogy between this Ordinance and the act of California. Under the Ordinance, as is provided by the article quoted in your note, the liberty of residence is extended to the subjects or citizens of the Powers who are not entitled to that freedom by virtue of treaty. The purport of the law is to grant a privilege hitherto denied, not to rescind it; and the permission granted is general in its application, the prohibition being limited only to a specific case. Your note draws attention to the relation of this Ordinance to Chinese subjects in Japan. The position, however, of the latter under the existing treaty between Japan and China differs materially from that of Japanese subjects in this country under our present treaty, so that, in the absence of the Ordinance in question no Chinese subjects in Japan would have had any right to the freedom of residence as enjoyed by the subjects or citizens of other nations. The effect of the Ordinance was to extend to them this privilege and, therefore, in this respect the law is quite the reverse to that of the California statute, which deprived Japanese subjects of rights hitherto possessed.

Commenting on the remark in my previous note on the present subject, that the California statute is contrary to the letter and spirit of the treaty and is at variance with the accepted principles of just and equal treatment, your note declares that “while it is readily conceivable that a question of treaty right and a question of fair and equal treatment may co-exist, yet, if the matter under consideration has by the contracting parties been made the subject of an express adjustment and agreement, it is hardly open to either party thereafter to say that the reciprocal measure of treatment which they have voluntarily concurred in establishing is not just and equal.” With due respect to the principle professed by this assertion, you will permit me to state that at the time when the Treaty of 1911 was under negotiation between the two Governments such a situation as has been created by the California legislation was never anticipated, and no arrangement was made to meet the exigencies of the case, so that, we are now confronted with a question for which there are no adequate provisions. It is true that every nation has her freedom of domestic legislation in matters that are not expressly stipulated in her treaties with other Powers. However, in the exercise of this right it is generally deemed necessary, where friendly nations are concerned, to practice moderation, so as to maintain the principle of mutual respect, to promote the relations of reciprocal interest and not to defeat the very aim and design of the treaty itself. With regard to the negotiations which terminated in the Treaty of 1911, and to the note of Viscount Uchida5 dated February 21, 1911, referred to in your note, the adjustment of the alien land tenure has no doubt been left, with tacit mutual confidence, to the judicious consideration as well as the sense of equity of each contracting party. Although neither nation was then desirous of entering into a categorical treaty stipulation on this subject, the absence of such an agreement was certainly not intended to accord to either party an opportunity to enact laws, the effect of which would be incompatible with the aim and design of the treaty itself, Japan entirely relying in this respect upon the justice and impartiality of the United States. The aforesaid note of Viscount Uchida was given at the instance of the United States Government, and it is a source of disappointment to the Imperial Government now to find that the liberal terms of the assurance therein contained, instead of being appreciated, as it was desired, are being employed in extenuation of the California statute of which invidious discrimination is the principal feature. In offering the aforesaid assurance to the United States Government, the Imperial Government were certainly aware of the existence in some states of the Union of the laws denying to all aliens the privilege of land ownership, but it was beyond the contemplation of the Government that the Japanese nation as such might be excluded from this privilege enjoyed by other Powers having with the United States treaty relations or otherwise.

With regard to the question of naturalization, fundamentally speaking it should no doubt be considered as a political problem which concerns each individual nation, but when, as in the present case, the question is employed as a means of enforcing a discriminatory measure practically directed against one particular nation it must necessarily assume an international aspect. Despite statements to the contrary, the formula adopted is clearly of Californian origin and in no other state of the Union is liberty to own land made to depend upon capacity to acquire American citizenship. Historically examined, as your note points out, there is no doubt whatever that no discrimination against the Japanese nation was ever intended either by the framers of the Constitution or by the authors of the subsequent amendments, and this very fact in itself should, it seems to me, dissuade the American legislators of the present time from availing themselves of the non-explicit terms of the laws for the purpose of inflicting a stigma upon a friendly nation.

It is a matter of satisfaction to the Imperial Government to learn that your Department conforms to the principle, as stated in my aide mémoire of June 4, 1913,6 that where a right is once vested by treaty or by any other law it remains preserved even if the treaty or law which created such a vested right should cease to exist.

Refuting, however, the contention in the aide mémoire that the ownership of property carries with it full right of alienation, your aide mémoire of July 16, 1913, asserts that a vested right of ownership would not be impaired by a change in the law denying alienation to all aliens or to particular classes of aliens, and that my contention, if correct, would render it impossible for a country to alter its laws concerning the transmission of property. The soundness of this argument would seem to be dependent upon the justice of such an alteration in the law. A significant distinction must exist between the case where the change is general and where it is specific in its application. The stipulations in the treaties between the United States and other Powers, referred to in your aide memoire, providing for the sale of land and the withdrawal of the proceeds would seem to apply to cases where the disqualification to succeed to real estate by reason of alienage is universal, affecting all foreigners alike. Instances may not be lacking where no impairment of a vested right of ownership may take place in consequence of a modification of the law concerning transmission, but the position of the case would be quite different where, as in the present instance, the prohibition is directed against a particular race or nation so as to abridge ex industria their right of ownership by taking away from it the liberty of alienation by reasonable methods known to law.

Your aide mémoire correctly asserts that only to a few nations the United States Government have conceded the most-favored-nation treatment in the matter of the alien ownership of land. At the same time, however, a concession even more generous in character than this treatment is accorded by the United States to the subjects or citizens of some other Powers; for by the treaties with these nations the United States offers to their subjects or citizens a similar treatment in this respect as accorded to her own citizens. Moreover, the laws of a majority of the states in the Union permit aliens to own real estate independently of treaty stipulations. The assertion, therefore, that the subjects or citizens of countries not having treaties with the United States containing a most-favored-nation clause or special stipulations on the subject of land tenure are excluded from the enjoyment of land-ownership, does not tally with the actual position of aliens in many States of the Union, including California herself, where, save the restriction under the new law, all aliens are permitted to own land even in the absence of any treaty stipulations whatsoever, as provided by Section 671 of the Civil Code of California which contains the following words: “any person, whether citizen or alien, may take, hold and dispose of property, real or personal, within this State.”

In my aide mémoire I have referred to an instruction given by the Secretary of State to the American Minister in Mexico in 1879; to a resolution of the House of Representatives in 1911 calling for the termination of the Commercial Treaty between the United States and Russia; and to an instruction given by the Department of State to the United States Minister to Brazil in 1875. Your aide mémoire favors me with full detail in explanation of the cases thus cited, and informs me that the remonstrances of the United States to the foreign Powers concerned, on the occasions in question, have not had the results as desired by the United States Government. Whilst appreciating the information which you have been good enough to accord me, I am of the opinion that further discussion on the various phases of these cases would neither be wise nor necessary. I will, therefore, content myself by stating that in citing the above-mentioned cases my aide memoire has merely essayed to point out that in questions of a more or less analogous nature the United States herself has held the same views and has maintained a similar attitude towards foreign Powers—a fact which is confirmed by the information contained in your communication. No matter how the representations of the United States Government may have been received by the other nations concerned, whatever may have been the result of their remonstrances, the fact remains that the United States Government have always upheld their views and have maintained their attitude.

It is a matter of great regret to the Imperial Government that they are compelled to own their sense of disappointment to find in the communications so far received from the United States Government, little that appears to answer in a fundamental manner to the main complaint of the Imperial Government, so as to shake their original convictions which dictated the present protest, namely, that the new California statute is invidiously discriminatory against the Japanese nation, that it is contrary to the letter as well as spirit of the existing treaty, and that it is incompatible with the sentiment of amity and friendship which has always characterized the intercourse between our two nations. The question at issue, although of a serious and far reaching nature, is not, in its essential aspect, of an intricate character, and the Imperial Government are satisfied that the case has been fully set forth in their notes to the United States Government, and they deem it unnecessary to elaborate their representations to a greater extent than they have already urged.

The Imperial Government appreciate the propitious offer of the United States Government that they would stand ready to compensate any Japanese subject whose property rights might have been impaired by the operation of the statute, and that in case any Japanese subject should institute a litigation in the courts of the United States for the defense of his rights the United States Government would tender their good offices to secure the prompt and efficacious determination of his suit. Unfortunately, however, the present question is one which affects the people of Japan as a nation, so that, quite independently of the facilities and privileges which individual members of the Japanese community in California may enjoy, they must naturally look to the central administrative authorities of the two Governments for the adjustment of the question, as it concerns them in its international aspect. The Imperial Government are compelled to consider that the courses suggested by the United States Government would neither be adequate nor meet the exigencies of a case such as the present one, and they deem it their duty once again to assert their view that in questions of this nature the diplomatic channel is the only proper course through which a satisfactory solution of the controversy may fitly be attained. Whilst, therefore, the Imperial Government are aware of the existence, in the political system of the United States, of certain constitutional difficulties, they must look to the Federal Government of this country for the adjustment of the pending question, welcoming in this respect the denial in your aide mémoire of July 16, 1913, of the suggestion that the question of alien ownership of land in the States is beyond the reach of the treaty-making power.

In bringing to a termination the negotiations for the conclusion of a convention, the Imperial Government were actuated by the opinion that the project, as it then stood, would compose in no wise the existing misunderstandings. Our first mutual concern, it appears to the Imperial Government, should be to ameliorate the present situation in California created by the unfortunate legislation, and then to guard against all possible future troubles of a similar nature. The task may not be a facile one, but the Imperial Government repose too much confidence in the integrity and judgment of the American Government to entertain any doubt that means of the solution of the question will be found. It is, therefore, the earnest hope of the Imperial Government that a response to this note may be forthcoming in which the United States Government will express their concurrence with the views herein contained and will advocate a course which may have the effect of relieving the difficulties. Meanwhile the Imperial Government deem it to be a matter of grave importance that no efforts on their part as well as on that of the United States Government should be spared to meet the question with entire rectitude, and to prevent any possible future complications which might arise and result in perplexing the situation and aggravating the susceptibilities of the two nations.

Accept, Sir, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.

S. Chinda.

3 Above referred to as the note (telegram) delivered to the Secretary on August 26, 1913.

4  For. Rel. 1913, p. 642.

5  For. Rel. 1913, pp. 626–627.

6  For. Rel. 1913, p. 632.

Abolition of foreign settlements in Chosen (Korea)Abolition of foreign settlements in Chosen (Korea)

[637] Chargé Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Tokyo, April 25, 1913.

File No. 895.102/11.

[638] The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé Blanchard.

Department of State, Washington, July 11, 1913.

File No. 895.102/11.

[639] Ambassador Guthrie to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Tokyo, March 26, 1914.

File No. 895.102/20.

[640] Ambassador Guthrie to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Tokyo, March 27, 1914.

Fila No. 895.102/21.

[641] Consul General Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Seoul, April 1, 1914.

File No. 895.102/19.

Chargé Blanchard to the Secretary of State. File No. 895.102/11.

[Document 637]

Chargé Blanchard to the Secretary of State.

No. 29.] American Embassy,
Tokyo, April 25, 1913.

Sir: Referring to previous correspondence reporting upon the conference between the consular representatives of the treaty powers at Seoul and the representative of the Government General with regard to the conditions of the proposed transfer to the Government General of the Affairs of Foreign Settlements in Chosen, I now have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of Consul General Scidmore’s No. 4350 to this Embassy, dated April 22,7 transmitting transcripts of the seventh and eighth meetings held at Seoul March 31 and April 14, and the original of the final protocol signed by all the representatives concerned.

I have [etc.]

A. Bailly-Blanchard.

[Inclosure.]

Protocol agreed to at the Conference held between the Consular Representatives of Treaty Poiuers concerned and the Director of the Bureau of Foreign Affairs of the Government General of Chosen relating to the abolition of the system of Foreign Settlements in Chosen.

I. The Foreign Settlements in Chosen, namely: Chemulpo, Chinnampo, Kun-san, Mokpo, Masampo, and Songchin shall be incorporated with the respective newly organized Communes of Chosen to which they appropriately belong.

II. When such incorporation takes place the competent local authorities shall assume all the duties and obligations of local administration hitherto performed and incurred by the Municipal Councils of the said Foreign Settlements, including public works, sanitation, etc.

III. The common funds and property, if any, belonging to the Municipal Councils of the said Foreign Settlements shall be transferred to the local authorities concerned.

IV. The holders of leases in perpetuity of land within the circumscriptions of the said Foreign Settlements shall be allowed the option of converting the said leases in perpetuity to actual ownership. Such ownership shall be on the same basis as that of Japanese subjects in Chosen.

V. When such conversions have been made and registered the owners of the said land shall be accorded national and most favoured nation treatment in all that concerns the use and enjoyment of such land and houses thereon, as well as in the matter of imposts, taxes, and rates leviable on such land and houses. The conversions and registrations aforesaid shall be made without any taxes, fees, or charges whatever.

VI. In case such option is not availed of, the rights created by the said leases in perpetuity, not inconsistent with the arrangements agreed to in the present Protocol, shall continue to be duly respected. In the matter of imposts, taxes, and rates leviable in respect of the leased land and houses thereon under the second clause of the leases in perpetuity the following adjustment shall be made: (a) A sufficient sum shall be appropriated out Of, and not in excess of, the ground rent payable in respect of the leased land in question to cover national land and house taxes leviable on the said leased land and houses thereon were such land held by an actual owner;

(b) In case the remainder, if any, of the said ground rent equals the local and municipal taxes and rates leviable on the said leased land and houses thereon were such land held by an actual owner the said land and houses shall be exempt from all such local and municipal taxes and rates;

(c) In case the remainder of the said ground rent exceeds the local and municipal taxes and rates leviable on the said leased land and houses thereon were such land held by an actual owner the surplus shall be refunded;

(d) In case the local and municipal taxes and rates leviable on the said leased land and houses thereon were such land held by an actual owner exceed the remainder of the said ground rent the said land and houses shall be liable to taxes and rates to an extent sufficient to make the local and municipal taxes and rates on such land and houses equal to the local and municipal taxes and rates leviable on the leased land and houses thereon were such land held by an actual owner.

VII. The holders of leases in perpetuity aforesaid shall be accorded national and most favoured nation treatment in the matter of imposts, taxes, and rates of whatever kind and nature, whether national, local, or municipal, not otherwise provided for in the present Protocol,

VIII. The competent Registry Offices in Chosen shall undertake due registration of the leases in perpetuity aforesaid as well as subsidiary rights relating thereto. Such registration, consistently with the provisions of law, shall be available against third parties. Legalized copies of the existing Consular registrations relating to the said subsidiary rights shall be transferred to the competent Registry Offices. Registrations so transferred shall continue to have the same force and value as they had in the Consular Offices in which such registrations were effected.

With regard to the leases in perpetuity on which mortgages exist in the Consular Registers concerned at the time of the abolition of the system of Foreign Settlements no registration shall be made in respect of the transfer of such leases in perpetuity to a third party or their conversion to actual ownership, or the cancellation of subsidiary rights relating thereto, except upon the written application of the holders of the said leases in perpetuity or their duly authorized agents certified by their Consular Representatives. This arrangement, however, shall not affect cases where leases in perpetuity are disposed of in default of payment of rent, taxes or rates, or by virtue of legal process.

IX. The existing Public Gardens in the Foreign Settlements shall be maintained in good order and condition by the authorities concerned; and their respective areas shall not be diminished except for public purposes.

X. The existing Foreign Cemeteries in the Foreign Settlements shall be maintained by local foreign residents, in conformity with the laws and ordinances governing cemeteries, crematories, burial, cremation, etc., free of all taxes and rates. The sum of Twenty Thousand Yen (Y. 20,000) or so much thereof as may be necessary shall be appropriated for this purpose out of the property belonging to the Municipal Council of the General Foreign Settlement at Chemulpo.

Done at Seoul (Keijo), Chosen, the 21st day of April, 1913.

Geo. H. Scidmore, Consul-General of the United States of America.

Keuger, Dr., German Consul-General.

J. Bribosia, Consul-General for Belgium.

J. Lutschg, Consul-General for Russia.

A.M. Chalmers, His Britannic Majesty’s Consul-General for Corea.

R. André, Acting Consul for France.

A.M. Chalmers, His Britannic Majesty’s Consul-General for Corea, In Chargé of Italian Interests.

Midori Komatzu, Director of the Bureau of Foreign Affairs of the Government General of Chosen

7 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé Blanchard. File No. 895.102/11.

[Document 638]

The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé Blanchard.

No. 21.] Department of State,
Washington, July 11, 1913.

Sir: Referring to the Embassy’s despatch No. 29 of April 25, 1913, transmitting the original of the final protocol, signed by all the consular representatives of the treaty powers at Seoul and the representatives of the Imperial Japanese Government General, in which was embodied the result of their preliminary negotiations with regard to the conditions of the proposed transfer to the Government General of the affairs of Foreign Settlements in Chosen, I have to state that the said protocol is acceptable to the Government of the United States as a basis for the formal negotiations which it is understood will be initiated by the Imperial Japanese Government in accordance with the note addressed to the Embassy by his excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs on August 28, 1912.

You may so inform the Consul General at Seoul, whom the Department takes this opportunity to commend upon the satisfactory work done by him in connection with this complicated question.

I am [etc.]

J. B. Moore.

Ambassador Guthrie to the Secretary of State. File No. 895.102/20.

[Document 639]

Ambassador Guthrie to the Secretary of State.

No. 56.] American Embassy,
Tokyo, March 26, 1914.

Sir: Referring to the Embassy’s despatch No. 7 of September 23, 1913,7 in regard to the method of procedure in approving the protocol stipulating the conditions of transfer of the Foreign Settlements in Chosen, concluded between the consular representatives in Seoul and the Government General on April 2 last, I now have the honor to inclose copies of an exchange of notes, executed in accordance with the Department’s instructions, with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, approving the said protocol on the understanding that in the event of subsequent modifications of the terms thereof American citizens shall not be placed in a less favorable position than the nationals of the other powers concerned.

I am forwarding copies of this correspondence to the Consul General at Seoul.

I have [etc.]

Geo. W. Guthrie.

[Inclosure 1.]

Ambassador Guthrie to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

No. 25.] American Embassy,
Tokyo, October 2, 1913.

Your Excellency: Referring to your excellency’s note No. 62 of August 27 last, I have the honor to state that my Government is satisfied with the protocol relating to the adjustment of the Foreign Settlements in Chosen approved by the consular representatives at Seoul and the Chosen Government General, deeming it a fair adjustment of the questions involved, and that I am authorized to proceed to an exchange of notes with your excellency approving the said protocol in its present form on the understanding that in the event of subsequent modifications of the terms thereof American citizens shall not be placed in a less favorable position than the nationals of the other powers concerned.

I avail [etc.]

Geo. W. Guthrie.

[Inclosure 2—Translation.]

The Ministers for Foreign Affairs to Ambassador Guthrie.

No. 25.] Department of Foreign Affairs,
Tokyo, March 20, 1914.

Monsieur l’Ambassadeur: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s note of the 2d October last informing me that the United States Government are satisfied with the protocol relating to the adjustment of the Foreign Settlements in Chosen which was signed at Seoul on the 2d April last, and that you are authorized to proceed to an exchange of notes approving the said protocol in its present form on the understanding that in the event of subsequent modifications of the terms thereof American citizens shall not be placed in a less favorable position than the nationals of the other powers concerned.

I beg to state that the Imperial Government, having no objection to the proposed understanding, are desirous to bring to a conclusion, with the present note in reply to your excellency’s note under acknowledgment, the exchange of notes required for the approval of the protocol in question.

I avail [etc.]

Baron N. Makino.

[Inclosure 3.]

Ambassador Guthrie to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

No. 87.] American Embassy,
Tokyo, March 24, 1914.

Your Excellency: Referring to your excellency’s note No. 25 of the 20th instant, I have the honor to state that I concur in the proposal to bring to a conclusion with that note in reply to my note of October 2 last, while agreeing to the understanding as proposed therein, the exchange of notes required for the approval of the protocol relating to the adjustment of the Foreign Settlements in Chosen which was signed at Seoul on April 2, 1913.

I avail [etc.]

Geo. W. Guthrie.

7 Not printed.

Ambassador Guthrie to the Secretary of State. Fila No. 895.102/21.

[Document 640]

Ambassador Guthrie to the Secretary of State.

No. 57.] American Embassy,
Tokyo, March 27, 1914.

Sir: Supplementing my despatch No. 56 of the 26th instant, relative to the approval of the protocol stipulating the conditions of transfer of the Foreign Settlements in Chosen, I have now the honor to inclose a copy of a note received today from the Minister for Foreign Affairs, in which he informs me that the Government General of Chosen intends to put in force its ordinance for carrying into effect the abolition of the said settlements on April 1 next.

I have been unofficially informed by the British Ambassador that as his objections have not been met he had yesterday afternoon refused to consent to the exchange of notes confirming the protocol on behalf of his Government.

What effect this will have on the proposed action by the Minister for Foreign Affairs I am not informed. However, in order that the Consul General at Seoul may be prepared to act, I am advising him of the proposed action of the Government General.

I have [etc.]

Geo. W. Guthrie.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Ambassador Guthrie.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Tokyo, March 26, 1914.

Monsieur l’Ambassadeur: Referring to my note of the 20th instant, relative to the conclusion of the formalities required for the approval of the protocol respecting the abolition of the Foreign Settlements in Chosen, I have the honor to inform your excellency that the Government General of Chosen intends to put in force its ordinance for carrying into effect the abolition of the said settlements (Serial No. 7 of the 30th of October, 1913) on the 1st April next.

I avail [etc.]

Baron N. Makino.

Consul General Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 895.102/19.

[Document 641]

Consul General Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate General,
Seoul, April 1, 1914.

Foreign settlements abolished from to-day.

Miller.

Liberia:Liberia:

Contents

Financial affairs (Documents 642-650)

Financial affairsFinancial affairs

[642] The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

Department of State, Washington, September 22, 1914.

File No. 882.0.0/488a.

[643] Minister Buckner to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Monrovia, September 24, 1914.

File No. 882.51/623.

[644] The Acting Secretary of State to Messrs. Kuhn, Loeb and Company.

Department of State, Washington, September 25, 1914.

File No. 882.51/623.

[645] Messrs. Kuhn, Loeb and Co. to the Acting Secretary of State.

New York, September 29, 1914.

File No. 882.51/625.

[646] The Secretary of State to Minister Buchner.

Department of State, Washington, September 30, 1914.

File No. 882.51/623.

[647] Minister Buckner to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Monrovia, October 3, 1914.

File No. 882.51/626.

[648] [Untitled]

American Legation, Monrovia, November 28, 1914.

File No. 882.51/633.

[649] The Acting Secretary of State to Messrs. Kuhn, Loeb and Company.

Department of State, Washington, November 30, 1914.

File No. 882.51/633.

[650] Kuhn, Loeb and Company to the Acting Secretary of State.

New York, December 2, 1914.

File No. 882.51/634.

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Page. File No. 882.0.0/488a.

[Document 642]

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Page.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 22, 1914.

178. Department does not appear to be in cable communication with Monrovia. Forward following message to American Minister there:

“Telegraph briefly effect European war is having on conditions in Liberia.”

Lansing.

Minister Buckner to the Secretary of State. File No. 882.51/623.

[Document 643]

Minister Buckner to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Monrovia, September 24, 1914.

Referring to Department’s instruction through London. Shipping almost paralyzed. Assigned revenues estimated not more than $3,000 monthly. Interest paid for September. Receivership has $30,000 in bank. No payment to Liberian Government for August. Only partial payments possible to customs and frontier force for August and succeeding months. Frontier force reduced forty per cent. Financial assistance from some source imperative. Receivership has asked fiscal agents for loan.

Buckner.

The Acting Secretary of State to Messrs. Kuhn, Loeb and Company. File No. 882.51/623.

[Document 644]

The Acting Secretary of State to Messrs. Kuhn, Loeb and Company.

Department of State,
Washington, September 25, 1914.

Sir: I transmit herewith paraphrase of a telegram which the Department has received from the American Minister Resident at Monrovia with reference to financial conditions in Liberia.

As will be seen from Minister Buckner’s telegram, conditions are very serious in Liberia on account of the situation caused by the present wars in Europe and the Government and people of the Republic find themselves in a distressing position through no fault of their own.

I shall be glad to receive any suggestions which you may care to offer with a view to the taking of some steps looking to the relief of Liberia.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

Messrs. Kuhn, Loeb and Co. to the Acting Secretary of State. File No. 882.51/625.

[Document 645]

Messrs. Kuhn, Loeb and Co. to the Acting Secretary of State.

New York, September 29, 1914.

Sir: We beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 25th inst., enclosing paraphrase of a telegram which the State Department has received from the American Minister Resident in Monrovia, with reference to financial conditions in Liberia. We have given the most careful consideration to your letter, but while we greatly regret to learn of the hardships which the war has caused in Liberia, we are unable to offer any suggestion for the relief of this situation, as under existing conditions, it is not possible to arrange a loan to Liberia.

We remain [etc.]

Kuhn, Loeb and Company.

The Secretary of State to Minister Buchner. File No. 882.51/623.

[Document 646]

The Secretary of State to Minister Buchner.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 30, 1914.

Your September 24. Cable more definite information regarding condition of American missionaries in Liberia and also needs of Liberians.

Bryan.

Minister Buckner to the Secretary of State. File No. 882.51/626.

[Document 647]

Minister Buckner to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Monrovia, October 3, 1914.

Department’s September 30. American missionary drafts discounted 8 per cent. Some boarding schools closed for lack of food but no famine anywhere. Fifty-four immigrants are destitute and appeal to me for aid.

Buckner.

[Untitled] File No. 882.51/633.

[Document 648]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Monrovia, November 28, 1914.

Clark says revenues November insufficient for payment cost of collection and interest due November 30. New York bankers refuse loan. Can anything be done to prevent default?

Buckner.

The Acting Secretary of State to Messrs. Kuhn, Loeb and Company. File No. 882.51/633.

[Document 649]

The Acting Secretary of State to Messrs. Kuhn, Loeb and Company.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 30, 1914.

Referring to previous correspondence upon the subject of the rehabilitation of the finances of Liberia, I would inform you that a telegram in the following words has been received from the American Minister at Monrovia:

[Foregoing telegram.]

This Government is deeply interested for historic and philanthropic reasons in the welfare of Liberia and the successful outcome of its loan negotiations. Liberia’s resources have been almost entirely customs receipts coming from British, French or German commerce, and are now practically nonexistent through no fault of her own. It is believed that conditions in Liberia will resume their normal and promising aspect upon the conclusion of the wars in Europe, and the department would be glad if any proper assistance could be extended to the Republic in this hour of need.

Robert Lansing.

Kuhn, Loeb and Company to the Acting Secretary of State. File No. 882.51/634.

[Document 650]

Kuhn, Loeb and Company to the Acting Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

New York,
December 2, 1914.

We beg to acknowledge receipt of your telegram in reference to Liberia and have discussed its contents with Messrs. J. P. Morgan and Company, National City Bank, and First National Bank, our associates here. The fiscal agency informs us that although payments for the service of the loan are in arrears and must be made up out of future instalments of pledged revenues or otherwise, the agency has on hand sufficient funds to pay the coupon due January 1, 1915, and expects to make such payment. Next coupon will not mature until July 1, 1915. Plan proposed by General Receiver that unissued bonds be certified and used as the basis of a loan is not feasible because fiscal agency agreement restricts use of unissued bonds and proceeds to specified purposes mentioned in the agreement and we greatly regret that under present conditions it is not possible to arrange any loan to Liberia.

Kuhn, Loeb and Company.

Mexico:Mexico:

Contents

Consular Agent Edward A. Powers, at Parral (Documents 1024-1027)

Consul General Philip C. Hanna, at Monterey (Documents 1028-1029)

Vice Consul John R. Silliman, at Saltillo (Documents 1030-1052)

Protection of Spanish subjects and interests (Documents 1336-1464)

Protection of British subjects and interests. Execution of William S. Benton, a British subject; good offices of the United States (Documents 1465-1527)

Protection of French citizens and interests; treatment of religious orders (Documents 1528-1568)

Protection of German subjects and interests (Documents 1569-1602)

Protection of Chinese; admission of refugees to the United States (Documents 1603-1615)

Political affairs: Constitutionalist revolution against Gen. Huerta’s dictatorship, led by Carranza and Villa. Arrest by Huertista officer at Tampico of an officer and men of the U. S. S. DolphinPolitical affairs:1 Constitutionalist revolution against Gen. Huerta’s dictatorship, led by Carranza and Villa. Arrest by Huertista officer at Tampico of an officer and men of the U. S. S. Dolphin. Occupation of Vera Cruz by United States forces. Severance of diplomatic relations between the United States and Mexico; representation of the United States by the Minister of Brazil. Mediation between the United States and Mexico by plenipotentiaries of Argentina, Brazil, and Chile. Flight of Huerta; provisional presidency of Carbajal, nominee of the Mediators; transfer of the Government by President Carbajal to the Constitutionalist Army through the Governor of the Federal District. Assumption of executive power by Carranza; military convention of all factions at Aguascalientes; provisional presidency of Gutierrez, nominee of the convention; Carranza bolts convention and Villa and Zapata adhere thereto. Withdrawal of the United States forces from Vera Cruz. Carranza’s retreat from Mexico City to Vera Cruz. Gutiérrez, Villa, and Zapata establish Conventionist Government in Mexico City

1 Continued from For. Rel. 1913, pp. 692–867.

[651] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, November 24, 1913.

File No. 812.00/11443d.

[652] Ambassador W. H. Page to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, London, January 28, 1914.

File No. 812.00/10712.

[653] The Secretary of State to Ambassador W. H. Page.

Department of State, Washington, January 29, 1914.

File No. 812.00/10712.

[654] Solicitor Folk to the Secretary of State.

Department of State, Washington, January 31, 1914.

File No. 812.00/10833.

[655] The Secretary of State to Solicitor Folk.

Department of State, Washington, January 31, 1914.

File No. 812.00/10833.

[656] The Secretary of State to all diplomatic missions of the United States.

Department of State, Washington, January 31, 1914.

File No. 812.00/10735a.

[657] Proclamation revoking the proclamation of March 14, 1912, prohibiting the exportation of arms or munitions of war to Mexico.

[seal] Done at the City of Washington this third day of February, in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and thirty-eighth.

File No. 812.113/3105a.

[658] Admiral Mayo to General Zaragoza

U. S. S. Dolphin, Tampico, April 9, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11988.

[659] The Secretary of State to President Wilson.

Department of State, Washington, April 10, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11663a.

[660] Admiral Fletcher to the Secretary of the Navy.

U S. S. Florida, Vera Cruz, April 10, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11988.

[661] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, April 10, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11484.

[662] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, April 10, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11483.

[663] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, April 11, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11487.

[664] Admiral Fletcher to the Secretary of the Navy.

U. S. S. Florida, Vera Cruz, April 11, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11988.

[665] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, April 11, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11487.

[666] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, April 12, 1914, 9 a.m.

File No. 812.00/11485.

[667] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, April 12, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 119.28/a.

[668] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico, April 12, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 119.23/1.

[669] [Untitled]

American Embassy, Mexico City, April 12, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11486.

[670] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, April 12, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 812.00/11478.

[671] Admiral Fletcher to the Secretary of the Navy.

U. S. S. Florida. Vera Cruz, April 12, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 812.00/11988

[672] The Secretary of the Navy to Admiral Fletcher.

Navy Department, Washington, April 12, 1914, 12 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11988.

[673] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, April 12, 1914, 12 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11486.

[674] The Acting Secretary of the Navy to Admiral Fletcher.

Navy Department, Washington, April 13, 1914, 6 a.m.

File No. 812.00/11988.

[675] Admiral Fiske to the Secretary of the Navy.

Navy Department, Washington, April 13, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13491.

[676] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, April 13, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11486.

[677] Admiral Fletcher to the Secretary of the Navy.

U. S. S. Florida. Vera Cruz, April 14, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11988.

[678] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, April 14, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11507a.

[679] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shanghnessy.

Department of State, Washington, April 14, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11517a.

[680] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, April 14, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11514.

[681] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, April 14, 1914, 12 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11512.

[682] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, April 15, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11659.

[683] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, April 15, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11658.

[684] The Secretary of State to certain diplomatic missions.

Department of State, Washington, April 15, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11523a.

[685] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, April 15, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11522.

[686] Admiral Fletcher to the Secretary of the Navy.

U. S. S. Florida, Vera Cruz, April 15, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11988.

[687] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, April 16, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11522.

[688] Admiral Fletcher to the Secretary of the Navy.

U. S. S. Florida. Vera Cruz, April 16, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11988.

[689] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, April 16, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11532.

[690] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, April 17, 1914, 12 m.

File No. 812.00/11532.

[691] The Secretary of State to certain American diplomatic missions.

Department of State, Washington, April 17, 1914, 9 p.m.

[692] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, April 17, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11540.

[693] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, April 18, 1914, 9 a.m.

File No. 812.00/11551.

[694] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, April 18, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11540.

[695] The Secretary of State to certain American diplomatic missions.

Department of State, Washington, April 18, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11540.

[696] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, April 18, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11556.

[697] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, April 18, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11555.

[698] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, April 19, 1914, 1 a.m.

File No. 812.00/11556.

[699] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, April 19, 1914, 12 m.

File No. 812.00/11555.

[700] The Mexican Embassy to the Department of State.

Mexico City, April 19, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11622.

[701] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, April 19, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11552.

[702] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, April 19, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11553.

[703] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, April 19, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11554.

[704] The Secretary of State to certain American diplomatic missions

Department of State, Washington, April 20, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 812.00/11552.

[705] Address of the President delivered at a joint session of the two Houses of Congress, April 20, 1914, on “The Situation in our dealings with General Victoriano Huerta at Mexico City.”

April 20, 1914

63d Congress, 2d Session.

[706] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, April 20, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11634c.

[707] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, April 20, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11547, 11564.

[708] The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

Department of State, Washington, April 21, 1914, 4 a.m.

File No. 812.00/11633b.

[709] The Secretary of State to Consul General Shanklin.

Department of State, Washington, April 21, 1914, 5 a.m.

File No. 812.00/11564.

[710] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, April 21, 1914, 6 a.m.

File No. 812.00/11564.

[711] The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

Department of State, Washington, April 21, 1914, 6 a.m.

File No. 812.00/11564.

[712] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, April 21, 1914, 12 m.

File No. 812.00/11564.

[713] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, April 21, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11594.

[714] The Mexican Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

Mexican Embassy, Washington, April 21, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11677.

[715] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, April 21, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11595.

[716] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, April 21, 1914, 9.50 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11608a.

[717] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, April 22, 1914, 6 a.m.

File No. 812.00/11599.

[718] [Untitled]

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, April 22, 1914, 8 a.m.

File No. 812.00/11602.

[719] [Untitled]

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, April 22, 1914, 8 a.m.

File No. 812.00/11601.

[720] The Secretary of State to the Argentine Minister

Department of State, Washington, April 22, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11744b.

[721] The Secretary of State to the Bolivian Minister.

Department of State, Washington, April 22, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11744a.

[722] The Secretary of State to certain American diplomatic missions.

Department of State, Washington, April 22, 1914, 12 m.

File No. 812.00/11637a.

[723] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, Texas, April 22, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11618.

[724] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

Chihuahua, April 22, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11650.

[725] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico, April 22, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 123Os4/122.

[726] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihuahua, April 23, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11651.

[727] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, April 23, 1914, 11.30 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11654.

[728] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, April 24, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11651.

[729] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, April 24, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11654.

[730] Minister Fletcher to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Santiago, April 24, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11683.

[731] Consul Johnson to the Secretary of State.

Brownsville, Texas, April 25, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11715.

[732] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, Texas, April 25, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11714, 12282.

[733] The Brazilian Ambassador and the Argentine and Chilean Ministers, as Mediators between the Governments of the United States and Mexico, to the Secretary of State.

Argentine Legation, Washington, April 25, 1914.

File No. 812.00/16525.

[734] The Secretary of State to the Mediators.

Department of State, Washington, April 25, 1914.

File No. 812.00/16525.

[735] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

Vera Cruz, April 25, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 1230s4/123.

[736] The Secretary of State to American diplomatic missions.

Department of State, Washington, April 26, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11744c.

[737] Chargé Lorillard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Buenos Aires, April 27, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11737.

[738] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, April 27, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11732.

[739] [Untitled]

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, April 28, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11756.

[740] Ambassador W. H. Page to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, London, April 28, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11749.

[741] The Mediators to the Secretary of State.

Argentine Legation, Washington, April 28, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23494.

[742] The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, April 28, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23493a.

[743] The Secretary of State to the Mediators.

Department of State, Washington, April 29, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23494.

[744] The Secretary of State to certain American diplomatic missions.

Department of State, Washington, April 29, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11776a.

[745] Special Agent Garothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, April 29, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11770.

[746] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, April 30, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11780.

[747] The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

Department of State, Washington, April 30, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11756.

[748] The Mediators to the Secretary of State.

Washington, May 2, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23425.

[749] The Secretary of State to American diplomatic officers.

Department of State, Washington, May 2, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11802a.

[750] General Funston to the Secretary of War.

Vera Cruz, May 2, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11820.

[751] Mr. R. Zubáran Capmany, representing General Carranza to the President and the Secretary of State.

Washington, D. C.,, May 4th, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23426.

[752] The Mediators to the Secretary of State.

Washington, May 5, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11849.

[753] [Untitled]

Washington, May 6, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23427.

[754] The Secretary of State to the Mediators.

Department of State, Washington, May 8, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23427.

[755] The Secretary of State to all American diplomatic missions.

Department of State, Washington, May 11, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11902a.

[756] The Secretary of State to the Mediators.

Department of State, Washington, May 12, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11849.

[757] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, May 12, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11914.

[758] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, May 14, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 812.00/12025.

[759] The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy, Washington, May 15, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12019.

[760] The Secretary of State to H. Percival Dodge, Esquire.

Department of State, Washington, May 16, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12001a.

[761] The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy, Washington, May 17, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12003.

[762] The Secretary of State to the Mediators.

Department of State, Washington, May 18, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12011a.

[763] Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

Special Commission of the President of the United States, near the Mediators. Niagara Falls, N. T., May 20, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12136.

[764] The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

Niagara Falls, May 20, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23435.

[765] The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

Department of State, Washington, May 21, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23435.

[766] The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

Niagara Falls, May 21, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23436.

[767] The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

Department of State, Washington, May 21, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23452c.

[768] The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

Niagara Falls, May 22, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23437.

[769] [Untitled]

Niagara Falls, May 23, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23439, 23441.

[770] The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

Department of State, Washington, May 24, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23452d.

[771] The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

Niagara Falls, May 25, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23444.

[772] The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

Department of State, Washington, May 26, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23444

[773] The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

Niagara Falls, N. Y., May 26, 1914.

File No. 812.00/234.45.

[774] The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

Department of State, Washington, May 27, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23445.

[775] The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

Prospect House, Niagara Falls, N.Y., May 28, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23446.

[776] The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

Department of State, Washington, May 29, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23446. 23452g.

[777] The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

Niagara Falls, N. Y., May 30, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23451.

[778] The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

Department of State, Washington, May 30, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23452h.

[779] The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

Niagara Falls, N. Y., May 31, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12130.

[780] The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

Department of State, Washington, May 31, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23451.

[781] The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

Niagara Falls, June 1, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23453.

[782] The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

Niagara Falls, June 2, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23455.

[783] The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

Department of State, Washington, June 3, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23455a.

[784] The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

Niagara Falls, June 4, 1914, 11.45 a.m.

File No. 812.00/23456, 23457.

[785] The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

Department of State, Washington, June 4, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23456.

[786] Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 9, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12221½.

[787] The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

Niagara Falls, June 11, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23469.

[788] Specially Commissioner Lamar to the Secretary of State.

Niagara Falls, June 12, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12263½.

[789] Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

Special Commission of the President of the United States, near the Mediators, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 13, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12240.

[790] Commissioner Lehmann to the Secretary of State.

Special Commission of the President of the United States, near the Mediators, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 13, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12241.

[791] Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

Special Commission of the President of the United States, near the Mediators. Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 15, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12270.

[792] Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

Special Commission of the President of the United States, near the Mediators, Niagara Falls, June 15, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12271.

[793] Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

Special Commission of the President of the United States, near the Mediators, Niagara Falls, June 16, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12288.

[794] The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

Niagara Falls, June 16, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23477.

[795] Collector Cobb to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, June 16, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12266.

[796] Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

Special Commission of the President of the United States, Near the Mediators, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 17, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12313.

[797] Consul Edwards to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, June 17, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12273.

[798] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, June 18, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 812.00/12305.

[799] Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

Special Commission of the President of the United States, Near the Mediators, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 20, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12314.

[800] The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

Niagara Falls, June 22, 1914.

File No.812.00/23485.

[801] The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

Department of State, Washington, June 23, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23486a.

[802] The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

Niagara Falls, June 24, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23487, 23488.

[803] Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

Prospect House, Niagara Falls, N. T., June 25, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12363.

[804] The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

Niagara Falls, June 29, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23490.

[805] The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

Department of State, Washington, July 1, 1914.

File No. 812.00/23490.

[806] Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

Special Commission of the President of the United States, Near the Mediators, Niagara Falls, N. Y., July 1, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12395.

[807] The Secretary of State to certain American Consuls

Department of State, Washington, July 1, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12392a–j.

[808] Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

Special Commissioners of the President of the United States, near the Mediators, Washington, July 3, 1914.

File No. 312.00/12411.

[809] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, July 3, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12425a.

[810] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

Gómez Palacio, Durango, July 5, 1914.

Pile No. 812.00/12472.

[811] Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

Department of State, Washington, July 6, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12432.

[812] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Saltillo, July 6, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12429.

[813] The Secretary of State to the Missions in Argentina, Brazil and Chile.

Department of State, Washington, July 7, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12430.

[814] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

Gomez Palacio, July 9, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12717.

[815] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Monterey, July 9, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12449.

[816] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, July 10, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12464.

[817] The Chilean Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

Chilean Legation, Washington, July 10, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12479.

[818] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Saltillo, July 10, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12469.

[819] Chargé Lorillard to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Buenos Aires, July 11, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12471.

[820] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, July 15, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12497.

[821] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, July 15, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12497.

[822] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, July 16, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 812.00/12519a.

[823] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, July 16, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12516.

[824] [Untitled]

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, July 17, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12525.

[825] [Untitled]

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, July 18, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12550.

[826] The Secretary of War to the Secretary of State.

War Department, Washington, July 18, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12560.

[827] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Monterey, July 19, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12552.

[828] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, July 20, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 812.00/12552.

[829] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, July 20, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 812.00/12552.

[830] The Secretary of State to Collector Cobb.

Department of State, Washington, July 20, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12552.

[831] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, July 22, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12586.

[832] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, July 23, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12586.

[833] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, July 23, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 812.00/14052a.

[834] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, July 23, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 812.00/14052b.

[835] Vice Consul Bundy to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Kingston, Jamaica, July 24, 1914.

File No. 812.001H87/3.

[836] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, July 24, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12609.

[837] The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, July 25, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 812.00/12586.

[838] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, July 25, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 812.00/12609.

[839] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Monterey, July 25, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12622.

[840] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, July 26, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12612.

[841] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, July 27, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12609.

[842] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, July 27, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12612.

[843] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, July 27, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12612.

[844] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Tampico, July 27, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 812.00/12644.

[845] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, July 27, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12637.

[846] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, July 28, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12637.

[847] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, July 28, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12637.

[848] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Tampico, July 28, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12643.

[849] [Untitled]

Saltillo, July 30, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12691.

[850] [Untitled]

Monterey, July 31, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12759.

[851] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Monterey, July 31, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12760.

[852] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Monterey, July 31, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12762.

[853] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, July 31, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12846.

[854] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, August 1, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12691.

[855] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Monterey, August 1, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12704.

[856] The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

Department of State, Washington, August 2, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12704.

[857] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Saltillo, August 3, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12846.

[858] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Saltillo, August 3, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12723.

[859] [Untitled]

Saltillo, August 3, 1914, noon.

File No. 812.00/12727.

[860] [Untitled]

Saltillo, August 3, 1914, 6 p.m..

File No. 812.00/12733.

[861] [Untitled]

Saltillo, August 4, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 812.00/12742.

[862] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, August 6, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12775a.

[863] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, August 7, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12730.

[864] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, August 8, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12796a.

[865] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, August 8, 1914, midnight.

File No. 812.00/12787.

[866] [Untitled]

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, August 9, 1914, noon.

File No. 812.00/12788.

[867] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, August 9, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 812.00/12795a.

[868] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, August 9, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 812.00/12791.

[869] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, August 9, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 812.00/12787.

[870] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, August 10, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 812.00/12791.

[871] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, August 11, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12832a.

[872] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, August 12, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12834.

[873] [Untitled]

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, August 13, 1914.

File No. 81V.00/12842.

[874] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, August 13, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12842.

[875] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, August 13, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12847.

[876] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Teoloyucan, August 13, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12861.

[877] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, August 14, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12847.

[878] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, August 17, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12907.

[879] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico City, August 20, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12945, 12949.

[880] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, August 22, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12963.

[881] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, August 22, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 812.00/12963.

[882] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico City, August 23, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 812.00/12967.

[883] [Untitled]

Mexico, August 23, 1914, 9 p.m. No. 5

File No. 812.00/12970.

[884] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, August 24, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12970.

[885] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico, August 24, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 812.00/12982.

[886] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, August 25, 1914, 1 a.m.

File No. 812.00/12990.

[887] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, August 25, 1914.

File No. 812.00/12967.

[888] Mr. R. Zubáran Capmany to the Secretary of State.

Confidential Agency of the Constitutionalist Government of Mexico, Washington, August 25, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13007.

[889] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico, August 26, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13015.

[890] The Department of State to Mr. R. Zubáran Capmany.

Department of State, Washington , August 28, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13007.

[891] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, August 28, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13015.

[892] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico, August 29, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13040.

[893] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Mexico, September 1, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13064.

[894] General Obregon to Collector Cobb.

El Paso, Tex. , September 1, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13086.

[895] The Secretary of State to Collector Cobb.

Department of State, Washington, September 4, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13086.

[896] Special Agent Fuller to the Secretary of State.

Mexico, September 5, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13116.

[897] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, September 7, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13116.

[898] Special Agent Fuller to the Secretary of State.

Mexico, September 7, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13122.

[899] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico, September 11, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13160.

[900] [Untitled]

Mexico City, September 11, 1914, 8 p.m. No. 2.

File No. 812.00/13161.

[901] [Untitled]

Mexico City, September 12, 1914, 9 a.m. No. 3.

File No. 812.00/13166.

[902] [Untitled]

Mexico, September 12, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13171.

[903] [Untitled]

Mexico City, September 14, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13180.

[904] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, September 15, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13193.

[905] The Secretary of War to the Secretary of State.

War Department, Washington, September 15, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13225.

[906] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, September 15, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13G30a.

[907] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico, September 16, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13196.

[908] [Untitled]

Mexico, September 16, 1914

File No. 812.00/13195.

[909] Consul General Hurst to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Barcelona, [undated ; received September 17, 1914.]

File No. 812.001H87/6.

[910] General Villa to the President.

Chihuahua, Mexico, September 17, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13258.

[911] The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, September 17, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13222a.

[912] The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, September 17, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13269a.

[913] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, September 17, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13208.

[914] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico City, September 18, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13217.

[915] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of War.

Department of State, Washington, September 19, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13225.

[916] The Secretary of War to the Secretary of State.

War Department, Washington, September 21, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13384.

[917] The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, September 22, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13258.

[918] The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, September 22, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13384.

[919] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War.

Department of State, Washington, September 23, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13384.

[920] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico City, September 23, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13377.

[921] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico City, September 23, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13278.

[922] Special Agent Carothers to the Department of State.

El Paso, September 26, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13304.

[923] Mr. Belt to the Secretary of State.

Mexico, September 29, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13327.

[924] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihuahua, September 30, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13430.

[925] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, October 1, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13384.

[926] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Zacatecas, October 2, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13367.

[927] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, October 5, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 812.00/13396.

[928] [Untitled]

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, October 5, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13397.

[929] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, October 7, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13431a.

[930] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Aguascalientes, October 14, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13507.

[931] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, October 14, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13510.

[932] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Aguascalientes, October 15, 1914, 9 a.m.

File No. 812.00/13521.

[933] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

Guadalupe, October 18, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13531.

[934] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Mexico City, October 22, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13570.

[935] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Aguascalientes, October 22, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13580.

[936] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

Guadalupe, October 23, 1914, 9 a.m.

File No. 812.00/13578.

[937] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Aguascalientes, October 23, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13581.

[938] The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova.

Department of State, Washington, October 24, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13580.

[939] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico, October 26, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13603.

[940] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, October 27, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13610.

[941] [Untitled]

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, October 28, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13699.

[942] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Aguascalientes, October 29, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13638.

[943] [Untitled]

Aguascalientes, October 30, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13658.

[944] The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, November 1, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13610.

[945] The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova.

Department of State, Washington, November 2, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13610.

[946] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Aguascalientes, November 2, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13649.

[947] [Untitled]

Aguascalientes, November 2, 1914, midnight.

File No. 812.00/13666.

[948] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

Guadalupe, November 3, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13685.

[949] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Aguascalientes, November 5, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13704.

[950] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico, November 9, 1914, 11 a.m. No. 2.

File No. 812.00/13729.

[951] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Aguascalientes, November 9, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13735.

[952] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, November 10, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13730.

[953] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Aguascalientes, November 10, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13741.

[954] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Mexico City, November 13, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 812.00/13770.

[955] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Aguascalientes, November 13, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13774.

[956] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, November 13, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13766a.

[957] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Aguascalientes, November 14, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13794.

[958] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova.

Department of State, Washington, November 16, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13774.

[959] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Mexico City, November 16, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 812.00/13795.

[960] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Aguascalientes, November 16, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13802.

[961] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, November 16, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13921.

[962] Mr. Belt to the Secretary of State.

Mexico City, November 19, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13836.

[963] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

Irapttato, November 19, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13833.

[964] The Acting Secretary of War to General Funston.

War Department, Washington, November 20, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13975.

[965] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico City, November 22, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 812.00/13864.

[966] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, November 22, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 812.00/13858.

[967] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, November 23, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13872.

[968] Consul Bonney to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, San Luis Potosi, November 23, 1914.

File No. 812.00/13875.

[969] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, November 26, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13897, 13907.

[970] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Queretaro, November 27, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13928.

[971] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, November 29, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 812.00/13926.

[972] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, November 29, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13940.

[973] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Mexico, December 5, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13980.

[974] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Mexico, December 8, 1914.

File No. 812.00/14048.

[975] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, December 13, 1914.

File No. 812.00/14009a.

[976] Mr. Arredondo to the Secretary of State.

Confidential Agency of the Constitutionalist Government of Mexico, Washington, December 16, 1914.

File No. 812.00/14031.

[977] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, December 16, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 812.00/14.052b.

[978] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, December 19, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 812.00/14053.

[979] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico City, December 20, 1914.

File No. 812.00/14057.

[980] [Untitled]

Mexico City, December 23, 1914.

File No. 812.00/14076.

[981] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, December 26, 1914.

File No. 812.00/14084a.

[982] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico, December 29, 1914.

File No. 812.00/14095, 14104, 14106.

[983] [Untitled]

Mexico, December 30, 1914.

File No. 812.00/14108.

[984] [Untitled]

Mexico, December 31, 1914.

File No. 812.00/14115.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 812.00/11443d.

[Document 651]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 24, 1913.

558. The following has been reported to the Embassies except Turkey and Mexico and to the European Legations. Have sent copy to Lind.

our purposes in mexico.

The purpose of the United States is solely and singly to secure peace and order in Central America by seeing to it that the processes of self government there are not interrupted or set aside.

Usurpations like that of General Huerta menace the peace and development of America as nothing else could. They not only render the development of ordered self government impossible; they also tend to set law entirely aside, to put the lives and fortunes of citizens and foreigners alike in constant jeopardy, to invalidate contracts and concessions in any way the usurper may devise for his own profit and to impair both the national credit and all the foundations of business, domestic or foreign.

It is the purpose of the United States therefore to discredit and defeat such usurpations whenever they occur. The present policy of the Government of the United States is to isolate General Huerta entirely; to cut him off from foreign sympathy and aid and from domestic credit, whether moral or material, and to force him out.

It hopes and believes that isolation will accomplish this end and shall await the results without irritation or impatience. If General Huerta does not retire by force of circumstances it will become the duty of the United States to use less peaceful means to put him out. It will give other Governments notice in advance of each affirmative or aggressive step it has in contemplation should it unhappily become necessary to move actively against the usurper; but no such step seems immediately necessary.

Its fixed resolve is that no such interruptions of civil order shall be tolerated in so far as it is concerned. Each conspicuous instance in which usurpations of this kind are prevented will render their recurrence less and in the end a state of affairs will be secured in Mexico and elsewhere upon this continent which will assure the peace of America and the untrammeled development of its economic and social relations with the rest of the world.

Beyond this fixed purpose the Government of the United States will not go. It will not permit itself to seek any special or exclusive advantages in Mexico or elsewhere for its own citizens but will seek, here as elsewhere, to show itself the consistent champion of the open door. In the meantime it is making every effort that the circumstances permit to safeguard foreign lives and property in Mexico and is making the lives and fortunes of the subjects of other Governments as much its concern as the lives and fortunes of its own citizens.

You will communicate to the foreign office.

Bryan.

Ambassador W. H. Page to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/10712.

[Document 652]

Ambassador W. H. Page to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
London, January 28, 1914.

141. In a long talk with Sir Edward Grey to-day following a long conversation I held with the King on Saturday night, the idea was informally suggested by Grey that the British Government and other European Governments might be willing to request Huerta to resign on two conditions: first, if such a request would be agreeable to the President; and second, if the President will present a definite plan whereby after Huerta’s resignation the pacification of Mexico may be expected. It is thought here that Huerta would feel that he could save his face by yielding to the request of several strong [powers] in a way he would not feel if he resigned at the pressure of the United States only. Mexican refugees and residents here inform me that such a plan would also cause the ruling class in Mexico to feel that their nationality would suffer less humiliation. Huerta would probably demand conditions.

Please telegraph me at the earliest hour possible the feeling of the President with regard to this proposal. If he be favorably disposed please inform me also whether he has a plan to present of a government to follow Huerta which the British, the German and the Spanish Governments might support and what conditions imposed by Huerta would be acceptable to the President.

If the President be hospitable to this general idea and will propose a tentative plan for discussion I believe that the moral support of Europe can be got. Sir Edward Grey informally expressed his approval. The King is much interested.

Page.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador W. H. Page. File No. 812.00/10712.

[Document 653]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador W. H. Page.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 29, 1914.

Please remind His Majesty’s Government of the several earnest efforts this Government has made to bring about a change of administration at Mexico City which General Huerta could accept without personal risk or humiliation and say that the repeated rejection of these suggestions has created a situation which would make any change now effected there upon terms which General Huerta would accept merely a substitution of the authority and responsibility of the United States for the authority and responsibility of the men now associated with Huerta. The President warmly appreciates the suggestion of Sir Edward Grey but fears that the revolution in Mexico has reached such a stage that the sort of settlement proposed, namely the elimination of General Huerta and the substitution of others in authority at Mexico City, would be without the desired effect of bringing peace and order. The men in the north, who are conducting a revolution with a programme which goes to the very root of the causes which have made constitutional government in Mexico impossible, and who are not mere rebels, would still have to be reckoned with. No plan which could be carried out at Mexico City at the present juncture could be made the basis of a satisfactory settlement with them. No plan which could not include them can now result in anything more than a change in personnel of an irrepressible contest. If the European powers would jointly or severally inform General Huerta in plain terms that he could no longer expect countenance or moral support from them, the situation would be immensely simplified and the only possible settlement brought within sight. No one outside Mexico can now accommodate her affairs. The withdrawal of all moral and material support from without is the indispensable first step to a solution from within. From many sources which it deems trustworthy the Government of the United States has received information which convinces it that there is a more hopeful prospect of peace, of the security of property and of the early payment of foreign obligations if Mexico is left to the forces now reckoning with one another there than there would be if anything by way of a mere change of personnel were effected at Mexico City. There are no influences that can be counted on at Mexico City to do anything more than try to perpetuate and strengthen the selfish oligarchical and military interests which it is clear the rest of the country can be made to endure only by constant warfare, and a pitiless harrying of the north. The President is so fully convinced of this, after months of the most careful study of the situation at close range, that he no longer feels justified in maintaining an irregular position as regards the contending parties in the matter of neutrality. He intends therefore, almost immediately, to remove the inhibition on the exportation of arms and ammuniion from the United States. Settlement by civil war carried to its bitter conclusion is a terrible thing, but it must come now, whether we wish it or not, unless some outside power is to undertake to sweep Mexico with its armed forces from end to end, which would be the mere beginning of a still more difficult problem.

Bryan.

Solicitor Folk to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/10833.

[Document 654]

Solicitor Folk to the Secretary of State.

Department of State,
Washington, January 31, 1914.

To the Secretary: It has become important to determine the date when Victoriano Huerta became Dictator of Mexico in the sense of President Wilson’s declaration announcing that he will not recognize as legal or binding anything done by Huerta since he became Dictator.

According to the record Huerta assumed to exercise legislative as well as executive authority on October 10, 1913, when he caused to be imprisoned a large number of the members of the Mexican Congress. This date would seem to be the beginning of the Dictatorship. However, the date of the beginning of the Iluerta Dictatorship is a matter to be determined by President Wilson and, of course, the date so fixed will be conclusive.

Will you please let me hear from you on the subject.

Jos. W. Folk.

The Secretary of State to Solicitor Folk. File No. 812.00/10833.

[Document 655]

The Secretary of State to Solicitor Folk.

Department of State,
Washington, January 31, 1914.

To the Solicitor: Replying to your inquiry as to when Victoriano Huerta became Dictator of Mexico; I have consulted with President Wilson, and find that he regards October 10th, 1913, as the date upon which Victoriano Huerta became Dictator of Mexico, that being the date on which he suspended the Constitution; assumed the power and authority delegated to other officials; dissolved Congress, and caused a large number of the members of the Mexican Congress to be imprisoned. From and after that date Victoriano Huerta has been Dictator in the sense of the announcement of the President of the United States that he will not recognize as legal or binding anything done by Huerta since he became Dictator.

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to all diplomatic missions of the United States. File No. 812.00/10735a.

[Document 656]

The Secretary of State to all diplomatic missions of the United States.

[Circular telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 31, 1914.

No one outside Mexico can now accommodate her affairs. The withdrawal of all moral or material support from without is the in dispensable first step toward a solution from within. From many sources which it deems trustworthy the Government of the United States has received information which convinces it that there is a more hopeful prospect of peace, of the security of property and of the early payment of foreign obligations if Mexico is left to the forces now reckoning with one another there than there would be if anything by way of a mere change of personnel were effected at Mexico City. There are no influences at Mexico City that can be counted on to do anything more than try to perpetuate and strengthen the selfish oligarchical and military interests which it is clear the rest of the country can be made to endure only by constant warfare and a pitiless harrying of the north. The President is so fully convinced of this, after months of the most careful study of the situation at close range, that he no longer feels justified in maintaining an irregular position as regards the contending parties in the matter of neutrality. He intends, therefore, almost immediately, to remove the inhibition on the exportation of arms and ammunition from the United States into Mexico. Settlement by civil war carried to its bitter conclusion is a terrible thing, but it must come now whether we wish it or not, unless some outside power is to sweep Mexico with its armed forces from end to end; which would be the beginning of a still more difficult problem.

By removing the inhibition on the exportation of arms and ammunition into Mexico the Government of the United States puts itself, and intends to put itself, in the same position as other nations whose citizens have all along been at liberty to sell what they pleased to Mexico. The Government of the United States deems it essential to the settlement of her present difficulties that Mexico should be treated as any other country would be which was torn by civil war. The circumstance that Mexico is for the time being unable to meet her financial obligations creates no novel or exceptional international rights; and she will be the sooner able to meet those obligations and resume her full international responsibilities if she is left to determine her own affairs by domestic force and then by domestic counsel.

Bryan.

Proclamation revoking the proclamation of March 14, 1912, prohibiting the exportation of arms or munitions of war to Mexico. File No. 812.113/3105a.

[Document 657]

Proclamation revoking the proclamation of March 14, 1912, prohibiting the exportation of arms or munitions of war to Mexico. 2

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas, by a Proclamation of the President issued on March 14, 1912,3 under a Joint Resolution of Congress approved by the President on the same day, it was declared that there existed in Mexico conditions of domestic violence which were promoted by the use of arms or munitions of war procured from the United States; and

Whereas, by the Joint Resolution above mentioned it thereupon became unlawful to export arms or munitions of war to Mexico except under such limitations and exceptions as the President should prescribe:

Now, therefore, I Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, hereby declare and proclaim that, as the conditions on which the Proclamation of March 14, 1912, was based have essentially changed, and as it is desirable to place the United States with reference to the exportation of arms or munitions of war to Mexico in the same position as other Powers, the said Proclamation is hereby revoked.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal] Done at the City of Washington this third day of February, in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and thirty-eighth.
Woodrow Wilson.

By the President:
W. J. Bryan
Secretary of State.

2 Communicated to the Embassy at Mexico City on February 3.

3  For. Rel. 1912, p. 745.

Admiral Mayo to General Zaragoza File No. 812.00/11988.

[Document 658]

Admiral Mayo to General Zaragoza 4

U. S. S. Dolphin,
Tampico, April 9, 1914.

This morning an officer5 and squad of men of the Mexican military forces arrested and marched through the street of Tampico a commissioned officer of the United States Navy, the Paymaster of the U. S. S. Dolphin, together with seven men composing the crew of the whaleboat of the Dolphin.

At the time of this arrest the officer and men concerned were unarmed and engaged in loading cases of gasoline which had been purchased on shore. Part of these men were on the shore, but all, including the man or men in the boat, were forced to accompany the armed Mexican force.

I do not need to tell you that taking men from a boat frying the American flag is a hostile act not to be excused.

I have already received your verbal message of regret that this event had happened, and your statement that it was committed by an ignorant officer.

The responsibility for hostile acts can not be avoided by the plea of ignorance.

In view of the publicity of this occurrence, I must require that you send me, by suitable members of your staff, formal disavowal of and apology for the act, together with your assurance that the officer responsible for it will receive severe punishment. Also that you publicly hoist the American flag in a prominent position on shore and salute it with twenty-one guns, which salute will be duly returned by this ship.

Your answer to this communication should reach me and the called-for salute be fired within twenty-four hours from 6 p.m. of this date.

Mayo.

4 Commanding the Huertista forces resisting the Constitutionalists at Tampico.

5 Colonel Hinojosa.

The Secretary of State to President Wilson. File No. 812.00/11663a.

[Document 659]

The Secretary of State to President Wilson.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 10, 1914.

I send despatch just received from the Secretary of the Navy: Mayo reports, April 9, 5 p.m.:

“This forenoon Mexican soldiers arrested paymaster and whaleboat’s crew of Dolphin, part of whom were in boat with flag flying, marched them two blocks through streets, then back to boat, and there released them. General Zaragoza expressed regret verbally.

“In view of publicity of event, I have called for formal disavowal and apology, punishment of officer in charge Mexican squad, and salute to American flag within 24 hours from 6 p.m., Thursday.

“Mayo.”

Fletcher.

I do not see that Mayo could have done otherwise. I await instructions.

Bryan.

Admiral Fletcher to the Secretary of the Navy. File No. 812.00/11988.

[Document 660]

Admiral Fletcher to the Secretary of the Navy.

[Telegram.]

U S. S. Florida,
Vera Cruz, April 10, 1914, 5 p.m.

Have informed Embassy of Mayo’s message in regard to arrest of boat’s crew and suggested that the gravity of the offense be explained to Huerta and promise of ample reparation be obtained, to avoid forcing the issue locally at Tampico.

Fletcher.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11484.

[Document 661]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, April 10, 1914, 8 p.m.

841. Referring to the ultimatum delivered by Admiral Mayo to the military authorities at Tampico. I have received a note6 from the Foreign Office giving their side of the question and requesting me to ask for the withdrawal of the ultimatum. In the absence of instructions in the premises I called on General Huerta and explained to him the gravity of the matter and procured from him the follow ing written statement which I have sent to Admiral Fletcher and * * * given to the press:

First. That in view of the fact that the Chargé d’Affaires of the United States of America heard that the whaleboat in which the American sailors were was flying the flag of his country an investigation will be made to establish the responsibility of Colonel Hinojosa.

Second. That in accord with the line of conduct which the Government of Mexico has always followed in the fulfillment of its duties of an international character regarding all nations it deplores what has occurred in this case, which has grown out of nothing more than a misunderstanding by a subordinate official, since General Zaragoza, the superior in rank of this official, at once pointed out that what had happened was unintentional, and imposed upon Colonel Hinojosa the disciplinary punishment within the authority of said General Zaragoza.

Third. That if the investigation which is to be made should develop a greater responsibility on the part of Colonel Hinojosa the appropriate penalty will be imposed upon him by the competent authorities.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

6 Text given in Mr. O’Shaughnessy’s dispatch No. 2208 of April 15.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 812.00/11483.

[Document 662]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 10, 1914, 9 p.m.

740. You have received from Mayo, Vera Cruz, copy of message sent to local Mexican general. The President directs that you present the matter at once to the Foreign Office with utmost firmness, earnestness, and frankness, representing to them the extreme seriousness of the situation and the possibility that the gravest consequences may ensue unless the guilty parties are promptly punished. Inform us of reply made and action taken.

Bryan.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11487.

[Document 663]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, April 11, 1914, 1 p.m.

842. Referring to my 841, April 10, 8 p.m., and to Department’s 740, April 10, 9 p.m. Will the promise received by me from Huerta (which I have further received in a signed note7 from the Foreign Office as a statement of the President), if carried out, be satisfactory, as I am not acting on your 740, April 10, 9 p.m. until I again hear from you?

The Minister for Foreign Affairs is in Guadalajara until Monday, and the entire machinery of Government is at a standstill owing to Holy Week* * *.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

7 Text given in Mr. O’Shaughnessy’s dispatch No. 2207 of April 15.

Admiral Fletcher to the Secretary of the Navy. File No. 812.00/11988.

[Document 664]

Admiral Fletcher to the Secretary of the Navy.

[Telegrams.]

U. S. S. Florida,
Vera Cruz, April 11, 1914, 3 p.m.

Mayo reports: General Zaragoza has sent me official letter expressing regrets over arrest of boat’s crew, stating was due to ignorance of officer; but with reference to other stipulations has asked twenty-four hours delay, on account poor communication, to consult his Government. Request being reasonable was granted.

Mayo.

Fletcher.

[Untitled]

April 11, 1914, 2 p.m.

Written reports of arrest of boat’s crew just received from Mayo and all details are in agreement with the cable dispatch of April 9, 5 p.m. He states that at twelve o’clock a German came on board and reported that the crew of the Dolphin’s whaleboat and paymaster in charge, who had gone ashore for gasoline, had been arrested by a squad of Federal soldiers. Lieutenant Commander Earle was at once dispatched officially to demand release of these men from General Zaragoza and to ask for explanation. The boat’s crew and paymaster were released about 1.30 and returned to the ship. Upon hearing the report of Lieutenant Commander Earle, a letter was sent to Zaragoza by Captain Moffett, in uniform and sidearms. Written reports by Earle, Paymaster Copp, Commander Moffett, German from whom gasoline was purchased, and members of boat’s crew, were received, and all agree upon details. Earle reports he was accompanied by Consul Miller and the man from whom the gasoline was purchased. The General, as soon as he learned the facts, immediately dispatched orders to have the paymaster and the men released, and stated that he was sincerely sorry for the occurrence; that the officer in command was ignorant of the first laws of war and was carrying out his instructions to allow no boats whatever at that warehouse dock. Earle told the General that we had no means of knowing there was any objection to going to that dock, which was inside the Federal lines. The General again apologized, and upon returning Earle found that the whaleboat and crew had already been released.

Earle further states in substance that the crew were loading the boat with gasoline and had about eight cases left. Two men were in the boat. An officer in charge of a squad of ten soldiers, all well armed, arrived on the scene and told the paymaster he and the men were under arrest and to come with him. The officer ordered the men in the boat to come out. The men did not come out of the boat and the soldiers then started towards the boat with determined gestures and they again directed the men to leave the boat. Seeing this the paymaster ordered the men to come out. At this time the United States colors were flying from the staff in the bow and the stern of the whaleboat. The soldiers formed in a squad around the non and the paymaster and marched them about five minutes walk, crossing a railroad track which apparently marked the Federal line of defense. At this point an officer of high rank was met and after questioning the lieutenant he seemed angry and directed all hands to return to the boat, where they were told to complete the loading. The boat was not allowed to leave, however, until another officer came up, who shook hands with the paymaster and apologized profusely and allowed the boat to go. The time between the arrest and release was about one hour. The paymaster states his protests and explanations as to his identity arid rights were unheeded by the officer [and adds] “On our return, after being allowed to finish loading, we were not allowed to return [to the ship] until the arrival of an officer with the following message: The General sends his excuses and informs you that he has been misinformed and that you can return to your ship.

Admiral Mayo states in his report: The arrest of this officer and these men, some of whom were taken from a United States boat flying the United States flag, and the marching of these men through the streets publicly, under armed guard, was, I consider, such a humiliating and gross insult to them and to the flag of the United States that such public apology and reparation as I ask for in my letter to General Zaragoza should be insisted upon.

I am of the opinion that there is ample justification for the demands made by Mayo and that the taking of men from a naval boat flying the American flag is an hostile act which can not be excused by a plea of ignorance on the part of a commissioned Mexican officer. Undue delay in complying with demand to salute American flag only intensifies situation, and retaliatory measures, even to the seizing of a Mexican gunboat, would not be excessive under the circumstances.

Fletcher.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 812.00/11487.

[Document 665]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 11, 1914, 9 p.m.

741. Your No. 842, April 11, 1 p.m. I communicated Admiral Mayo’s ultimatum to the President and he approved demand made. My telegram 740 of April 10, 9 p.m., to you was in part expressed in the language of the President.

The statement by Huerta as quoted in your No. 841, April 10, 8 p.m., does not meet the last part of the demand and I notified Mr. Algara, the Mexican Chargé here, of this fact about noon to-day.

This Government appreciates, however, the difficulty of securing prompt action during the religious exercises connected with Holy Week and if General Huerta gives this as a reason for not having complied, this Government will direct Admiral Mayo to extend the time until Monday evening.

Bryan.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11485.

[Document 666]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, April 12, 1914, 9 a.m.

844. Your 741, April 11, 9 a.m. This telegram, owing to the ignorance of the censor, who was kept on the cable last night, did not reach the Embassy until half past eleven. Owing to the urgency of the situation, I suggested that the Sub-Secretary of Foreign Affairs come immediately to the Embassy to discuss the matter, which he did at half past one. I showed him your telegram 740, and told him that the incident was fraught with the greatest consequences, and suggested to him that he see the President this morning at half past seven, and impress upon him the necessity of quick action in acceding to the demands of Admiral Mayo, now supported by the President of the United States, and that I would see him at the Foreign Office between nine and ten and if necessary go myself to the President in case he should not have come to reason. The Sub-Secretary suggested that it would make the act much easier for Mexico if the United States would be satisfied were the flag saluted on the Dolphin by a Mexican battery or gunboat, as he feared that the hoisting of the American flag on a Mexican public edifice (as, he asserts, Admiral Mayo demands), besides being humiliating, might lead to serious anti-American disorders throughout Mexico. Will this salute to our flag be answered according to custom by a salute to the Mexican flag?

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 119.28/a.

[Document 667]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 12, 1914, 10 a.m.

742. We are just informed that message No. 741, April 11, 9 p.m., sent from here has been stopped by censor and delivery refused. Investigate at once and demand message.

Bryan.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 119.23/1.

[Document 668]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Embassy,
Mexico, April 12, 1914, 10 a.m.

845. Your 742, April 12, 10 a.m. A censorship upon both outgoing and incoming cables instituted last night at 9.30. Not having heard from you, I inquired at the cable office at about 11 p.m. and was informed that the censor was holding up a message from you. I thereupon made such robust representations that the message was delivered at the Embassy at 11.35 last night.* * * Non-delivery really due to ignorance of censor.

O’Shaughnessy.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/11486.

[Document 669]

[Untitled]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, April 12, 1914, 2 p.m.

847. Referring to my No. 844, April 12, 9 a.m., I called upon the Sub-Secretary for Foreign Relations at 9.30. He told me that General Huerta said that he could not accede to the demands of the United States and that he considered that the reparation which was stated in my number 841, April 10, 8 p.m., was sufficient under the circumstances, dwelling on the fact that there was fighting going on at the time of the occurrence, which extenuated in his opinion the action of the federal colonel. I told the Sub-Secretary as well as General Ramon Corona, Chief of the Presidential Staff, who speaks English quite perfectly, that I considered the attitude taken by General Huerta as one fraught with the most serious possibilities. I told him that if the people of the United States once believed that the federal colonel in question acted through an animosity against Americans, a fact which the press would not fail to endeavor to make them believe, my personal opinion was that the people would force the administration to uphold our national dignity even with armed force if necessary; and that I could not accept this verbal refusal from the Mexican Government in the premises as I felt in view of the momentous possibilities that a reconsideration should be given to the matter by General Huerta.

While at the Foreign Office the Sub-Secretary was called to General Huerta’s and he left at the same time I did. I told him that I would be at his disposition at the Embassy during the entire day but requested him to be as expeditious as possible as I desired to report to my Government.

At ten minutes past noon the Sub-Secretary called at the Embassy and delivered to me a note, signed by him in his character as Sub-Secretary for Foreign Relations, refusing to accede to the demands of the United States in the premises, which note I give in full below: Mr. Chargé d’affaires: I beg to refer again to the case of the American marines arrested at the Iturbide bridge at the port of Tampico, and to the conference which you and I held this morning at two o’clock with regard to the fact that the Secretary of State of the United States of America informed the Chargé d’Affaires of Mexico in Washington that the declaration of the President of the United Mexican States, which I had the honor of communicating to you day before yesterday, is not sufficient to close the incident.

From the report received in this Department the following facts appear clear: First, That the American marines disembarked at a place subject to military authority where military operations were being conducted and where a hostile attack had just been made.

Second, That the marines disembarked without previous advice and without permission from the military authorities of Mexico.

In view of these facts it is perfectly explicable that Colonel Hinojosa. who had under his orders the forces of the State of Tamaulipas who were charged with the duty of defending the above-mentioned Iturbide bridge, should have believed himself authorized to arrest the American marines. The sovereignty of Mexico in accord with international practice was not limited in this respect because the city was subject to military operations. For this reason I said to you in my first note relative to the matter that General Morelos Zaragoza, the commanding military officer in Tampico, carried courtesy to the extreme when he gave ample satisfaction and immediately caused the arrest of Colonel Hinojosa. In view of the fact I repeat that the American marines violated the military laws to which the city was then subject when they disembarked.

The President of the United Mexican States, in conformity with the policy which our country has always followed in international matters, wished to be even more punctilious and directed, as I had the honor to inform you, that the Government of the United States of America be informed that the President himself deplored what had happened and had ordered that the competent authorities determine the responsibility which Colonel Hinojosa might have taken upon himself.

But it appears that the Government of the United States of America has wished to interpret this extreme courtesy as recognition that Colonel Hinojosa acted arbitrarily and further insists on the demands formulated by Admiral Mayo: that the Mexican military authorities salute the flag of the United States.

By express order of the President I have the honor to inform you that the Government of Mexico, in conformity with international law, does not consider itself obliged to accede to the demands referred to, and that carrying courtesy to that point would be equivalent to accepting the sovereignty of a foreign state to the derogation of the national dignity and decorum, which the President is disposed to have respected in any case.

I avail [etc.].

R. A. Esteva Ruiz.

I told the Sub-Secretary that I considered the action of General Huerta very badly advised and that I might very likely endeavor to get him to reconsider his attitude. I shall, however, await your instructions before seeing General Huerta in this sense.

The Sub-Secretary insists that General Huerta is afraid of serious anti-American outbreaks throughout Mexico if he submits to what he calls the humiliating terms of the United States. General Huerta has been largely influenced in his decision by General Blanquette and his military entourage. I have the honor to respectfully suggest that, if you are determined to force this issue, it be not done too precipitately in order that Americans in unprotected and outlying districts as well as in small towns may have time to get to the border or seaboard, as isolated instances of mob violence against Americans and other foreigners will be more than probable, and they can be thus avoided.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11478.

[Document 670]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, April 12, 1914, 11 a.m.

At about 10.15 yesterday morning while on duty ashore at the post office building here a mail orderly from the Minnesota in full uniform with the official mail bag across his shoulder was arrested by a policeman at the orders of Mexican soldier and taken to the jail. After being questioned the jefe político released the orderly and locked up the soldier. I shall investigate the matter and report.

Canada.

Admiral Fletcher to the Secretary of the Navy. File No. 812.00/11988

[Document 671]

Admiral Fletcher to the Secretary of the Navy.

[Telegrams.]

U. S. S. Florida.
Vera Cruz, April 12, 1914, 10 a.m.

Mayo reports, April 11, 11 a.m.: Received message from Zaragoza, substance being that he is ordered to await instruction as to action in arrest matter. Have voluntarily informed him that I will not report my failure to obtain promise of reparation until noon April 12. Do not expect compliance with my demands and consider it desirable that Department’s instructions as to further procedure reach me promptly.

Mayo.

Fletcher.

[Untitled]

April 12, 1914, 11.30 p.m.

I have received from Embassy, dated Sunday afternoon, April 12, the following: Positive refusal of Mexican Government, in writing, to accede to demand of Admiral Mayo relative to the salute at Tampico.

Fletcher.

The Secretary of the Navy to Admiral Fletcher. File No. 812.00/11988.

[Document 672]

The Secretary of the Navy to Admiral Fletcher.

[Telegram.]

Navy Department,
Washington, April 12, 1914, 12 p.m.

No action will be decided one way or the other until the President arrives. Direct Mayo not to press salute until ordered.

Daniels.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 812.00/11486.

[Document 673]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 12, 1914, 12 p.m.

743. Your 844 April 12, 9 a.m. I prefer not to answer definitely until after the President returns, which will be about seven o’clock to-morrow morning.

Bryan.

The Acting Secretary of the Navy to Admiral Fletcher. File No. 812.00/11988.

[Document 674]

The Acting Secretary of the Navy to Admiral Fletcher.

[Telegram.]

Navy Department,
Washington, April 13, 1914, 6 a.m.

Have Mayo report as soon as possible how far and in what sense the following statement, now made by General Huerta, is true: Martial law obtained at Tampico at time marines landed, and under such circumstances it was not permissible for them to land without first giving notice or requesting permission.

Did our ships in the harbor understand these conditions? Have they had proper notification of such circumstances and how did they interpret their obligations at that time if these statements are true?

Victor Blue.

Admiral Fiske to the Secretary of the Navy. File No. 812.00/13491.

[Document 675]

Admiral Fiske to the Secretary of the Navy.

Navy Department,
Washington, April 13, 1914.

To the Secretary of the Navy: 1. In obedience to your order, I have the following comment to make as to the communication from the Mexican Sub-Secretary of State.8 I do this after consultation with the General Board.

2. The boat from the Dolphin, to which the men belonged who were arrested in Tampico, was sent ashore on duty; and the men in the boat, and the men standing on the dock when arrested, were there on duty. They were there officially and not unofficially.

3. It is a recognized principle of international law that public national vessels carry with them an element of extraterritoriality, by which they are considered as part of the country to which they belong. This extends to the boats of public vessels. For this reason, the officers and crews of such national ships, and of their boats, are included in the extraterritorial protection, and are immune from ordinary municipal interference or arrest while in such ships or boats.

4. This does not mean that officers and men of these national vessels when on shore on unofficial matters, even if in uniform, are immune from hindrance or arrest; but it does mean that while on board their ships, or in their boats, they are absolutely immune, in much the same way as that in which an ambassador is immune within his embassy.

5. For this reason, it was a direct violation of international law that the two men who were in the whaleboat of the Dolphin should have been taken out of the boat by the armed soldiers in Tampico. Even if they had committed offenses, the remedy would not have been to take them out of the boat or to arrest them, but to report them to their own superior officers.

6. The marching of them and the other members of the party, including a commissioned officer, through the streets of the city, was an offensive and unnecessary act; it was not, however, so clearly a violation of international law as was the forcible removal of the two men from the boat. Yet it cannot be excused on the ground taken by the Sub-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, because, without accomplishing any useful purpose whatever, it subjected an officer and several enlisted men of our Navy to public and unnecessary humiliation, without provocation, while they were officially on shore in uniform.

7. The Paymaster and the members of the crew did not know that they had landed at a place where it was prohibited to land. Had they known, it is inconceivable that they would have gone there. They were entirely unarmed; and no reason is apparent why they should have deliberately gone, openly and in broad daylight, to a place where they were prohibited to go, when armed forces of Mexicans in uniform were in the vicinity.

8. It is a fact that the visit of the boat was a perfectly innocent visit, made in good faith and on duty—to get gasoline. But even if it had been a piece of intentional wrongdoing and in violation of a known prohibition, a sufficient remedy on the part of the Mexicans would have been to warn them against landing. This they could have done, and their act would have been perfectly proper and within their rights.

9. Even if the boat went alongside the dock, and even if members of the crew got out of the boat, before the authorities noticed it, all useful purposes would have been accomplished if the Mexicans had requested the Paymaster to recall his men and return with them to their ship. This also they could have done and kept entirely within their rights.

10. Instead of doing this, however, the Mexicans committed the double intentional wrong of taking men, in uniform, out of a man-of-war’s boat flying the flag of the United States, and also marching them and others, including a commissioned officer, through the streets of the city, under arrest.

11. Prior to writing this letter, the following authorities have been consulted: Moore, International Law Digest; Oppenheim, International Law; Hall, International Law, 5th edition; Lawrence, Principles of International Law.

B. A. Fiske.

8 Transmitted in Mr. O’Shaughnessy’s No. 847 of April 12.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 812.00/11486.

[Document 676]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 13, 1914, 8 p.m.

747. Your 847, April 12, 2 p.m. We are investigating statements contained in Huerta’s reply. Will answer tomorrow. In meantime hope Huerta will reconsider position taken.

Bryan.

Admiral Fletcher to the Secretary of the Navy. File No. 812.00/11988.

[Document 677]

Admiral Fletcher to the Secretary of the Navy.

[Telegram.]

U. S. S. Florida.
Vera Cruz, April 14, 1914, 3 p.m.

In reply to Department’s April 13, have received following from Mayo: No intimation received of existence of martial law or of objection to boat taking supplies. Stewards, orderlies, etc., are going ashore when necessary. Only part of boat’s crew out of boat to handle stores. Men were sailors, not marines.

Mayo.

Fletcher.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 812.00/11507a.

[Document 678]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 14, 1914, 5 p.m.

748. Secretary of the Navy has advised flag officer at Hampton Roads to proceed with least possible delay to Tampico with all available ships, including the Michigan, Louisiana, New Hampshire, South Carolina, Arkansas, Vermont, New Jersey, Tacoma, Nashville and Hancock. The latter will carry the first regiment of expeditionary force of marines.

This information was given to the press by the Secretary of the Navy about two o’clock this afternoon.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shanghnessy. File No. 812.00/11517a.

[Document 679]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shanghnessy. 9

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 14, 1914, 10 p.m.

744. The Government of the United States appreciates the courteous and conciliatory attitude of General Huerta but ventures to think that he does not realize the very serious character of the present situation and the very grave consequences which it may involve. The Government of the United States cannot believe that the landing of the marines was really regarded in anything but its true light. It was obviously a routine visit to the shore to obtain supplies. The marines were engaged in loading the supplies into the boat when they were seized and there is no evidence whatever that they had been warned that a landing at that place was contrary to the existing regulations. Even if they were acting contrary to the regulations governing that particular landing-place, the remedy should have been a request to them to withdraw and a notification to their commanding officer of the real situation. In no conceivable circumstances, while peace between the two countries exists, could the arrest and even temporary detention of regularly commissioned officers and enlisted men of this Government by Mexican authorities have been excusable. You will please represent to General Huerta, very respectfully but with the greatest firmness, the confidence of this Government that it can depend upon his quick perception and his sense of military honor to comply with the expectations of the naval authorities of the United States at Vera Cruz and Tampico. This Government does not feel that it would be dealing candidly with General Huerta if it did not point out to him that a failure to reconsider his present attitude might lead to a situation which this Government and, I am sure, General Huerta himself would contemplate with the greatest reluctance. No mortification can possibly come to General Huerta from paying full respect to the sovereign dignity of the United States of America, and nothing less than that can satisfy the principles of this Government or the feeling of the people whom it represents.

The impression on the part of this Government that the arrest of the officer and men at Tampico cannot have been the mere mistake of a subordinate officer is intensified by the subsequent arbitrary and, as it seems to this Government, quite inexcusable arrest of a uniformed orderly of the United States Navy at Vera Cruz while carrying the mails of the fleet, and by the action of the government censor at Mexico City in presuming to withhold dispatches sent by this Government to its Embassy.

The President regards this as a most serious matter and directs that you communicate it to General Huerta in full and at once with the assurance that the President expects a prompt acceptance of the terms.

Bryan.

9 In response to his No. 847 of April 12, 2 p.m.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11514.

[Document 680]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, April 14, 1914, 11 p.m.

854. Referring to your No. 747, April 13, 8 p.m. I spent two hours with General Huerta this morning. He said that he [omission] that his first declaration promising an adequate investigation, etc., would close the incident; that Colonel Hinojosa’s action, the result of ignorance and not of animosity, extenuated the said action; that General Zaragoza’s voluntary expression of regret would, all things considered, be accepted by the United States Government especially as it is dealing with a weaker nation than itself and one torn with revolution; that in judging his attitude regarding saluting the flag my Government should not forget that while he is not recognized by the United States he is recognized by all the great powers, the entire Federal army and the majority of Mexicans; that he is therefore in a position in which he must uphold the dignity and sovereignty of Mexico lest he break his oath of office and be mercilessly criticised by the educated public opinion of Mexico.

I then said, “But what will this situation come to? Your country has been torn with revolution for three years and is gradually being materially ruined and a race is growing up in the surroundings of bloodshed, rapine and corruption.”

To this he answered that no one regretted the present state of affairs more than he did; that the misunderstanding of him by the Government of the United States had largely helped to prolong the state of affairs to which I referred; and that, knowing the great and [omission] which had been played by the Government of the United States in the promotion of the peaceful settlement of international disputes, he was glad to suggest that the whole question of the arrest of American marines at Tampico be placed before the Hague Tribunal according to agreement to which the Mexican Government was a party as well as the United States. He said that he considered that this was an ideal case for the Hague Tribunal which would seem to have been created in order to avoid regrets for actions between the two countries. He also referred to one of articles of the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, which, he said, fifty years before The Hague was ever thought of, showed the desire of the Mexican people to avoid any friction with the United States which would lead to serious difficulties, and that he had, since his assumption of the Presidency, done everything within his power to avoid such, as, for instance, in the case of wrongs to Americans, to right them.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11512.

[Document 681]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, April 14, 1914, 12 p.m.

855. Huerta has today placed the Tampico incident before the Senate in executive session and has asked for special authority to deal with the question.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11659.

[Document 682]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

No. 2208.] American Embassy,
Mexico City, April 15, 1914.

Sir: Referring to my cablegram No. 841, of April 10, 8 p.m., I have the honor to enclose herewith a translation of the note mentioned therein.

I have [etc.]

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Foreign Office,
Mexico, April 10, 1914.

Mr. Chargé d’affaires: The Department of War and Marine has just informed me of an incident which occurred at the port of Tampico between a few marines of the American man-of-war Dolphin and Colonel Ramon H. Hinojosa, who was in command of the forces of the State of Tamaulipas at Iturbide Bridge.

It appears from this communication that yesterday at 10:00 a.m. several American marines in uniform arrived, on a launch at a warehouse situated near the Iturbide Bridge, in order to purchase gasoline, as was known afterwards; and that the above-mentioned Colonel Ramón H. Hinojosa, in charge of the defense of said bridge against the rebels, ordered that the marines should be taken between two files of Mexican soldiers to his presence. As soon as the Commander-in-Chief of the forces in Tampico had knowledge of the event, through the Consul of the United States at that port and the commander of the Dolphin, he apologized and explained that Colonel Hinojosa was in command of State troops, and ordered his arrest, sending him to the artillery barracks.

So far, as you will see, the military commander of Tampico was courteous to the extreme of arresting the officer in command of the forces which arrested the marines from the Dolphin, notwithstanding that, as you are well aware, and of this there are precedents during the Civil War of the United States of America, when a port is subject to the military authorities, menaced by an attack from rebels, no free access to it is allowed by or to anyone; and besides it is perfectly understood that a military commander who sees the arrival of men in uniform at the post he is guarding should proceed to arrest them pending an investigation as to whether the presence of those men is or is not justifiable. Therefore, the military commander in Tampico has gone beyond that which international courtesy demands; consequently, however deplorable the incident may have been it should have been considered as ended in the above-mentioned form. Unfortunately, it did not happen in this way, inasmuch as the Consul of the United States of America and an aide of Admiral Mayo yesterday afternoon presented to the military commander in Tampico a note containing five articles, in which they asked: An apology by a commission of members of the staff of the above-mentioned commander; that the flag of the United States of America be hoisted in a public and high place; that a salute of twenty-one guns be fired; and that Colonel Hinojosa be severely punished; for the execution of all of the above a term of twenty-four hours was fixed, which expires this afternoon.

I believe that a knowledge of these facts will be sufficient for you to at once telegraph to the Consul of the United States at Tampico and to Admiral Mayo to the end that they withdraw their petition inasmuch as, without discussing whether or not it is within the province of the above-mentioned officials or whether their ultimatum is in accordance or not with the rules of international law, the articles of said note are lacking in justification in view of the apology made by the military commander at Tampico and the punishment imposed upon Colonel Hinojosa.

I renew [etc.].

R. A. Esteva Ruiz.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11658.

[Document 683]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

No. 2207.] American Embassy,
Mexico City, April 15, 1914.

Sir: Referring to my cablegram No. 842, of April 11, 1 p.m., regarding the arrest of the American marines at the port of Tampico, I have the honor to enclose to you herewith a translation of the note in question.

I have [etc.].

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Foreign Office,
Mexico, April 10, 1914.

Mr. Chargé d’affaires: As a complement of the note I had the honor to address you this morning, and as a result of the conference between you and myself of this date and of the one we had with the President of the Republic, I beg to say that since you have information, as you had the kindness to inform me, that the boat in which the American marines were was flying the American flag the President of the Republic has decided on the following: (1) That an investigation be at once instituted in order to establish the responsibility of Colonel Hinojosa; (2) that in accordance with the course which the Mexican Government has always followed to comply with its international duties with respect to all nations, you should be and are by these presents informed that the incident is deplored and that it resulted entirely from the misunderstanding of an inferior officer thus relieving this Government of any responsibility from the moment that the officer superior in rank to Colonel Hinojosa proceeded at once to apply correctional discipline within his power and to cause it to be known that no intention had preceded the occurrence; (3) that if from the investigation that is to be instituted it should appear that Colonel Hinojosa has incurred a graver responsibility the proper penalty will be imposed upon him by the authorities having legal jurisdiction to do so.

In view of this decision of the President it is to be hoped that your Government Will consider that the incident has been closed in accordance with the form required by the dignity of the two nations.

You will be duly advised of the result of the investigation that is to be made.

I renew [etc.]

R. A. Esteva Ruiz.

The Secretary of State to certain diplomatic missions. File No. 812.00/11523a.

[Document 684]

The Secretary of State to certain diplomatic missions. 10

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 15, 1914, 8 p.m.

In order that you may be able to inform the Government to which you are accredited regarding the Tampico incident, Department quotes a telegram which was sent to the American Embassy, Mexico City, April 14, 10 p.m.:

[Quotation of the telegram No. 744 of that date.]

The Secretary of the Navy advised the flag officer at Hampton Roads to proceed with least possible delay to Tampico with all available ships, which means that at least ten additional warships will shortly join those now in Mexican waters.

Bryan.

10 Sent to the Embassies at London, Paris, Madrid, Rome, Berlin, Vienna, Tokyo, and Rio de Janeiro, and to the Legations at Santiago, Buenos Aires, and Guatemala.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11522.

[Document 685]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, April 15, 1914, 9 p.m.

856. Referring to your No. 744, April 14, 10 p.m. I finally found General Huerta at 12:15 noon and brought the contents of that telegram to his attention, and did my utmost to impress upon him the gravity of the situation. He said that all the acts complained of were due to ignorance and not intention and that he could not see why the President of the United States did not accept his original statement as sufficient. I said that I did not think that he could stand on the matter of right but rather look to the expediency of coming to a satisfactory arrangement. He then said: “Will you take this matter up officially with the Minister for Foreign Affairs? “To which I answered that I would like to have an interview with both him and the Minister for Foreign Affairs today and he set the hour of five o’clock at Chapultepec Castle.

I met him there and had a long conference, the general tone of which was exceedingly frank, and he unbosomed himself and informed me that the policy of my Government towards him was the result of the machinations of his enemies, etc. I finally was able to get the following out of him, namely, that if the American Government would agree to simultaneous salutes he would be only too pleased to do this; that is: that at the same time that twenty-one guns would be fired by a Mexican battery saluting the American flag, twenty-one guns should be fired by an American battery saluting the Mexican flag. After some time I was able to elicit from him that he did not desire to salute first because he believed that the United States Government would not return the salute and would thereby humiliate his Government. He quoted in this connection the fact that the President of the United States did not answer his New Year’s telegram. He said that if the American Government would not agree to this that the question could go to The Hague and he asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs who was present if the arbitration treaty between Mexico and the United States would not cover this case, and he said that it would.

I told him that I would inform him of your reply. When asked by Huerta for my advice I told him that were I in his place I would get busy and fire the salutes demanded and finish the incident.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

Admiral Fletcher to the Secretary of the Navy. File No. 812.00/11988.

[Document 686]

Admiral Fletcher to the Secretary of the Navy.

[Telegram.]

U. S. S. Florida,
Vera Cruz, April 15, 1914, 11 p.m.

On April 14, in answer to specific questions, have obtained from Mayo following answers: Our boats daily used regular landing during attack [of Constitutionalists] on Tampico, without objection previous to the arrest. No notice that other landings were forbidden had been given. We were never requested to give notice nor obtain permission before landing boats’ crews. I received no notice that hostilities existed. The only restriction imposed upon our movements was a refusal to pass through the [Federal] lines to deliver letter to Rebels. I will also transmit the foregoing to the American Embassy. Foreign warships report same conditions.

Fletcher.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 812.00/11522.

[Document 687]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 16, 1914, 1 p.m.

752. The President is gratified to learn from your telegram No. 856, April 15, 9 p.m., that General Huerta is disposed to bring this unfortunate incident to a close by complying with Admiral Mayo’s demand. He felt sure that this would be the result when the General understood the situation. If you will examine Mayo’s demand you will see that it states that the salute will be returned. This I may add is the invariable custom, from which the Government would not of course depart. Now that Admiral Mayo’s demand is to be acceded to, the sooner it is done the better and I suggest that General Huerta take the matter up at once through the proper channels.

Bryan.

Admiral Fletcher to the Secretary of the Navy. File No. 812.00/11988.

[Document 688]

Admiral Fletcher to the Secretary of the Navy.

[Telegram.]

U. S. S. Florida.
Vera Cruz, April 16, 1914, 3 p.m.

About 10 a.m. on April 11, while in the post office at Vera Cruz, a mail orderly from the Minnesota got into a discussion with a Mexican mail orderly of the 18th battalion. They could not understand each other and the policeman, in order to avoid a possible disturbance, directed them both to come with him to the station. The police judge, upon hearing the statement of the police officer, at once told our mail orderly he was not at fault and would not be detained. The Mexican mail orderly was found at fault by the judge and was detained and turned over to the military authorities and was given proper punishment. The attitude of the Mexican authorities was correct; there is no cause for complaint against them and the incident is without significance.

Fletcher.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11532.

[Document 689]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, April 16, 1914, 11 p.m.

858. With reference to the Department’s number 752, April 16, 1 p.m. I have just returned (10:30 p.m.) from long interview with the Minister for Foreign Affairs whom I took to see General Huerta but I did not see him myself. I fear that my telegram number 856, April 15, 9 p.m., may have appeared ambiguous. The phrase “He said that if the American Government would not agree to this the question could go to The Hague” refers to the simultaneous saluting of the two flags. The Minister for Foreign Affairs, who believes that an arrangement should be made almost at all costs, has been able to formally make the following proposition at the instance of General Huerta: That the American flag shall be hoisted on the flagstaff at the saluting-station at Tampico and saluted by twenty-one Mexican guns; and that, simultaneously with the hoisting of the American flag on the said flag-staff, the American war vessel that is to salute the Mexican flag shall hoist the Mexican flag and, simultaneously with the salute given by the Mexican battery to the American flag, salute the Mexican flag. In other words, that there shall be an absolute coincidence in time in the two actions. I fear that this is the best arrangement that can be made and I have been able to arrive at this proposition only after much labor, as General Huerta insists that he is in the right and that the American marines had no right to be where they were as there was fighting going on. I have the honor to request that if you agree to this that I be informed with all possible haste as I desire to begin as early as possible tomorrow to get the terms thereof carried out with as much celerity as possible in order that the salutes may be given Saturday morning, April 18. I had not been put in possession of a copy of the full text of Admiral Mayo’s demand to General Zaragoza, which has embarrassed me somewhat, until I was given a copy of it at the Foreign Office today.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 812.00/11532.

[Document 690]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 17, 1914, 12 m.

754. Replying to your telegram No. 858, April 16, 11 p.m. Please represent to General Huerta that we can act only after he has lived up to the requirements of the occasion. A simultaneous salute would deprive his action of its significance. We are disappointed that he does not recognize in the arrest of our sailors a clear violation of international rights. We expect this recognition as an assurance for the future. Please express to him our gratification that he is ready to meet the full terms of international courtesy, and say to him that we hope that there will be no further discussion as to the exact method of an exchange of salutes. That method is fixed by clearly defined international practice. It could in no circumstances be a subject for discussion by such a tribunal as that of The Hague. General Huerta can rest assured that the full courtesies will be observed on our part and that we will in no respect depart from accepted international practices. You will discuss the details of the arrangement with Admiral Mayo.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to certain American diplomatic missions. [Document 691]

The Secretary of State to certain American diplomatic missions. 11

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 17, 1914, 9 p.m.

Department’s April 15th, 8 p.m. General Huerta yesterday signified his willingness to have the required salute given if this Government would salute the Mexican flag simultaneously.

For information of the Government to which you are accredited Department’s reply is given:

[Quotation of telegram 754 of April 17, 12 m., to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.]

Bryan.

11 Sent to the Embassies at Paris, London, Madrid, Rome, Berlin and Vienna.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11540.

[Document 692]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, April 17, 1914, 11 p.m.

860. I presented your number 754, April 17, noon, to the Minister for Foreign Affairs at four thirty today and he informed me that he would bring it up at the Cabinet meeting at six o’clock. I permitted the Minister for Foreign Affairs to read the telegram and gave him a free but strong translation thereof in Spanish for use at the meeting. I told him that I could see only one reason for refusal of our demand in view of the fact that General Huerta had every opportunity to save his face, namely that the cause of the Federal Government was lost and that foreign intervention was the only fair expectation that could save Mexico from anarchy.

At ten o’clock tonight the Minister for Foreign Affairs came to the Embassy and made the following statement which was taken down in Spanish and is faithfully translated as follows: The President says that he has done everything he is obliged to do as the Chief of the country with regard to the United States in connection with the Tampico incident; that the arrested marines, held for a short time, were released before their release was asked and that an apology was tendered by the military commander of the port, General Morelos Zaragoza, to Rear Admiral Mayo; that subsequently the President himself expressed his regret of the occurrence and promised to open an investigation, as has already been done, a full investigation of the case, in order to punish the person should there be one guilty of the charge; that any nation in the world would have considered the above proceedings as a sufficient satisfaction, as this is all that international law can demand, but that going beyond his own obligation he has agreed that the Mexican cannons salute the American flag, provided that the American cannons simultaneously salute the Mexican flag; that this demonstration is intended to show the good will of the Mexican President towards the people of the United States as well as to indicate that the mutual and simultaneous salute of the artillery to the two flags signifies the satisfaction with which the two countries see the happy end of a conflict which at no time has been really serious.

I have the honor to request instructions regarding what my conduct shall be in general, as the result of General Huerta’s refusal to our demands; and also what advice I shall be authorized to give to American citizens asking for information.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11551.

[Document 693]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, April 18, 1914, 9 a.m.

862. With regard to the Tampico incident, the Minister for Foreign Affairs spoke of appealing to the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo as a solution (Article 21).

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 812.00/11540.

[Document 694]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 18, 1914, 1 p.m.

757. Replying to your No. 860, April 17, 11 p.m. Say to General Huerta that the President is greatly disappointed at his failure to make prompt and willing reparation for the insult offered American sailors at Tampico, the offense being still further aggravated by the subsequent arrest of a United States mail carrier at Vera Cruz. Time has been given in the belief that General Huerta would on reflection accede to the very reasonable demand of Admiral Mayo. Your telegram just received indicates that this Government’s forbearance has been misinterpreted. The request for a simultaneous salute is, under all the circumstances, as unjustifiable as the arrest of the American sailors and makes it impossible to consider further delay. You will therefore say to General Huerta that unless by six o’clock p.m. Sunday, April 19th, he announces his intention to comply with Admiral Mayo’s demand, the President will on Monday lay the matter before Congress with a view to taking such action as may be necessary to enforce the respect due the nation’s flag. If General Huerta reconsiders the position taken he can arrange the details of the salute with Admiral Mayo. If on the contrary he adheres to the position he has taken you will at once make the contents of this telegram known to the representatives of foreign governments and send a paraphrase of it to all our consulates in Mexico so that it may be communicated to American citizens, who should at the same time be reminded of the President’s advice to withdraw from Mexico until order is restored. Inform us promptly as to General Huerta’s attitude and answer.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to certain American diplomatic missions. File No. 812.00/11540.

[Document 695]

The Secretary of State to certain American diplomatic missions. 12

[Circular telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 18, 1914, 1 p.m.

The following statement was given out from the White House at noon today: General Huerta is still insisting upon doing something less than has been demanded and something less than would constitute an acknowledgment that his representatives were entirely in the wrong in the indignities they have put upon the Government of the United States. The President has determined that if General Huerta has not yielded by six o’clock on Sunday afternoon, he will take the matter to Congress on Monday.

Bryan.

12 Sent to the Embassies at Mexico City, London, Paris, Vienna, Berlin, Rome, Madrid, and Tokyo, and the Legation at Guatemala.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11556.

[Document 696]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, April 18, 1914, 8 p.m.

865. I became cognizant of the contents of your 757, April 18, 1 p.m., at 5:45 p.m. today and after having had a free but strong translation made thereof I endeavored to find General Huerta but was unable to do so; but at 7:25 I found the Minister for Foreign Affairs at the council of notables and placed in his hands the translation referred to, up to the phrase: “If on the contrary he adheres to the position he has taken, etc.,” and begged him to forthwith bring this to the attention of General Huerta, which he promised to do. He asked me, if General Huerta acceded to our demands, whether I would sign a protocol with him stating that upon the salute being rendered by the Mexican battery it would be returned according to international usage by the American warship, and I told him that I was prepared to sign such a document. In the event of this not being agreeable to the President please inform me. I told the Minister for Foreign Affairs that from my knowledge of the manner in which our war with Spain had been initiated I was of the opinion that armed intervention in Mexico to uphold the prestige and honor of the United States would be forced upon the present Administration by public acclamation.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11555.

[Document 697]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, April 18, 1914, 11 p.m.

867. Referring to my 865, April 18, 8 p.m. The Minister for Foreign Affairs came to the Embassy at 8.20 this evening and said that he had prevailed upon General Huerta to accept the terms of the United States and that the Mexican battery would salute the American flag upon the assurance that the said salute would be returned immediately afterwards by a United States man of war flying the Admiral’s flag. He thereupon requested me to draw up with him and sign a protocol, a translation of which follows: draft protocol.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy, Chargé d’Affaires of the United States of America, and Jose Lopez Portillo y Rojas, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the United Mexican States, for the purpose of putting an end to the lamentable incident which occurred on the 9th instant at the port of Tampico arising from the detention of nine marines and one officer of the United States from the crew of the Dolphin, considering:

That said marines were immediately released by General Ignacio Morelos Zaragoza, Military Commander of the Port; that the same officer sent his apology to Rear Admiral Mayo, Commander of the American Fleet anchored in the harbor; that later on, when the incident became known to the Provisional President of the Republic of Mexico, General Victoriano Huerta, he expressed his regrets through the Department of Foreign Affairs and directed that a full investigation should be made in order to punish the person guilty of the offense, should there be one; and, in conclusion, that the detention in question was inspired by the zeal of the inferior officer, who carried the same into effect, a thing which can be easily understood if it is borne in mind that when the above-mentioned marines were detained they had landed without first having permission from the military authorities, and at a time when the port was not only in a state of war but was being attacked by revolutionary forces—

The above-mentioned Chargé d’Affaires of the United States of America and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mexico, acting in their respective characters, hereby agree to the following: First, the Mexican Government, moved by its desire to show its friendliness towards the people of the United States of America and acting in a manner similar to that in which the United States has acted in like cases, hereby agrees to salute the American flag at the port of Tampico with twenty-one guns from the coast battery or from that of a Mexican man of war anchored in the harbor.

Second, the salute mentioned in the preceding article shall be made at the moment at which the American flag shall be hoisted to the top of a staff on the Mexican coast.

Third, the Government of the United States of America hereby agrees to salute the Mexican flag immediately afterwards with twenty-one guns from the battery of the Dolphin or of any American battleship anchored in the harbor.

Fourth, the salute mentioned in the preceding article shall be made at the moment at which the Mexican flag shall be hoisted to the top of the mainmast of the above-mentioned vessel or of any battleship anchored in the harbor.

In testimony whereof the present instrument is made in duplicate and signed by the contracting parties.

I informed him that I must submit this to my Government.

I have the honor to request immediate instructions if the above protocol is satisfactory to the President of the United States in order that I may at the earliest possible moment tomorrow Sunday bring this matter to a conclusion.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 812.00/11556.

[Document 698]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 19, 1914, 1 a.m.

760. Your 865, April 18, 8 p.m. The President is out of town. Cannot reach him before eight o’clock tomorrow morning. Am sure however that he would not be willing to have you sign the protocol mentioned. The salute should be fired without any agreement as to the return salute. The United States can be relied upon to do its duty in the matter according to international custom and courtesy. In addition to other reasons signing of protocol would be objectionable because it might be construed as recognition of his Government whereas the President has no intention of recognizing the Huerta Government.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 812.00/11555.

[Document 699]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 19, 1914, 12 m.

762. I forwarded to the President immediately your telegram 865 April 18, 8 p.m., and copy of my reply 760, April 19, 1 a.m., to the effect that a protocol would be objectionable.

The President wires: “Your reply to O’Shaughnessy is exactly what I should have wished it to be. In no case should any concession of any kind in detail or otherwise be made.”

On receipt of your telegram 867, April 18, 11 p.m., saying that Huerta had acceded to the demand but only on condition that you sign a protocol, I talked with the President by telephone. He repeats most emphatically his objection to the signing of any protocol or agreement. He is not willing that the salute shall be fired as a matter of contract, or upon condition that we return it. It must be fired in accordance with international custom as an apology for the insult offered. When it has been fired it will then be the duty of this Government, according to invariable custom, to return the salute; but General Huerta must trust this Government to live up to the requirements of international courtesy.

The proposed protocol of which you sent a copy would be especially objectionable because it was so worded that General Huerta might construe it as a recognition of his Government, whereas the President has notified General Huerta and the foreign nations that he does not expect to recognize General Huerta’s Government.

General Huerta’s acceptance of Admiral Mayo’s demand should be unconditional. As soon as he announces his intention to comply with this demand he can arrange the details directly with Admiral Mayo. Please make plain to him that further negotiations are unnecessary and that the President expects him to accept at once in order that the incident may be closed.

Bryan.

The Mexican Embassy to the Department of State. File No. 812.00/11622.

[Document 700]

The Mexican Embassy to the Department of State. 13

[Telegram—Translation.]

Mexico City, April 19, 1914.

Mexican Embassy,
Washington, D.C.

Inform His Excellency President Wilson that the Provisional Constitutional President of the Republic of Mexico, desirous of maintaining harmony between the two nations, will not insist on a simultaneous salute and would be satisfied with a reciprocal salute, fired first by the Mexican land battery to the American flag to be raised on the Dolphin in Tampico harbor, to be answered by guns from the Dolphin to the Mexican flag raised on one of our gunboats, on the basis of the protocol personally delivered last night to the Chargé d’Affaires of the United States of America, but not unconditionally as stipulated by the American Government, since this demand is contrary to the dignity and respect to which the Mexican nation is entitled.

[Not signed.]

13 Translation of a telegram from the Mexican Foreign Office to the Mexican Embassy, left at the Department of State April 22, 1914.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11552.

[Document 701]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, April 19, 1914, 5 p.m.

868. I found Minister for Foreign Affairs at four p.m. and made plain to him the contents of your No. 762, April 19, noon. He complained that I had promised to sign the protocol and thereupon General Huerta had acceded to the demands of the United States. I told him that had he written to me a note asking if the salute would be returned I should have answered that of course the United States would live up to the requirements of international courtesy and that I could not sign any document of the nature which he proposed without first referring it to my Government. He said that the desire of the United States evidently was to humiliate the provisional government further by demanding from it an act which could come only from a sovereign government, without recognizing the said government as such; that if the United States did not consider General Huerta as representing the Mexican people, why did they ask him to salute the flag of the United States and have the salute of the American flag returned. He was very much overwrought and said that the United States desired to further humiliate this Government, that he could not advise General Huerta to comply with our demands on the present basis, and that he thought, in view of the care this Government had given to American interests, it was being treated very harshly. I told him that, so far as I was concerned, now having made the stand of the President of the United States plain to him, I must consider the incident closed and that matters must take a course over which I could have no influence.

At twenty minutes past four the Minister for Foreign Affairs descended from my automobile and took his own to go to see General Huerta and asked me if I would come to the Department of Foreign Affairs at six o’clock, which I told him I would do. At present therefore the Minister for Foreign Affairs, as the mouthpiece of General Huerta, has absolutely refused to salute the American flag unconditionally. He states that the whaleboat of the Dolphin was not flying the American flag at the time the sailors landed.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11553.

[Document 702]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, April 19, 1914, 7 p.m.

869. I called at the Foreign Office at 5:50 p.m. and the Minister for Foreign Affairs handed me a note verbale which states in substance that the Mexican Government is not disposed to accede to the unconditional demand of the Government of the United States but it is disposed to act according to the terms of the protocol which I have already transmitted to you. I told him actually that so far as this Embassy is concerned the matter is closed and that I should inform my Government that General Huerta had definitely refused the demands of the United States. I am cabling a translation of note later.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11554.

[Document 703]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, April 19, 1914, 11 p.m.

870. I have informed most of the foreign diplomats verbally of the contents of your No. 757, April 18, 1 p.m., as instructed therein. I have advised Americans who have consulted me, including two of the heads of foreign religious missions here, to bring their women into Mexico City or get them to Vera Cruz. I am doing this as tactfully as possible. The instruction to the Consuls ordered in your No. 757, April 18, 1 p.m., will be despatched tomorrow. I suggest, however, that the Department communicate with all Consuls for the reason that I [omission] ascertain which of the Consulates I can reach. The Minister for Foreign Affairs has given out a statement in the premises a full report of which has been sent by the Associated Press.

The translation of the note mentioned in my 869, April 19, 7 p.m., is as follows: Jose Lopez Portillo y Rojas presents his compliments to Mr. Nelson O’Shaughnessy, Chargé d’Affaires of the United States of America, and, after talking with General Victoria no Huerta, ad interim President of the United Mexican States, begs to inform him that the Government of Mexico is not disposed to accede to the unconditional demands of the American Government; but it Is disposed to act on the terms of the draft protocol which was left in his hands last night by López Portillo.

López Portillo reiterates to Mr. O’Shaughnessy the assurances of his attentive and distinguished consideration.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

The Secretary of State to certain American diplomatic missions File No. 812.00/11552.

[Document 704]

The Secretary of State to certain American diplomatic missions 14

[Circular telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 20, 1914, 11 a.m.

General Huerta having refused to comply unconditionally with Admiral Mayo’s demand for a salute, the President will lay the matter before Congress this afternoon with a view of taking such steps as may be necessary to enforce respect to the flag.

In reply to an inquiry Chargé O’Shaughnessy had several days ago informed the Mexican Foreign Office that a return salute is the invariable custom and that the United States could be relied upon to live up to the requirements of international courtesy. But General Huerta first asked for a simultaneous salute, and when that was refused asked for a protocol agreeing that the salute would be returned. The President refused to allow a protocol to be signed or a return salute to be made a matter of contract.

Will inform you of the action taken by Congress but there is no doubt that it will support the President in his action.

Bryan.

14 Sent to the Embassies at London, Paris, Berlin, Vienna, Rome, Madrid and Tokyo and the Legation at Guatemala.

Address of the President delivered at a joint session of the two Houses of Congress, April 20, 1914, on “The Situation in our dealings with General Victoriano Huerta at Mexico City.” 63d Congress, 2d Session.

House Document No. 910.

[Document 705]

Address of the President delivered at a joint session of the two Houses of Congress, April 20, 1914, on “The Situation in our dealings with General Victoriano Huerta at Mexico City.”

April 20, 1914

Gentlemen of the Congress:

It is my duty to call your attention to a situation which has arisen in our dealings with General Victoriano Huerta at Mexico City which calls for action, and to ask your advice and cooperation in acting upon it. On the 9th of April a paymaster of the U. S. S. Dolphin landed at the Iturbide Bridge landing at Tampico with a whaleboat and boat’s crew to take off certain supplies needed by his ship, and while engaged in loading the boat was arrested by an officer and squad of men of the army of General Huerta. Neither the paymaster nor anyone of the boat’s crew was armed. Two of the men were in the boat when the arrest took, place and were obliged to leave it and submit to be taken into custody, notwithstanding the fact that the boat carried, both at her bow and at her stern, the flag of the United States. The officer who made the arrest was proceeding up one of the streets of the town with his prisoners when met by an officer of higher authority, who ordered him to return to the landing and await orders; and within an hour and a half from the time of the arrest orders were received from the commander of the Huertista forces at Tampico for the release of the paymaster and his men. The release was followed by apologies from the commander and later by an expression of regret by General Huerta himself. General Huerta urged that martial law obtained at the time at Tampico; that orders had been issued that no one should be allowed to land at the Iturbide Bridge; and that our sailors had no right to land there. Our naval commanders at the port had not been notified of any such prohibition; and, even if they had been, the only justifiable course open to the local authorities would have been to request the paymaster and his crew to withdraw and to lodge a protest with the commanding officer of the fleet. Admiral Mayo regarded the arrest as so serious an affront that he was not satisfied with the apologies offered, but demanded that the flag of the United States be saluted with special ceremony by the military commander of the port.

The incident can not be regarded as a trivial one, especially as two of the men arrested were taken from the boat itself—that is to say, from the territory of the United States—but had it stood by itself it might have been attributed to the ignorance or arrogance of a single officer. Unfortunately, it was not an isolated case. A series of incidents have recently occurred which can not but create the impression that the representatives of General Huerta were willing to go out of their way to show disregard for the dignity and rights of this Government and felt perfectly safe in doing what they pleased, making free to show in many ways their irritation and contempt. A few days after the incident at Tampico an orderly from the U. S. S. Minnesota was arrested at Vera Cruz while ashore in uniform to obtain the ship’s mail, and was for a time thrown into jail. An official dispatch from this Government to its Embassy at Mexico City was withheld by the authorities of the telegraphic service until peremptorily demanded by our Chargé d’Affaires in person. So far as I can learn, such wrongs and annoyances have been suffered to occur only against representatives of the United States. I have heard of no complaints from other Governments of similar treatment. Subsequent explanations and formal apologies did not and could not alter the popular impression, which it is possible it had been the object of the Huertista authorities to create, that the Government of the United States was being singled out, and might be singled out with impunity, for slights and affronts in retaliation for its refusal to recognize the pretensions of General Huerta to be regarded as the constitutional provisional President of the Republic of Mexico.

The manifest danger of such a situation was that such offenses might grow from bad to worse until something happened of so gross and intolerable a sort as to lead directly and inevitably to armed conflict. It was necessary that the apologies of General Huerta and his representatives should go much further, that they should be such as to attract the attention of the whole population to their significance, and such as to impress upon General Huerta himself the necessity of seeing to it that no further occasion for explanations and professed regrets should arise. I, therefore, felt it my duty to sustain Admiral Mayo in the whole of his demand and to insist that the flag of the United States should be saluted in such a way as to indicate a new spirit and attitude on the part of the Huertistas.

Such a salute General Huerta has refused, and I have come to ask your approval and support in the course I now purpose to pursue.

This Government can, I earnestly hope, in no circumstances be forced into war with the people of Mexico. Mexico is torn by civil strife. If we are to accept the tests of its own constitution, it has no government. General Huerta has set his power up in the City of Mexico, such as it is, without right and by methods for which there can be no justification. Only part of the country is under his control. If armed conflict should unhappily come as a result of his attitude of personal resentment toward this Government, we should be fighting only General Huerta and those who adhere to him and give him their support, and our object would be only to restore to the people of the distracted Republic the opportunity to set up again their own laws and their own government.

But I earnestly hope that war is not now in question. I believe that I speak for the American people when I say that We do not desire to control in any degree the affairs of our sister Republic. Our feeling for the people of Mexico is one of deep and genuine friendship, and everything that we have so far done or refrained from doing has proceeded from our desire to help them, not to hinder or embarrass them. We would not wish even to exercise the good offices of friendship without their welcome and consent. The people of Mexico are entitled to settle their own domestic affairs in their own way, and we sincerely desire to respect their right. The present situation need have none of the grave implications of interference if we deal with it promptly, firmly, and wisely.

No doubt I could do what is necessary in the circumstances to enforce respect for our Government without recourse to the Congress, and yet not exceed my constitutional powers as President; but I do not wish to act in a matter possibly of so grave consequence except in close conference and cooperation with both the Senate and House. I, therefore, come to ask your approval that I should use the armed forces of the United States in such ways and to such an extent as may be necessary to obtain from General Huerta and his adherents the fullest recognition of the rights and dignity of the United States, even amidst the distressing conditions now unhappily obtaining in Mexico.

There can in what we do be no thought of aggression or of selfish aggrandizement. We seek to maintain the dignity and authority of the United States only because we wish always to keep our great influence unimpaired for the uses of liberty, both in the United States and wherever else it may be employed for the benefit of mankind.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 812.00/11634c.

[Document 706]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 20, 1914.

766. Resolution supporting President’s position passed House by vote of 323 to 29. Take every possible precaution for safety of Americans and other foreigners.

Bryan.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11547, 11564.

[Document 707]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, April 20, 1914, 9 p.m.

Steamer Ypiranga, owned by Hamburg-American Line, will arrive tomorrow from Germany with 200 machine guns and 15,000,000 cartridges; will go to Pier 4 and start discharging at 10.30. There will be 30 cars on the pier to load the munitions of war direct from the steamer; trains of 10 cars each will be sent out over the Mexican Railway as soon as loaded, making three trains in all.

There are now here 1,200 standard and narrow-gauge freight-cars including [list of cars]; 10 narrow-gauge engines and 10 standard-gauge engines. Plenty of coal and oil in railroad yards.

The general in command states that he will not fight but will leave with all soldiers and rolling-stock tomorrow, tearing up the track behind him.

Canada.

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada. File No. 812.00/11633b.

[Document 708]

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 21, 1914, 4 a.m.

Fletcher has been instructed to take the customhouse immediately and prevent delivery of arms and ammunition. Confer with Fletcher. This despatch is sent as a matter of precaution for fear the despatch sent directly to him might be delayed. Immediate action necessary.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Shanklin. File No. 812.00/11564.

[Document 709]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Shanklin.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 21, 1914, 5 a.m.

Furnish aid to any Americans in need and urge all to leave Mexico. Canada telegraphs that it is the intention of local Mexican authorities to take all soldiers from Vera Cruz to City of Mexico and tear up track. Keep in touch with Canada and act according to information received. In view of uncertainty of the situation it is better to take no chances.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 812.00/11564.

[Document 710]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 21, 1914, 6 a.m.

767. We are informed that local Mexican authorities at Vera Cruz are planning to remove Mexican soldiers from Vera Cruz to City of Mexico and tear up track today. Keep in touch with Canada and without giving to Foreign Minister the information received impress upon him the necessity of keeping road to Vera Cruz open for the protection of foreign residents who may desire to leave. Represent to him that this is a matter of utmost importance.

Senate has adjourned till noon today when House resolution supporting President will be passed, but, as resolution is not necessary to justify the President in his action, he is at liberty to take such action as he may deem proper, except declaration of war, without waiting for the resolution to pass.

Inform us promptly of any change in the situation. If your communications are interfered with, notify us immediately through some other legation.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada. File No. 812.00/11564.

[Document 711]

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 21, 1914, 6 a.m.

Have you any further information confirming report that local authorities intend to withdraw soldiers to Mexico City and tear up tracks? Keep O’Shaughnessy informed and make every necessary arrangement for escape of foreigners in City of Mexico. If any attempt is made to tear up track or otherwise embarrass or hinder those who desire to leave Mexico, confer with Fletcher at once and join him in vigorous protest against interruption of communication, keep us advised promptly of any change in the situation.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 812.00/11564.

[Document 712]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 21, 1914, 12 m.

768. Say to General Huerta that we are informed that his forces contemplate destruction of railroads from Vera Cruz. We hope that this is not true. As the roads to Vera Cruz are the outlet for foreigners in the interior this Government might feel it its duty to take means to prevent interruption of railroad communication between the capital and the seacoast.

While there is no excitement here and no apparent danger to Mexican representative we will as a precaution furnish a guard to Mexican Embassy here.

Bryan.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11594.

[Document 713]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, April 21, 1914, 4 p.m.

Marines and bluejackets landed at 11.30 this morning immediately taking possession of cable office, post office, telegraph office and customs house, also railroad terminal and yards with rolling-stock. Notwithstanding firing from housetops we are masters situation so far without use heavy guns. Firing all around Consulate several shots having struck building. Steamer Ypiranga stopped outside by Admiral Fletcher. Our men now simply defending themselves but may have to use big guns from ships if Mexican troops do not cease firing soon. Some resistance from naval, soon silenced by guns on Prairie. At this time reported four our men killed, twenty wounded. American newspaper men and several other Americans in Consulate. Several Americans including some women who refused to go aboard refugee ship now marooned in hotels within firing-line. Trains from Mexico City did not arrive. Am now making efforts reach General Maas, Commandant of Port, requesting him in name of humanity cease firing to prevent necessity our ships bombarding city. This telegram sent at first opportunity.

Canada.

The Mexican Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11677.

[Document 714]

The Mexican Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

No. 134.] Mexican Embassy,
Washington, April 21, 1914.

Excellency: At half past nine to-day I had the honor to receive from His Excellency the Provisional Constitutional President of the United Mexican States, General Victoriano Huerta, a telegram as follows: We are fighting at Vera Cruz against the unlawful landing of American marines.

In the name of the Government that you represent, bring this fact to the attention of whom it may concern.

Acknowledge receipt of this cable.

In bringing the foregoing to the attention of your excellency I renew [etc.]

A. Algara E. de Terreros.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11595.

[Document 715]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, April 21, 1914, 5 p.m.

Captain Ypiranga has placed himself subject orders Admiral Fletcher and delivered bills of lading, which show munitions of war as reported. He agrees not to leave his position unless driven away by storm and then will remain within reach of guns our ships.

Our men are firing now only when fired at. We prepared flag of truce with message to General Maas to cease firing or our big guns will be used. Now about one thousand marines and blue jackets ashore. Admiral Badger with heavy force due here tonight. All business here suspended since noon.

Canada.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 812.00/11608a.

[Document 716]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 21, 1914, 9.50 p.m.

Please see General Carranza and make known to him the President’s position.

The President does not desire any resolution that could be construed as authorizing him to engage in war. All he asks and all that will be given is a resolution declaring that he is justified in using the armed forces to compel redress of a specific indignity. He has been careful to distinguish between General Huerta and his supporters on the one side and the rest of the Mexican people on the other side. He has reiterated his friendship for the Mexican people and his desire to see them establish for themselves a constitutional government. The taking of the customhouse at Vera Cruz was made necessary by General Huerta’s refusal to make proper reparation for the arrest of the American sailors. The Constitutionalists are reported in the newspapers as standing aloof from the controversy. This is a very proper attitude’ and we hope they will not misunderstand the President’s position or misconstrue his acts.

Bryan.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11599.

[Document 717]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, April 22, 1914, 6 a.m.

Firing commenced again at daybreak. Ships now shelling southern part of city. Large force men landed from Admiral Badger’s fleet before daylight. Copies of proclamation issued by Admiral Fletcher requesting cooperation at once of Alcalde, Jefe Político and populace of Vera Cruz establishing order. Have sent messengers to locate these officials and every effort is being made to that end. Unable yet communicate with Embassy but expect to this morning as telegraph is working. Major Butler arrived with his command during night from Tampico and is now ashore. Expected city will be quieted this morning. No further information yet as to exact number killed and wounded. Battleships Florida, Utah, Arkansas, Vermont, New Hampshire, New Jersey, South Carolina, transport Prairie, collier Orion now off this port. Transport Hancock reported due.

Canada.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/11602.

[Document 718]

[Untitled]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, April 22, 1914, 8 a.m.

Following is copy of Admiral’s proclamation: To the Alcalde, the Jefe Politico and the citizens of Vera Cruz:

It has become necessary for the naval forces of the United States of America now at Vera Cruz to land and assume military control of the customs wharves of Vera Cruz.

Your cooperation is requested to preserve order and prevent loss of life.

It is not the intention of the United States naval forces to interfere with the administration of the civil affairs of Vera Cruz more than is necessary for the purpose of maintaining a condition of law and order and to enforce such sanitary conditions as are needed to meet military requirements.

It is desired that the civil officials of Vera Cruz continue in the peaceful pursuit of their occupations. Under these conditions full protection will be given to the city by the United States naval forces.

It is enjoined upon all inhabitants and property owners to prevent firing by individuals from the shelter of their houses upon United States forces or upon anyone else. Such firing by irregulars not members of an organized military force is contrary to the laws of war; if persisted in it will call for severe measures.

F. F. Fletcher,
Rear Admiral, United States Navy; Commander detached squadron United States Atlantic Fleet.

I have succeeded in delivering this-proclamation to the Alcalde, Roberto Díaz, who was found barricaded in his home. He states Jefe Político and all officers fled with General Maas, and that he has no jurisdiction. I hold his receipt for the proclamation.

I have sent out messenger with notice to all hotel keepers to reopen their establishments, which will be given full protection.

Customs warehouse on fire this morning but now extinguished.

Am now informed troops have been ordered to advance and take possession of city.

Canada.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/11601.

[Document 719]

[Untitled]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, April 22, 1914, 8 a.m.

American forces commenced advance to take entire city at eight o’clock under guns of war vessels.

Canada.

The Secretary of State to the Argentine Minister File No. 812.00/11744b.

[Document 720]

The Secretary of State to the Argentine Minister 15

Department of State,
Washington, April 22, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith for your information a copy of the address delivered by the President to Congress on April 20, 1914, regarding the situation which has arisen in the dealings of the United States with General Victoriano Huerta at Mexico City.

The address has been cabled in its entirety to the American Chargé d’Affaires at Buenos Aires for communication by him to the Government of Argentina.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

15 The same mutatis mutandis to the diplomatic representatives of Austria-Hungary, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, Denmark, France, Germany, Great Britain, Greece, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and Turkey.

The Secretary of State to the Bolivian Minister. File No. 812.00/11744a.

[Document 721]

The Secretary of State to the Bolivian Minister. 16

Department of State,
Washington, April 22, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith for your information a copy of the address delivered by the President to Congress on April 20, 1914, regarding the situation which has arisen in the dealings of the United States with General Victoriano Huerta at Mexico City.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

16 The same to the diplomatic representatives of China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Japan, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Persia, Peru, Salvador, Siam, Uruguay, and Venezuela.

The Secretary of State to certain American diplomatic missions. File No. 812.00/11637a.

[Document 722]

The Secretary of State to certain American diplomatic missions. 17

[Circular telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 22, 1914, 12 m.

Senate passed by vote of 72 to 13 following resolution supporting President: In view of the facts presented by the President of the United States in his address delivered to the Congress in joint session the 20th day of April, 1914, in regard to certain affronts and indignities committed against the United States in Mexico, be it.

Resolved, That the President is justified in the employment of the armed forces of the United States to enforce his demands for unequivocal amends for affronts and indignities committed against the United States; be it further.

Resolved, That the United States disclaims any hostility to the Mexican people or any purpose to make war upon them.

House has accepted Senate resolution without debate. It differed but slightly from House resolution, which was adopted Monday [the 20th] by a vote of 337 to 37.

Please note that the word “justified” is used instead of “authorized.” This was done to emphasize the fact that the resolution is not a declaration of war but contemplates only the specific redress of a specific indignity.

Admiral Fletcher has taken possession of customhouse at Vera Cruz. No resistance at time, but later battery and scattered forces fired on Americans, which was returned. Four Americans killed, twenty wounded. Loss on Mexican side not known; estimated 150.

Bryan.

17 Sent to the Embassies at Vienna, Rio de Janeiro, Paris, Berlin, London, Rome, Tokyo, St. Petersburg, and Madrid; and to the Legations at Brussels, Peking, The Hague, Christiania, Stockholm, Copenhagen, Lisbon, Buenos Aires, Santiago, Lima, Tegucigalpa, Guatemala, Managua, San Salvador, San Jose, and Habana.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11618.

[Document 723]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, Texas, April 22, 1914.

Department’s April 21, 9.50 p.m.

Following is translation of text of reply from Carranza: In answer to the message of Secretary of State Bryan, which was communicated to me through you, please transmit to Mr. Bryan the following note addressed to President Wilson:

“Pending the action of the American Senate on Your Excellency’s message directed to that body, caused by the lamentable incident which occurred between the crew of a whaleboat of the cruiser Dolphin and the soldiers of the usurper Huerta, certain acts of hostility have been executed by the naval forces under the command of Admiral Fletcher at the port of Vera Cruz. In view of this violation of the national sovereignty, which the Constitutionalist Government did not expect from a Government which had reiterated its desire to maintain peace with the Mexican people, I comply with a duty of high patriotism in directing this note to you with a view of exhausting all honorable means before two friendly powers sever the pacific relations that still unite them.

“The Mexican nation—the real people of Mexico—have not recognized as their executive a man who has sought to blemish the national integrity, drowning in blood its free institutions. Consequently the acts of the usurper Huerta and his accomplices do not signify legitimate acts of sovereignty, they do not constitute real public functions of domestic and foreign relations, and much less do they represent the sentiments of the Mexican nation, which are of confraternity towards the American people. The lack of representative character in General Victoriano Huerta as concerns the relations of Mexico with the United States as well as with Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Cuba has been clearly established by the justifiable attitude of these nations, who have refused to recognize the usurper, thus lending a valuable moral support to the noble cause that I represent.

“The usurped title of ‘President of the Republic’ cannot invest General Huerta with the right to receive a demand for reparation on the part of the Government of the United States, nor the right to grant a satisfaction if this is due.

“Victoriano Huerta is a culprit amenable to the jurisdiction of the Constitutionalist Government, today the only one, In the abnormal circumstances of our nation, which represents the national sovereignty in accord with Article 128 of the Political Constitution of Mexico. The illegal acts committed by the usurper and his partisans, and those which they may yet perpetrate, be they of an international character such as those that recently occurred at the port of Tampico, or of a domestic character, will be tried and punished with inflexibility and promptness by the tribunals of the Constitutionalist Government.

“The individual acts of Victoriano Huerta will never be sufficient to involve the Mexican nation in a disastrous war with the United States, because there is no solidarity whatever between the so-called Government of Victoriano Huerta and the Mexican nation, for the fundamental reason that he is not the legitimate organ of our national sovereignty.

“But the invasion of our territory and the stay of your forces in the port of Vera Cruz, violating the rights that constitute our existence as a free and independent sovereign entity, may indeed drag us into an unequal war, with dignity but which until today we have desired to avoid.

“In the face of the real situation of Mexico—weak in comparison with the formidable power of the American nation and weaker than ever after three years of bloody strife—and considering the acts committed at Vera Cruz to be highly offensive to the dignity and independence of Mexico, contrary to your repeated declarations of not desiring to disturb the state of peace and friendship with the Mexican nation, and contrary also to the resolution of the American Senate, which has just declared that the United States does not assume any attitude inimical to the Mexican people and does not purpose to levy war against them; considering also that the hostile acts already committed exceed those required by equity to the end desired, which may be held to be satisfied; considering, furthermore, that it is not the usurper who should have the right to make reparation—I interpret the sentiment of the great majority of the Mexican people, so jealous of its rights and so respectful of the rights of foreigners, and invite you only to suspend the hostile acts already begun, to order your forces to evacuate all places that they hold in the port of Vera Cruz, and to present to the Constitutionalist Government, which I as Constitutional Governor of the Slate of Coahuila and First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army represent, the demand on the part of the United States in regard to acts recently committed at the port of Tampico, in the security that the demand will be considered in a spirit of elevated justice and conciliation.

V. Carranza,
The Constitutional Governor of the State of Coahuila, and First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army.”

Original by mail.

G. C. Carothers.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11650.

[Document 724]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Chihuahua, April 22, 1914, 7 p.m.

General Carranza has privately besought me, as an official who enjoys the respect of the Mexican people and especially those of this party, to approach our President with an earnest plea that some means be found to avoid armed conflict with Mexico while giving due consideration to the sensibilities of the Mexican people.

They inform me privately that the military leaders to a man united in forcing Carranza to take the stand outlined in his note today relative to the Tampico incident.

Letcher.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 123Os4/122.

[Document 725]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Embassy,
Mexico, April 22, 1914, 11 p.m.

I was handed my passports tonight at 7.30 o’clock and I leave for Vera Cruz April 24 on a special train with a large escort. General Huerta’s son goes with me as a guaranty of my safety. I am notifying consular officers to withdraw from Mexico.

O’Shaughnessy.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11651.

[Document 726]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Chihuahua, April 23, 1914, 3 p.m.

The Constitutionalist Chief has requested me verbally to ask if the President will consider receiving from him a High Commissioner authorized to treat upon the state of affairs and clothed with full power, or, if not convenient to receive such a Commissioner personally, that each appoint such a High Commissioner for the purpose named.

Letcher.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11654.

[Document 727]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, April 23, 1914, 11.30 p.m.

I have just dined with Villa. We discussed situation at length. He said there would be no war between the United States and the Constitutionalists; that he is too good a friend of ours and considered us too good friends of theirs for us to engage in a war which neither side desired; that other nations would laugh and say, “The little drunkard has succeeded in drawing them in”; that as far as he was concerned we could keep Vera Cruz and hold it so tight that not even water could get in to Huerta and that he could not feel any resentment. He said that no drunkard, meaning Huerta, was going to draw him into a war with his friend; that he had come to Juarez to restore confidence between us.

My impression is that he is sincere and will force Carranza to accept his own friendly attitude. He was much pleased that the embargo had not been restored, saying that he must secure his ammunition for the Monterey campaign through El Paso and that the report that the embargo had been restored had worried him. His residence is within two hundred yards of the international bridge guarded by ten men. He told me that he realized that if we were to go to war the United States would crush them, but that they would do much damage and fight as long as they could continue to exist on herbs and live in the hills; but that even though we were to cross into Mexico he would still ask us to withdraw and talk it over. He asked me what the extensive military activity in El Paso meant, to which I replied that the American forces had much to contend with on this side, with five thousand prisoners at Fort Bliss and ten thousand refugees in the city, and that the activity meant prevention of rioting in El Paso. He expressed satisfaction at this and said he would do the same thing under similar conditions.

In comparing his conversation with me to published interview with newspaper reporters please bear in mind that those interviews have been edited by the Carrancista junta here and that junta is striving to show that Villa upholds Carranza’s note to you. Villa’s attitude is that Carranza may write pretty notes from Chihuahua but that he is here to do the work. If we can hold Villa in Juarez a few days, and provided the proposed embargo does not change his attitude, I have hope of establishing the neutrality of the Constitutionalists through Villa. As indicative of his frame of mind he handed me a beautiful blanket with the request that I forward it to General Scott with his compliments.

G. C. Carothers.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 812.00/11651.

[Document 728]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 24, 1914.

Please express to General Carranza the pleasure and appreciation felt by the President because of the friendly spirit exhibited in his suggestion communicated in your dispatch of April 23; but explain to him that it would hardly be possible for the President to act upon that suggestion so long as General Carranza’s recent statement continues to be interpreted as it is now generally interpreted in the United States. If General Carranza could make it clear by another public statement that he stands neutral in respect of every matter that has arisen or may arise between the United States and General Huerta, that he will not assist Huerta or resist the United States in its effort to enforce specific redress for indignities which the officers of General Huerta have put upon the Government of the United States, such a statement will undoubtedly hasten General Huerta’s elimination, which all parties desire. General Huerta evidently is being encouraged to believe that the Constitutionalists will join him against the United States. So soon as he understands that they will not, he will cease to do the things which justify and oblige the United States to seek redress, and so relieve Mexico and the Mexican people of all danger of suffering directly or indirectly for General Huerta’s offenses.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 812.00/11654.

[Document 729]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 24, 1914.

Your dispatch El Paso, April 23, received and read with great gratification. You are at liberty to say to General Villa* * * that the action of the United States on that part of the border which is controlled on the Mexican side by the Constitutionalists will be governed entirely by the attitude of General Carranza, General Villa and their associates. We are earnestly desirous that the most friendly relationships should exist and are greatly pleased and reassured by what you report General Villa as having said. It shows a largeness of view on his part and a comprehension of the whole situation which is greatly to his credit. We sincerely hope that he represents the views of the Constitutionalists. Public opinion in the United States has been greatly disturbed by General Carranza’s attitude and has felt a very considerable degree of resentment about it. I have so far taken leave to believe that General Carranza did not mean real hostility. I hope that we may be assured of that in a very short time.

Bryan.

Minister Fletcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11683.

[Document 730]

Minister Fletcher to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Santiago, April 24, 1914.

Minister for Foreign Affairs having been informed by the Chilean Minister at Washington that the President of the United States would accept the good offices of Chile, Argentina and Brazil in the Mexican crisis, has instructed him to act with his Brazilian and’ Argentine colleagues in this sense. He has called the Mexican Chargé d’Affaires in Chile to make similar offer through him.

Fletcher.

Consul Johnson to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11715.

[Document 731]

Consul Johnson to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brownsville, Texas, April 25, 1914.

Colonel Ricey, member of General Carranza’s staff, has just left my office after delivering a verbal message sent me by the General.

He said that in case war was declared by the Americans, General Carranza and the men under him would not fight the American troops but would evacuate the city and leave their wives and children here, knowing that the American people are their friends and that their families would be safe with them. He assured me that if any Mexican should dare utter one word insulting to me, he would be shot down in my presence; that if I had to leave here I should have a guard of honor to escort me to the line and I should be allowed to take with me anything that I wanted to take. They have the highest regard for President Wilson and yourself and believe that it is not your wish to try to exterminate the entire Mexican people on account of that drunken reprobate Huerta. They will protect the American people and their property at all hazards, for they owe them all the success obtained on account of the great influence furnished by them. They cannot and they will not fight the Americans. They will not join Huerta under any circumstances.

Colonel Ricey is in command here and is a nephew of Governor Carranza.

Jesse J. Johnson.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11714, 12282.

[Document 732]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, Texas, April 25, 1914, 7 p.m.

Following for your information: An expression for the information of President Woodrow Wilson; forwarded through G. C. Carothers.

The great majority of the Mexican people, comprising all of the liberal party of warm democratic aspirations, recognize the greatness and power of the American people and are thankful for the sympathy they have shown for Mexico and their desire for its progress, manifested by their moral support of democratic Mexicans in the Revolution of 1910 and this one of 1913–14. They believe in the sincerity of the declarations of President Wilson that no war with Mexico is desired, and on their part aspire to live in good friendship with the United States.

They are sure that the difficulties between the United States of America and the United Mexican States have originated in the deliberate attempt of the usurper Huerta to force a war between the two countries, and it would be very lamentable if the satanic abilities of this perfidious man should launch into war two brotherly countries which have so long desired to live in the most harmonious fraternal relations.

It is true that the situation has been aggravated by the form of the note of the Constitutional Governor of Coahuila, First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army; but this note was entirely personal, and the attitude of one person, whatever his momentary authority, cannot carry such weight as to bring on a war between two countries desiring to continue at peace, disdaining the machinations of Huerta, whom both countries consider a common enemy.

The worthy pride of the Mexican chief of a great party is quite excusable even if it should expose the country to a lamentable war. The President of the great North American nation should measure up to his noble antecedents and the greatness of the country he represents, because our sister countries of Latin America hang on his words. He has before him the judgment of history, which shall decide whether he has been truly great, and moved only by his high ideals of justice and democracy, or was in the end influenced by the satanic machinations of one man and the haughtiness of another.

I can assure you that our Chief, Mr. Carranza, is animated by the keenest desire to avoid difficulties between our respective countries; and we, following his patriotic impulses and as faithful servants of our country, are of the same inclination. Mr. Carranza in his note has only endeavored to defend the dignity of the Republic, without the least intending his attitude to be considered as a hostile act against the Government of the United States, from which country we have received such great demonstrations of consideration and sympathy.

Francisco Villa.

Ciudad Juárez, Chihuahua,
April 25, 1911

Carothers.

The Brazilian Ambassador and the Argentine and Chilean Ministers, as Mediators between the Governments of the United States and Mexico, to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/16525.

[Document 733]

The Brazilian Ambassador and the Argentine and Chilean Ministers, as Mediators between the Governments of the United States and Mexico, to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Argentine Legation,
Washington, April 25, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: With the purpose of serving the interests of peace and civilization in our continent and with the earnest desire to prevent any further bloodshed to the prejudice of the cordiality and union that have always surrounded the relations of the Governments and peoples of America, we the plenipotentiaries of Brazil, Argentina and Chile, duly authorized thereto, have the honor to offer to your excellency’s Government our good offices for the peaceful and friendly settlement of the conflict between the United States and Mexico.

This offer puts in due form the suggestions which we have had occasion to make heretofore on the subject to the Secretary, to whom we renew the assurances of our highest and most distinguished consideration.

D. da Gama.

E. S. Naón.

Epo. Suárez Mujica

The Secretary of State to the Mediators. File No. 812.00/16525.

[Document 734]

The Secretary of State to the Mediators.

Department of State,
Washington, April 25, 1914.

Your Excellencies: The Government of the United States is deeply sensible of the friendliness, the good feeling and the generous concern for the peace and welfare of America manifested in the joint note just received from your excellencies tendering the good offices of your Governments to effect, if possible, a settlement of the present difficulties between the Government of the United States and those who now claim to represent our sister Republic of Mexico.

Conscious of the purpose with which the proffer is made, this Government does not feel at liberty to decline it. Its own chief interest is in the peace of America, the cordial intercourse of her republics and their people, and the happiness and prosperity which can spring only out of frank, mutual understandings and the friendship which is created by common purpose. The generous offer of your Governments is, therefore, accepted.

This Government hopes most earnestly that you may find those who speak for the several elements of the Mexican people willing and ready to discuss terms of satisfactory and, therefore, permanent settlement. If you should find them willing, this Government will be glad to take up with you for discussion in the frankest and most conciliatory spirit any proposals that may be authoritatively formulated, and will hope that they may prove feasible and prophetic of a new day of mutual cooperation and confidence in America.

This Government feels bound in candor to say that, its diplomatic relations with Mexico being for the present severed, it is not possible for it to make sure of an uninterrupted opportunity to carry out the plan of intermediation which you propose. It is, of course, possible that some act of aggression on the part of those who control the military forces of Mexico might oblige the United States to act to the upsetting of the hope of immediate peace; but this does not justify us in hesitating to accent your generous suggestion. We shall hope for the best results within a time brief enough to relieve our anxiety lest ill-considered hostile demonstrations should interrupt negotiations and disappoint our hopes of peace.

I take [etc.].

W. J. Bryan.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 1230s4/123.

[Document 735]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Vera Cruz, April 25, 1914, 1 p.m.

Arrived safely by special train last night. I transmit below translation of note tendered me by Foreign Office, breaking off relations; also my reply thereto.

O’Shaughnessy.

[Inclosure 1—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Foreign Office,
Mexico, April 22, 1914.

Mr. Chargé d’affaires: As you assuredly know, the marines of the American ships of war anchored in the port of Vera Cruz, availing themselves of the circumstance that the Mexican authorities had given them access to the harbor and to the town because they considered their presence was of a friendly character, disembarked yesterday with their arms and uniforms and possessed themselves by surprise of the principal public buildings without giving time for the women and children in the streets, the sick, and other non-combatants to place themselves in safety.

This act is contrary to international usages, for if these do not demand, as held by many states, a previous declaration of war, they impose at least the duty of not violating humane considerations of good faith by people whom the country in which they are has received as friends and who therefore should not take advantage of that circumstance to commit hostile acts.

According to international law, those acts of the armed forces of the United States (which I do not care to qualify in this note in deference to the fact that you have personally observed toward the Mexican Government and people the most strictly correct conduct so far as has been possible for you in your character of representative of a Government with which such serious difficulties as those existing have arisen) must be understood as the initiation of war against Mexico.

This Ministry reserves to itself the right of presenting to the other powers the events and the considerations pertinent to this matter, in order that they, as members of the concert of nations, may judge the conduct of the two nations and adopt the attitude which they may deem proper.

In view of this deplorable outrage upon the national sovereignty the President of the Republic has seen fit to determine, as I have the honor to communicate to you, that the diplomatic mission which until now you have discharged is concluded, and that you will have the goodness to retire from Mexican territory.

To that end I enclose your passports, at the same time informing you that, as is the diplomatic custom on such occasions, a special train will be at your disposal with a guard sufficient to protect you, your family and your staff, although the Mexican people is sufficiently civilized to respect you and those accompanying you even without this protection.

I avail [etc.]

José López Portillo y Rojas.

[Inclosure 2.]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

American Embassy,
Mexico, April 23, 1914.

Mr. Minister: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s note of yesterday, informing me that owing to the fact that the armed forces of the United States of America have occupied the port of Vera Cruz, my character as Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of the United States of America has terminated and that I am to withdraw from the territory of the United Mexican States, and at the same time transmitting to me my passports.

I beg to inform your excellency that I have telegraphed the American consular representatives resident within the United Mexican States to leave Mexican territory, and that I have entrusted this Embassy to His Britannic Majesty’s Legation in Mexico City, which diplomatic mission will, as occasion may require, care for all American interests in the United Mexican States.18

I avail [etc.]

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

18 The care of these interests was later transferred to the Brazilian Legation; see Severance of diplomatic relations, etc., post.

The Secretary of State to American diplomatic missions. File No. 812.00/11744c.

[Document 736]

The Secretary of State to American diplomatic missions. 19

[Circular telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 26, 1914.

Please communicate to the Foreign Office the following note from Ambassador of Brazil and Ministers of Argentina and Chile, together with the President’s reply through the Secretary of State.

[Texts of the note of April 25 and the reply.]

Bryan.

19 Sent to all missions in America and Europe and to Japan and China.

Chargé Lorillard to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11737.

[Document 737]

Chargé Lorillard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Buenos Aires, April 27, 1914.

Argentine Government has received information that Huerta will accept mediation. Minister for Foreign Affairs tells me offer of mediation on the part of this Government was made at the suggestion of Naón, who proposed it to his Brazilian and Chilean colleagues. He has been given full powers to act as he deems best in the premises.

Lorillard.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11732.

[Document 738]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, April 27, 1914, 2 p.m.

The American flag was raised over the port of Vera Cruz with impressive ceremony at two p.m.

Canada.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/11756.

[Document 739]

[Untitled]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, April 28, 1914, 3 p.m.

I beg to quote the following communication just received from British Admiral Cradock: If you will permit me, in consequence of difficulty you may perhaps have in communicating with Brazilian Minister in Mexico, I propose pending contrary instructions to contrive to do all in my power as heretofore in the interests of the United States of America, observing at the same time strict neutrality. Should you desire to do so, will you most kindly inform Washington.

Christopher Cradock,
Rear Admiral, British Navy.

Canada.

Ambassador W. H. Page to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11749.

[Document 740]

Ambassador W. H. Page to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Embassy,
London, April 28, 1914.

Sir Edward Grey informs me that under instructions from him Garden urged Huerta to accept mediation proposed by South American Republics and Garden has reported that Huerta assents. During Sir Edward’s absence in Paris the Mexican Minister in London sent to the British Foreign Office an unofficial request for British Government to offer mediation, which Grey answered by saying that South American Republics had already done so. But he spoke as if he would be willing to offer good offices of British Government if need should arise.

I thanked Grey for helpful acts of Minister Carden and Admiral Cradock, which seemed to please him.* * *

Page.

The Mediators to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/23494.

[Document 741]

The Mediators to the Secretary of State.

Argentine Legation,
Washington, April 28, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: It gives us satisfaction to inform your excellency that we have received the acceptance of General Huerta’s Government of our tender of good offices made through his excellency the Ambassador of Spain.

We are also glad to announce to your excellency that we made the same tender by telegraph to the Chief of the Constitutionalist forces.20

As a consequence of the acceptance of those good offices by your excellency’s Government as well as by that of General Huerta, we understand that it is proper to suspend from this time, and during the mediatory action, the hostilities and military movements by the forces of both parties.

We avail [etc.]

D. da Gama.

E. S. Naón.

Ed’o Suárez Mujica

20 See post, Inclosure 1 with the Special Commissioners’ despatch No. 8, May 31.

The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador. File No. 812.00/23493a.

[Document 742]

The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, April 28, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: I have communicated to the President the proposition21 which you were kind enough to submit on behalf of General Huerta’s Minister for Foreign Affairs to the effect that an agreement should be entered into for the suspension of hostilities during mediation and have the honor to report to you his views: Please call the attention of the Minister for Foreign Affairs to the fact that war has not been declared; that the United States occupies Vera Cruz in accordance with abundant international precedents as a means of enforcing redress for a specific indignity; and that inasmuch as a state of war does not exist the further action of the United States depends entirely upon the attitude and action of General Huerta. In such circumstances a formal armistice is not necessary. General Huerta can himself carry out his desire that hostilities shall cease during the pendency of the present negotiations.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

21 Oral.

The Secretary of State to the Mediators. File No. 812.00/23494.

[Document 743]

The Secretary of State to the Mediators.

Department of State,
Washington, April 29, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: Answering the note submitted by you and your colleagues, Ministers Naón and Suárez, I beg to say that notice of General Huerta’s acceptance of mediation is received with satisfaction. We note what you say in regard to suspension of hostilities during mediation. We so understand it, provided of course that this Governnient would be at liberty to repel any aggression attempted.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to certain American diplomatic missions. File No. 812.00/11776a.

[Document 744]

The Secretary of State to certain American diplomatic missions. 22

[Circular telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 29, 1914.

The Mediators have notified the State Department that both Huerta and Carranza have accepted the principle of mediation.23 This enables the Mediators to deal with the entire Mexican situation.

Bryan.

22 Sent to the missions in Argentina, Austria-Hungary, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark, France, Germany, Great Britain, Guatemala, Honduras, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal, Russia, Salvador, Spain, Sweden and Uruguay.

23 As to Carranza’s attitude, see post, the inclosures with the Special Commissioners’ despatch No. 8, May 31.

Special Agent Garothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11770.

[Document 745]

Special Agent Garothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, April 29, 1914, 10 p.m.

I have authentic information that Carranza has completely changed his attitude and is now in accord with Villa on policy towards United States. Villa left Chihuahua today for Torreon. My information is that Villa will move on Saltillo at once where all of the federals have concentrated.

G. C. Carothers.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11780.

[Document 746]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, April 30, 1914, 3 p.m.

The port of Vera Cruz was formally turned over to the army forces by the navy at two p.m. today.

Canada.

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada. File No. 812.00/11756.

[Document 747]

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 30, 1914, 4 p.m.

Your April 28, 3 p.m. Please convey to Admiral Cradock the sincere thanks and appreciation of this Government for the friendly interest manifested in his message to you, and say it will appreciate any future assistance he may be able to render along the lines indicated.

Bryan.

The Mediators to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/23425.

[Document 748]

The Mediators to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Washington, May 2, 1914.

Sir: With the acceptance of our good offices by all the parties interested in the pacific and amicable settlement of the conflict between the United States and Mexico, the time has arrived formally to begin negotiations.

For this purpose it is necessary that each of the parties name its representatives before the Mediators for the purpose of discussing the bases of settlement.

After representatives have been appointed, we shall hasten to fix the date for the inauguration of the conference.

We renew [etc.]

D. da Gama.

R. S. Naón.

Ed’o Suarez Mujica.

The Secretary of State to American diplomatic officers. File No. 812.00/11802a.

[Document 749]

The Secretary of State to American diplomatic officers.

[Circular telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 2, 1914.

The Mediators have submitted to the United States Government, and are submitting to Huerta and Carranza, requests that representatives be appointed by each to confer with the Mediators.

Bryan.

General Funston to the Secretary of War. File No. 812.00/11820.

[Document 750]

General Funston to the Secretary of War.

[Telegram.]

Vera Cruz, May 2, 1914.

Following order establishing military government Vera Cruz issued today: 1. In compliance with instructions from the Secretary of War and by direction of the President of the United States, the undersigned announces himself as Military Governor of Vera Cruz, Mexico, and the adjacent territory now under control of the armed forces of the United States. The government hereby established will continue the system which the people of Vera Cruz are accustomed to in so far as is consistent with military control.

2. There shall be a Provost Marshal General. He will institute or continue in force the usual departments of city government. He will make request to the Military Governor for the detail of officers to be placed in charge of the principal departments and bureaus and for such other officers as may be necessary.

3. In the exercise of police powers the Provost Marshal General will continue for the present the provost courts instituted by general orders No. 2 from these headquarters dated April 30, 1914.

4. The Judge Advocate at these headquarters is appointed Administrator of Justice. Upon his recommendation the Military Governor will establish trial courts for the trial of civil causes.

5. The funds received from whatever sources will be deposited in the general treasury and credited to the proper fund. The current and necessary expenses of the military and civil government shall be paid on requisition from the proper departments or bureaus approved by the Military Governor.

6. The following administrative officers are exempt from the control of the Provost Marshal General and are under the immediate control of the Military Governor: (a) The general treasury.

(b) Customs, including lighthouse service.

(c) The civil courts.

(d) The U. S. mail agency and the general post office.

Frederick Funston,
Brigadier General, Commanding.

Colonel Plummer, 28th Infantry, appointed Provost Marshal General. Commander Stickney, Navy, Administrator of Customs. Paymaster Potter, Navy, Treasurer of Customs.

Funston.

Mr. R. Zubáran Capmany, representing General Carranza to the President and the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/23426.

[Document 751]

Mr. R. Zubáran Capmany, representing General Carranza to the President and the Secretary of State.

memorandum.

The First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army, fully realizing the menace to the good relations between the people of Mexico and that of its neighbouring Republic, the United States, arising out of the wanton conduct of the usurper Huerta, has delegated the undersigned to make clear the feelings and the attitude of the Constitutionalists, and, indeed, of the people of Mexico toward the United States.

The United States and Mexico have, at present, friendly and peaceful relations, which not only the Constitutionalists, but the vast majority of the people of Mexico desire firmly to maintain. Such relations should not be affected by the acts of Huerta, since they do not voice the real sentiment of the nation. Consequently, it will be the purpose of the Constitutionalists to strive to continue unaltered those relations between the people of the two Republics, and to resolve all differences in the same spirit.

The First Chief feels that the Government of this nation entertains sentiments identical with those of the people of Mexico. This conviction on his part is based on his confidence in the spirit of justice and the high moral principles which have always inspired the acts of the President and the Secretary of State, both of whom are esteemed as the incarnation of the virtues of the American people. He also feels that the policy followed, and to be followed, in his struggle against the usurper, Huerta, in giving due protection to the lives and property of all American citizens and all foreigners who maintain strict neutrality is a manifest assurance of both the purpose and the ability of the Constitutionalists to discharge the international obligations of Mexico within the territory which they now, and will hereafter, control.

Pursuant to his instructions, the undersigned embraces this opportunity to express the sentiments of personal friendliness and appreciation with which the First Chief is animated for the President of the United States and the Secretary of State.

R. Zubáran Capmany.
Washington, D. C.,, May 4th, 1914.

Washington, D. C, May 4th, 1914

The Mediators to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11849.

[Document 752]

The Mediators to the Secretary of State.

[Translations.]

Washington, May 5, 1914.

We have the honor to inform your excellency that upon consulting all the opinions concerned, the city of Niagara Falls, Canada, has been designated as the seat of the conferences at which the bases of settlement for the pacific and friendly solution of the conflict pending between the United States and Mexico will be discussed, and that said conferences will open on the 18th day of the present month at the hour and place that will be named in due time.

We take pleasure at the same time in informing your excellency that General Huerta’s Government has given us official notice of the appointment of Messrs. Emilio Rabasa, Augustin Rodríguez y Luis Elguero to represent it at the said conferences, and that Señor Rafael Elguero will act as their Secretary.

We avail [etc.]

D. da Gama.

R. S. Naón.

Edo. Suarez Mujica.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/23427.

[Document 753]

[Untitled]

Washington, May 6, 1914.

Sir: We have the honor to inform your excellency that we have just received two telegrams from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of General Huerta informing us that the landing of troops and munitions of war is being made by the United States in Vera Cruz, and indicating to us that these acts are contrary to the agreement adopted by both Governments at the suggestion of the undersigned for the suspension of hostilities and of military movements between both parties during the process of mediation.

We feel sure that the acts complained of by the Government of General Huerta will be made the subject of an immediate investigation on the part of your excellency and, if found to be as alleged, will merit the formal adoption of appropriate measures.

We await a reply of your excellency, at the earliest possible moment, such as will enable us to clarify the situation and to reply in a satisfactory manner to the telegraphic despatches referred to.

We renew [etc.]

D. da Gama.

R. S. Naón.

Edo Suarez Mujica.

The Secretary of State to the Mediators. File No. 812.00/23427.

[Document 754]

The Secretary of State to the Mediators.

Department of State,
Washington, May 8, 1914.

Gentlemen: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of the note of your excellencies communicating a cablegram which you have received from General Huerta. In reply I beg to say that the troops and munitions mentioned were sent only to Vera Cruz, a place occupied by the United States when your offer of mediation was accepted. I am pleased to inform your excellencies that no aggressive measures of any kind have been taken by this Government since the acceptance of your generous good offices and that nothing has been done in conflict with the understanding with your excellencies as to suspension of hostilities.

I avail [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to all American diplomatic missions. File No. 812.00/11902a.

[Document 755]

The Secretary of State to all American diplomatic missions.

[Circular telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 11, 1914.

Plans for mediation are progressing satisfactorily. General Huerta has appointed representatives to attend the conference, which will begin May 18, at Niagara Falls, Canada. The President has appointed as representatives Associate Justice Lamar of the Supreme Court and Honorable Frederick Lehman, former Solicitor of the Department of Justice. Hostilities are suspended between General Huerta and the United States, but continue between General Huerta and the Constitutionalists, also between General Huerta and Zapata, who controls a section of Southern Mexico. The question of Carranza’s participation in the conference not yet determined.

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Mediators. File No. 812.00/11849.

[Document 756]

The Secretary of State to the Mediators.

Department of State,
Washington, May 12, 1914.

Excellencies: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of May 5, by which you inform the Department that the city of Niagara Falls, Canada, has been selected as the place for the conferences of the mediators between the United States and Mexico, and that their deliberations will commence there on May 18.

The Department has duly noted your statement, in your note, that you have been officially informed by the Administration of General Huerta that it will be represented at the conference by Messrs. Emilio Rabasa, Augustín Rodríguez, and Luis Elguero, and that Mr. Rafael Elguero will act as their secretary.

Thanking you for the information conveyed, I avail [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11914.

[Document 757]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, May 12, 1914.

Mexican peace delegates sailed on Kronprinzessin Cecilie ten o’clock last night, due Havana Thursday morning. They are: Licenciado Emilio Rabasa, author of best Mexican work on international law and Huerta’s choice for Ambassador to Washington, had he been recognized; was also candidate for Minister of Foreign Relations.

Licenciado Agustín Rodríguez, director School of Law, Mexico City, and oldest practicing attorney in republic; also dean of Mexican bar.

Licenciado Luis Elguero, Senator, capitalist, politician, lawyer of note; also Interventor appointed by Mexican Government for national and central banks of Mexico and member of Board of Directors, National Railways.

Licenciado Rafael Elguero, son of Luis Elguero and Secretary of peace delegation.

Manuel Martínez del Campo, employee Mexican Foreign Office, formerly a Chief of Protocol in that Department.

Rafael Capetillo, Attaché of Peace Delegation and employee of Foreign Office.

Delegation named in order of rank.

The following accompany the delegation: The Misses R. Rabasa, Isabel Rabasa, Carmen Rabasa, and Mr. Oscar Rabasa, children of Emilio Rabasa; Luis and Guadalupe Rodríguez, son and daughter of Agustin Rodríguez; Mrs. Mercedes de la Cueva de Martínez del Campo, wife of Manuel Martínez del Campo.

Impossible give exact date arrival in United States as they intend stopping Havana few days. They plan go via Key West. Suggest communicate our Minister at Havana for time of departure that port and arrival United States.

Canada.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12025.

[Document 758]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, May 14, 1914, 8 p.m.

Constitutionalist forces under General Pablo Gonzales occupied Tampico yesterday about noon. Perfect order being preserved. Guaranties assured to all foreigners to return to their business. Consulate reopened.

Miller.

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12019.

[Document 759]

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, May 15, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: I have the honor to inform your excellency that the Minister of Foreign Relations of Mexico has asked me to telegraph to express in his name the most earnest thanks to the Government of the United States for the attentions shown to the members of the Mexican delegation on their arrival in the territory of the Union.

I avail [etc.]

Juan Riaño.

The Secretary of State to H. Percival Dodge, Esquire. File No. 812.00/12001a.

[Document 760]

The Secretary of State to H. Percival Dodge, Esquire.

Department of State,
Washington, May 16, 1914.

Sir: You are hereby designated Secretary to the Special Commission of the President of the United States near the Mediators in the conferences to be held at Niagara Falls, Ontario.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12003.

[Document 761]

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, May 17, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: The representatives of General Huerta delegated to represent him at the conference called through the mediation of Brazil, Argentina and Chile asked me, on their leaving to-day for New York and Niagara Falls, to present in their names to your excellency their earnest thanks for all the attentions and courtesies extended to them since their arrival on American territory by your excellency and the Department of State, which attentions and courtesies they have appreciated to their full value.

In discharging this very pleasant duty, I avail [etc.]

Juan Riaño.

The Secretary of State to the Mediators. File No. 812.00/12011a.

[Document 762]

The Secretary of State to the Mediators.

Department of State,
Washington, May 18, 1914.

Excellencies: I have the honor to inform you that the Special Commissioners of the President of the United States near the Mediators in the conferences to be held at Niagara Falls, Ontario, will be the Honorable Joseph Rucker Lamar, an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States, and Mr. Frederick William Lehmann, formerly Solicitor General of the United States, who will be accompanied by their secretary, H. Percival Dodge, Esquire.

Accept [etc.]

William Jennings Bryan.

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12136.

[Document 763]

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

[Extract]

No. 1.] Special Commission of the President of
the United States, near the Mediators.
Niagara Falls, N. T., May 20, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that Mr. Justice Lamar, Mr. Lehmann and I paid an informal call this morning on Mr. Da Gama and Mr. Naón, Mr. Suárez not having arrived but being expected this evening. They explained at length their proposals for the procedure of the mediation; that they would hold separate sessions with the American and Huertista representatives, of which no stenographic report would be taken, and sessions with all the representatives, but only as occasion might require.* * *

At 3:30 p.m. the inaugural session was held, both our representatives and the Huertista representatives being present. Mr. Da Gama made the opening speech, welcoming the representatives and expressing ardent hope for the success of the mediation. Mr. Justice Lamar made a brief reply, expressing thanks for the Mediators’ interest and reciprocating the Mediators’ hope for success. Mr. Rabasa also made a brief reply, expressing thanks to the Mediators in the name of the “representatives of the Mexican Government.” The Mediators then submitted the method of procedure for the conference which they stated had been agreed to by both sides and which was the same as that which our representatives had agreed to in the morning. The session then adjourned, the Mediators inviting our representatives to meet them at 9:30 this evening, previous to which they expected to have a meeting with the Huertista representatives. At 9:30 p.m. we had a conference with the Mediators, a report of which will be telegraphed this evening.

I have [etc.]

H. Percival Dodge.

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/23435.

[Document 764]

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Niagara Falls, May 20, 1914.

We met the Mediators at 9.30 this evening and they brought forward as a plan of their own suggestion, which they believed was feasible and could be made acceptable, that General Huerta appoint as Minister for Foreign Affairs a man of standing and character and of Constitutionalist principled who would be satisfactory to the Constitutionalists, neutrals and the United States; that Huerta then resign, the person appointed Minister for Foreign Affairs thereupon succeeding under the Constitution as Provisional President; that thereupon steps be taken to carry out a constructive program, that is, the election of a President and Congress under the Constitution, with provision for the reforms deemed to be essential to permanent results; that upon the retirement of General Huerta and the accession to the presidency of the person appointed Minister for Foreign Affairs as before stated, there be an end of all hostilities if an attempt should be made to continue them, and an embargo be placed on the importation of arms and ammunition, to take effect upon the retirement of General Huerta and the succession to the presidency of the Constitutionalist in the manner stated.

As one man who might well be considered for the provisional presidency, the Mediators mentioned Señor Lascurain, who was Minister for Foreign Affairs appointed by Francisco Madero and who upon the death of Madero would and should have succeeded to the provisional presidency if he had not been forced to resign by General Huerta and who might therefore be considered to be the constitutional and Constitutionalist successor to Francisco Madero. But the Mediators stated that there might be other persons chosen who would be entirely satisfactory.

While the Mediators had had a conference with the Mexican representatives during the day, the proposition was not made as coming from the Mexicans but was suggested on the part of the Mediators themselves as their own plan, and was coupled with the statement that they believed it would be acceptable to the Mexican representatives. And the plan was of course predicated on the assumption that General Huerta would resign, and as to this they seemed to be very sanguine. The argument was that arms ought no longer to be imported when there was no occasion for further war, Huerta having been eliminated. They also seemed to assume that in the election that would be held the Constitutionalists would inevitably be successful, having the prestige of victors in the field.

We stated to the Mediators that we could not at present give them an answer and might not be able to do so in the morning, when they are to have a formal conference with the Mexican representatives.

Commissioners

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners. File No. 812.00/23435.

[Document 765]

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 21, 1914.

The President directs me to say:

“We are pleased and encouraged by the character of the proposal contained in your telegram of last evening. It will be necessary for us to ascertain the actual attitude and environment of Lascurain before forming a judgment and we would appreciate it very much if other names were suggested of men whose connections and sympathies we could at once look up.

“Meantime we hope that this alternative plan may be frankly discussed, namely, the appointment of such a man as Lascurain and the association with him of someone actually chosen by the now victorious party, and of a third man chosen by the two, in order to get away from the apparent succession to Huerta and set up an authority free from former cabinet influences and exceptional enough in the very circumstances of their authority to undertake with a free hand the formulation of the decrees of reform to be ratified by the Congress in due time elected.

“Is it too early to obtain opinions with regard to the scope and character of the agrarian reforms which would be involved?”

Bryan.

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/23436.

[Document 766]

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Niagara Falls, May 21, 1914.

On receipt of your wire, we at once met Mediators and found them in no sense opposed to the alternative plan suggested in your telegram of today, one preferring it, the others not objecting but thinking their original suggestion was more in consonance with constitutional form.

In addition to the name mentioned last night, they suggested General Rafael Angeles, Chief of Artillery, Constitutionalist Army; Luis Cabrera; Ernesto Madero; and Bonilla, a member of Carranza’s Cabinet. They stated they would make inquiries of the Mexican delegates as to whether they thought these names would be satisfactory to all concerned, and would ask delegates for other names. They were unable to give whereabouts of several of persons named.

As to the reforms, they expressed themselves as willing to go as far as might be thought proper, having in mind that this remains the peculiar work of the Mexican people and government, but that the provisional government remains pledged to an immediate effort to solve the question desired, the guaranty of good faith in this to be found in the personnel of the provisional government.

Commissioners

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners. File No. 812.00/23452c.

[Document 767]

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 21, 1914.

In view of the commanding position the Constitutionalists have secured in Mexico and the necessity of considering the views of those whom they represent, the President suggests that you ask the Mediators whether they do not consider it advisable to renew the invitation to the Constitutionalists to send commissioners without attempting to define the scope of what is to be discussed and without reference to the suspension of hostilities. It is likely to involve many delays and uncertainties if the discussion is conducted without them, and it is extremely difficult to confer with them satisfactorily by indirect ways such as are open to us here.

Bryan.

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/23437.

[Document 768]

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

Niagara Falls, May 22, 1914.

Acting upon your telegram of 21st, we inquired of the Mediators whether they would not consider it advisable to renew the invitation to the Constitutionalists to send commissioners without attempting to define the scope of what was to be discussed and without reference to suspension of hostilities. After extended discussion the Mediators answered, individually and as a body, that as the Constitutionalists had definitely; declined the invitation personally extended to them and had declined to recognize anything except the issues between General Huerta and the United States as appropriate to mediation, all questions relative to reforms to be for the Constitutionalists themselves to determine, it would not be consistent with the honor of the nations represented by the Mediators nor with the dignity or prestige of the mediation itself to renew the invitation.

Commissioners

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/23439, 23441.

[Document 769]

[Untitled]

Niagara Falls, May 23, 1914.

At six o’clock the [second plenary] conference was opened with a statement by the Ambassador of Brazil that it had been called at the request of the Mexican delegates.

Thereupon Señor Rabasa said that they had been instructed to state at the first meeting where it could be done that General Huerta’s sole idea was the good of Mexico and that he was willing to resign if that would contribute to such an end, but that his resignation could only be upon the fixed condition that it would contribute to the establishment of firm government.

The American representatives expressed satisfaction at what had been stated by Señor Rabasa and inquired as to whether he was prepared at that time to discuss what he conceived to be the conditions which would establish a firm government.

Reply was made to this that the Mexican representatives heartily approved of their method of private conference with the Mediators and preferred to adopt that method of expressing their views upon that subject and having them communicated to the American representatives.

The American representatives then inquired as to whether there would be a public statement of General Huerta’s willingness to resign or whether it was desired by the Mexican representatives that the communication should be treated as confidential.

With great earnestness they insisted that they regarded it as of great importance that the matter should be treated as confidential.

The meeting then adjourned and the Mediators requested us to meet them again and the time was fixed for tonight at ten.

At this meeting the views of the Mediators, expressed with great earnestness, were as follows:

Mediation between the parties in Mexico is practically impossible while active hostilities are continued. A cessation of hostilities is therefore imperative, and this may be attained either by an armistice agreed to by the parties or by a general embargo against munitions of war, which would have the same practical effect.

General Huerta is represented before the Mediators, and the understanding is general that he will resign. His authority is weakened thereby, while General Carranza is strengthening day by day. The restraint of the mediation proceedings is operative only on the weaker party.

There is grave danger of anarchy in Mexico City as a consequence of the existing situation, which should be promptly met.

General Huerta will give way to a provisional president or junta, but there must be coincident with this an armistice or embargo to ensure respect for the provisional government. For General Huerta to resign without a provisional government to succeed at once, with moral support of armistice or embargo, is to incur the danger of anarchy.

Settlement is impossible if General Huerta is to continue operations in the field, unrestrained in any way and not committed to and even in advance repudiating any adjustment reached by the mediation.

The provisional government, whether a president or a junta of three or five, should be obtained by pursuing constitutional forms as far as possible and so not be a government imposed by strangers.

Above all things a truce of some kind is imperative. From now on, every success gained and every advance toward Mexico City made by General Carranza impairs the work of mediation, and his arrival in Mexico City before the work of mediation is accomplished means the end of it.

In connection with the first step, the establishment of a provisional government, there must be an armistice or what is equivalent thereto. Work of a permanent nature may then be taken up and carried as far as deemed appropriate.

Commissioners

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners. File No. 812.00/23452d.

[Document 770]

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 24, 1914.

The President directs me to say:

“It is clear to us that the representatives from Mexico are keenly aware that General Huerta no longer has the force or standing to insist on anything; and they of course cannot expect us to supply him with the force or influence he lacks. We get the impression that the Mexican representatives are chiefly anxious that we should by some means intervene to prevent the complete success of the revolution now in progress. We on our part cannot afford in right or conscience to do that and can act only in the spirit and for the purposes expressed in the propositions I shall presently state. We are encouraged by your dispatches to believe that the Mediators realize the situation in all its elements as fully as we do, as shown by their willingness that a representative of the Constitutionalist cause should exercise the powers of the provisional presidency and that a Constitutionalist should be chosen president at the elections which would follow. We appreciate this very much and see in it a great hope for a logical and complete settlement.

“Please present to the Mediators as you have occasion and in the way you think best the following considerations and conclusions, by which we feel that we must be guided.

First. We can deal only with the facts in Mexico as they now stand. Concerning them it is too late to exercise any choice or effect any change.

Second. We must deal with those facts if possible and get our solution out of them without the use of the armed forces of the United States.

Third. The elimination of Huerta by one process or another, is now clearly inevitable, the only question remaining being the method, the occasion and the circumstances of his elimination.

Fourth. The object of our conferences now is to find a method by which the inevitable can be accomplished without further bloodshed. By the inevitable we mean not only the elimination of Huerta but the completion of the revolution by the transfer of political power from Huerta to those who represent the interests and aspirations of the people whose forces are now in the ascendency.

Fifth. To attempt to put a stop to the present processes of revolution before we have a peaceful method to suggest would be impracticable and futile because based upon no definite programme. It would, moreover, in all probability very soon force active intervention upon us and delay and confuse all we have hoped for.

Sixth. We can at the present stage of things do little more than set the stage for a settlement and demand guaranties that a settlement will be effected. Before we can insist on the acceptance of anything by the Constitutionalists, even the cessation of arms, we must know what it is that we are to insist that they accept. The whole settlement obviously depends, if there is to be no force used by the United States, on the acceptance of the programme by the Carrancistas. The use of force by the United States against them could be justified only by their rejection of terms of such a character that refusal on their part to accept them would be clearly indefensible, terms which meant the full attainment of the just objects of the revolution without further bloodshed.

Seventh. We are inclined to believe that it would be unwise to attempt to work out the details of the reforms involved anywhere but at Mexico City and through the proposed provisional government.

“We suggest that a prompt agreement upon a clear programme which the Constitutionalists can accept is the best and only way to stop the process of arms.”

Bryan.

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/23444.

[Document 771]

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Niagara Falls, May 25, 1914.

In your telegram of the 24th you suggested that we submit to the Mediators, in the manner we thought best, the points therein mentioned. After discussing it among ourselves and in view of matters hereafter to be stated, we deemed it advisable not to read to the Mediators either the telegram or extracts from it but arranged for a meeting at ten p.m. We then stated to the Mediators that because of the consequences to which it might lead and the responsibilities that might be involved, the President could not accede to their plan of securing an armistice or forcing an embargo, but that he recognized that their suggestion for the withdrawal of Huerta and the appointment of a provisional government composed of Constitutionalists contained the germ of a plan that should be successful where all were interested in the speedy cessation of arms.

We further stated that we did not desire to invade the province of the Mediators and would not at this time undertake to outline any plan unless they themselves desired us to do so. After considerable discussion among themselves they requested that we make any suggestions as a basis for discussion in which each one could frankly and without being committed feel at liberty to propose whatever might occur to him. Though they did not express themselves they were evidently disappointed at the failure to secure an armistice.* * * Notwithstanding their disappointment they agreed that we might give to the press a statement that they had heretofore made suggestions as to a plan of adjustment but that we, after correspondence with Washington, had made other suggestions and that the matter was hopeful and proceeding favorably. They then proposed that we meet the next day at three to begin formulating a plan.

We beg to call to your attention that in the minutes prepared by their secretaries of the meetings of the full conference—which means the Mediators, the Mexican representatives and ourselves—they uniformly speak of the Mexican representatives as the representatives of the Mexican Government.* * * We deem it proper to submit this matter for your consideration.

Commissioners

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners. File No. 812.00/23444

[Document 772]

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 26, 1914.

By way of comment on several passages of your telegram of the 25th and for the purpose of clearing up as many points as possible, the President directs me to say:

“We have not proposed or contemplated a direct transfer of government from Huerta to Carranza. On the contrary we think a provisional government necessary. At the same time it is evident to us that the preponderant influence in such a government would of necessity in the circumstances be with the Constitutionalists. Perhaps a single provisional president is preferable to a commission, in Which case the single man would of necessity be a Constitutionalist as we view the present conditions. What influences our thought and our preference in this matter is entirely the state of the facts and the method of dealing with them in such a way as to carry out a programme of peace and accommodation. Events have moved very fast and very far since mediation was agreed upon and we are endeavoring to interpret these events and to adjust each step to a programme of peace rather than of coercion, feeling that a programme which necessitated intervention and coercion would involve the interests, the welfare and the pride of the Mexican people much more deeply than an accommodation with the Constitutionalists carried out upon equitable terms. Even the occupation of Vera Cruz seemed for a little while to bring the danger of war with a whole people. The scope of the present negotiations has broadened in the view of the whole world and with the approbation of all who are concerned for the most permanent interests of America. We believe that this is the point of view from which the Mediators are handling the matter.”

Request a correction of the minutes to read “Mexican representatives “or some equivalent phrase instead of “representatives of the Mexican Government.” We do not feel that we would be justified even in this indirect way in being drawn into an apparent recognition of the government at Mexico City.

Bryan.

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/234.45.

[Document 773]

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Niagara Falls, N. Y., May 26, 1914.

At the meeting this morning, the Mediators submitted as a basis of discussion, the following proposition: In order to conform as far as possible to the existing Constitution, General Huerta should appoint a person as Minister for Foreign Relations, submit his resignation to the Congress and turn over the reins of government to the Minister for Foreign Relations, who would appoint a Cabinet of four to constitute Board of Provisional Government.

This Board to be composed of one Huertista, one Constitutionalist, two neutrals.

From the neutrals the Provisional Government was to be chosen.

A general absolute amnesty to be declared.

The Board promptly to call an election for President and Congress, in accordance with the existing Constitution; the election to be held under the Act of May 1912, which they are informed was adopted at the instance of the Maderista [administration]and [charges]the head of the government with the selection of electors and provides for direct vote for President.

Board to be requested to devote special attention to the agrarian question, electoral legislation, compulsory primary and agricultural education, organization of schools and experimental institutions, and would be also requested to institute steps for the creation of international commission looking to the settlement of claims of foreigners for damages due to military acts or the acts of nation authorities, and settlement of the claims of Mexicans.

United States to agree not to present claims for war indemnity.

Provisional government to be recognized by the United States and A. B. C. countries.

American forces to withdraw within fifteen days after the Board gives notice of its organization, the evacuation to be completed within thirty days unless the provisional government consents to an extension.

Discussion principally devoted to the first two propositions, they urging that the provisional government remain composed of all elements, and we insisting that the value of that fair proposition depended upon whether it would be acceptable to the Constitutionalists, who must now be recognized as the victorious force. They evidently objected to a transfer to a person recognized as the representative of Carranza, one of them stating that while it was not inconsistent with mediation to adopt a plan based on the recognition of all the contending revolutionary forces, yet to consent to a transfer to a representative of Carranza might appear to be an encouragement to revolution and he himself might feel bound to inquire of his own government whether he could consent to such a plan. In any event he stated that it would require serious consideration as to whether the transfer to Carrancista was within the spirit of the original proposal by them and accepted by Huerta and the United States.

In the informal discussion we urged that the urgent demands of the situation to prevent bloodshed as well as the permanent peace of Mexico might be better served by transferring the government to a provisional president instead of a board with divided responsibility and weaker executive action. They urged that this provisional government was only to be in power for a short time and was appointed more in the nature of satisfying all parties than with a view of anything it could do in the short period of its existence. In answer to which we urged that under the most favorable conditions the situation required a man of great ability to maintain order and deal with the problems incident to the transfer of authority, to say nothing of the difficulties incident to the disbandment of troops and return to their vocations. There was a lengthy exchange of views, but on these points we made little progress, the discussion in every instance returning to the matter of names, as to which they made no suggestions beyond those previously mentioned.

We adjourned to continue the discussion tomorrow.

We think it possible differences as to Mediators’ first and second propositions may be adjusted by agreement as to the personnel of provisional government without attempt to classify according to parties. The same man or men might be acceptable to all elements.

Commissioners

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners. File No. 812.00/23445.

[Document 774]

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 27, 1914.

The President directs me to say:

“We are seriously disappointed by the character of the proposals outlined in your dispatch of the 26th. We have reason to believe that the acceptance by Huerta of such a plan as that proposed could have been secured by this Government some months ago.

“The most serious and pressing question with regard to any plan, the question by which it must, whatever our preference, be tested, is this: Who would put it into operation if the victorious party refused to accept it? We are of necessity seeking a solution which is practicable as well as just, and likely to yield the results we have all along had in mind. Our object is the pacification of Mexico by reforms and changes instituted by her own leaders and accepted by her own people. A provisional arrangement established by force, especially if established by the force of the United States, would inevitably be temporary and the prelude to other revolutions. Certain things are clearly inevitable in Mexico as things now stand, whether we act or not. One of these is the elimination of Huerta. Another is resistance, and successful resistance, to any arrangement which can be made to seem to be a continuation of the Huerta régime.

“It would, in our judgment, be futile to set up a provisional authority which would be neutral. It must, to be successful, be actually, avowedly and sincerely in favor of the necessary agrarian and political reforms, and it must be pledged to their immediate formulation, not merely ‘requested to devote special attention’ to them.

“And it will be impossible for the United States to withdraw her hand until this Government is finally and fully satisfied that the programme contemplated will be carried out in all respects.

“We are putting these conclusions bluntly, not in the form, of course, in which we wish you to present them to the Mediators, but flatly for the sake of clearness.

“The case lies in our mind thus: the success of the Constitutionalists is now inevitable. The only question we can now answer without armed intervention on the part of the United States is this: Can t!>3 result be moderated; how can it be brought about without further bloodshed; what provisional arrangement can be made which will temper the whole process and lead to the elections in a way that will be hopeful of peace and permanent accommodation? If we do not successfully answer these questions, then the settlement must come by arms, either ours or those of the Constitutionalists.

“Every plan suggested must, therefore, of necessity be subjected to the test of these questions. We will not make war on the Mexican people to force upon them a plan of our own based upon a futile effort to give a defeated party equality with a victorious party. The whole present hopeful effort for peace would fall to pieces were we to attempt it.

“Confidentially we suggest that the Mexican representatives, being Científicos, are making a last desperate attempt to save their privileges from the reforms which the Carrancistas would certainly insist on. It is too late to save that régime. If we went in our ourselves we would not try to save it. It seems plain to us that their real interest lies in as early a settlement as possible and at our hands rather than at the hands of Carranza. Delay is likely to be fatal to them. It may be worth considering whether Huerta’s pride might be saved by resigning in favor of his present Foreign Minister and letting him do the rest.”

Bryan.

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/23446.

[Document 775]

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Prospect House,
Niagara Falls, N.Y., May 28, 1914.

We had not received your telegram of the 27th when we had a conference in Toronto yesterday. We then called attention to the many and serious objections to the appointment of a provisional government the majority of whose names are neutral, urging that the Huertista approval of such a plan would be purchased at the expense of the hostility of the Constitutionalists who claimed that their success entitled them to the sole power and who in justice were certainly entitled to the preponderance of authority.

They stated that we had misunderstood their proposals 2 and 324 as would be demonstrated by analyzing the political complexion of the names they had previously proposed, one of whom, Lascurain, was a Constitutionalist and by virtue of his position as Foreign Relations Minister was now in law entitled to be provisional president; General Angeles was now in the Constitutionalist Army; Rivero was an appointee of Madero as Minister to Argentina, resigned when Huerta came into power and ought to be acceptable to the Constitutionalists; Carbajal, appointed President of the Supreme Court by Diaz, they understood was in sentiment a neutral and they thought ought to be acceptable to all parties; they had been informed that Delama, the only Huertista, was a moderate who earnestly favored settlement of the present problems. They argued that it was not necessary in making the appointment to designate the names of the factions to which the men had belonged if they were of a character that would tend to secure the desired end and were otherwise satisfactory to the parties to the mediation.

We incline to think that the men to constitute the provisional government might be agreed upon if we disregarded classification and division among various elements and undertook to select individuals to constitute it. Would any of the five names suggested be satisfactory? What names could we suggest?

The discussion on the subject above indicated continued until we were obliged to adjourn in order to attend the official reception which had carried us to Toronto.

In view of previous conversations with the Mediators individually and in conference, we hope to be able to substitute “pledged “for “requested.”

When the Mediators suggested evacuation at the end of 15 days we at once urged that this would leave only a paper plan with nothing to guarantee its enforcement and exposing the country to the turmoils attendant upon the transfer to the provisional government whose ability to preserve peace and conduct the election safely depended solely upon the willingness of the Mexican people to have the plan of pacification carried into effect. The interest of all concerned therefore demanded that the evacuation should not be made until after the election has been held and the regular government was in operation. They thought this objection was answered by the provision that the withdrawal should be within the 45 days unless the provisional government consented to an extension of time and that extension definite or indefinite might be left to the decision of the provisional government which they assume to be in sympathy with the fundamental idea and disposed to act in accordance with the best interests of the Mexican people. That feature not having been discussed by us with you in Washington and not knowing the President’s wishes in the matter we were not in a position to do more than to suggest general considerations of international difficulties having regard to the desire of the United States to, secure the interest of the people of Mexico without intervention. In our next discussion on that point, shall we suggest that this feature be eliminated altogether from the plan or that it be left for settlement by the United States and the provisional government or by the United States and the government established after the election?

While this telegram is being put in code we have a visit from the Ambassador of Brazil, who suggests that as it has not been decided whether the provisional board should consist of three or four or any other definite number, it might be advisable to request both the Huertistas and Carrancistas to designate names fitted in character and ability to appointment on such a board, the Mediators to select the third, or third and fourth man, as the case might be, so as to give the preponderance to the provisional government.

Commissioners

24 See the Commissioners’ telegram of May 26.

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners. File No. 812.00/23446. 23452g.

[Document 776]

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 29, 1914.

The President directs me to say:

“In reply to your despatch of the 28th, we call attention to the letter25 sent today by special messenger to the Mediators by the authority of Carranza asking that the Constitutionalists be admitted to representation in the conference. Time will be gained by waiting to arrange this and all the processes of the mediation will be facilitated by the admission of representatives of Carranza. We assume that they will of course be admitted.

“In the meantime, we suggest that the appointment of a foreign minister by Huerta to succeed him might raise questions very embarrassing to this Government as it would also certainly meet with strong objection from the Constitutionalists. It is doubtful whether it would be wise for this Government to recognize the legal right of Huerta in this or any other detail or particular of the plan to be agreed upon. Another process would answer the same purpose. Huerta and his present foreign minister could resign by agreement and Lascurain could succeed him as if by right, he having last year foregone the succession under duress when Madero was displaced, and it could be agreed upon and stipulated that Lascurain should then appoint as minister of foreign affairs and immediately give way to a person agreed upon between this Government and the Mediators who should then be supported as constitutional president ad interim, administer the government and formulate and promulgate the reforms pending the election.

“The more we consider this difficult matter the more clear the difficulty grows of finding men for a board or commission among whom the intimate relations of mutual confidence and cheerful cooperation could be successfully established which will be necessary for their task. But it might be wise to associate with the provisional president a board of three persons to be agreed upon who would have charge and superintendence of the elections but not be permitted to share the powers of the presidency. You will see that the perplexities of the situation have turned our thoughts back to the idea of the Mediators that there should be a single provisional president and to our preference for a provisional government disconnected from both the Huerta régime and the previous régime.

“We agree with you that the most practical course is to select persons and not attempt to define the factions they represent or even go on the theory that they do represent factions. We will give our immediate and careful attention to the discussion of names and hope that the Mediators will be patient with apparent delay and great deliberation in this matter, perhaps the most critical of all.

“It should be agreed and stipulated that neither the provisional president nor any member of the provisional government should be a candidate at the elections.

“As we said in our last, it seems to us absolutely essential that the provisional government should be explicitly pledged and bound to undertake the reforms without which no settlement can last six months.

“The question of our evacuation should be left to be discussed and agreed upon between this Government and the government to be created at Mexico City, whether the provisional government, which might need our support and be conscious that it needed it, or the regularly constituted government which would succeed it after the elections.”

Please insist most earnestly to Mediators that a peaceful settlement is the supreme object of our efforts and that no formalities or technicalities should be permitted to interfere. We are not dealing with ideal conditions but with conditions as they are and no progress can be made toward a peaceful settlement of the Mexican situation without considering the opinions and wishes of the Constitutionalists. If they are not there to speak for themselves the burden of conferring with them is thrown upon us with consequent delay in addition to the feeling which refusal of representation is sure to arouse.

You will therefore urge representation of Constitutionalists even though they insist upon conditions which may seem unreasonable. When they become acquainted with the Mediators and see with what patriotism, patience and unselfishness they are working they will catch the spirit and grow more trustful and accommodating.

Assure the Mediators of the President’s profound appreciation of their labors and say that he advises them freely because of his desire to render them every possible assistance.

Bryan.

25 Inclosure 8 in the Commissioners’ despatch No. 8 of May 31.

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/23451.

[Document 777]

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Niagara Falls, N. Y., May 30, 1914.

We have learned from the Mediators that tire Mexican delegates have a telegram, date not designated, urging that a protocol be completed and signed as soon as possible, because of the danger from the advancing Constitutionalists. The Mediators themselves insist, however, that Carranza’s present willingness to come into the conference is because of his want of ammunition which they say is the reason why he has not followed up his advantage by marching toward Mexico City. At the same time they urge that his purpose in coming into the conference is to secure delay. We infer that they will object to the admission of a Carranza representative unless there is during the mediation a cessation of arms.

Commissioners

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners. File No. 812.00/23452h.

[Document 778]

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 30, 1914.

If Mediators insist upon armistice—which you think possible—call their attention to the fact that the Convention signed at The Hague in 1907 specifically states that mediation does not suspend hostilities unless suspension is provided for by special agreement. This can only be construed as meaning that the suspension of hostilities ought not to be insisted upon. It is all right where both parties are willing but a demand for an armistice should not be permitted to prevent mediation.

Referring to the request of the Mexican representatives for an early signing of a protocol, it might be well to remind them that it is impossible to agree upon a protocol until the Mediators have arrived at a plan which promises to restore permanent peace. If Huerta is willing to retire now, there is no objection to his doing so. He can turn the government over to anyone whom he pleases and leave the country. The mediation can then proceed, Huerta’s appointee surrendering to the man selected by the Mediators when mediation is completed.

Bryan.

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12130.

[Document 779]

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

No. 8.] Niagara Falls, N. Y., May 31, 1914.

Sir: We met the Mediators at half past nine last evening and they informed us that they had not yet finally determined their course with respect to the letter26 of May 28 from Mr. Zubáran acting on behalf of General Carranza, but they had determined that they would not admit representatives of General Carranza to the mediation except upon the conditions upon which the other parties had appeared, one of these, and a very practical one, being consent to an armistice pending the mediation. The Hague agreement they said did not apply here, inasmuch as the Mediators at the very start had made the suspension of hostilities a condition of using their friendly offices to bring about a solution of the difficulties between the parties, and we understood from them that this condition was one imposed upon them by the Governments they represented.

They submitted to us a copy of the letter sent by Mr. Zubáran and suggested that it indicated a refusal by General Carranza in any event to accept the mediation as applicable to anything except the Tampico incident and matters immediately related thereto. We enclose a copy of the Zubáran letter.26

As supporting their suggestion they called particular attention to the Washington correspondence on page five of the New York Times of May 30th, 1914,27 in which it is stated that General Carranza is willing to accept mediation as to— 1. The Tampico flag incident.

2. The arrest of the American mail orderly at Vera Cruz.

3. The censorship of the despatch sent by Secretary Bryan to the American Chargé d’Affaires.

4. The American occupation of Vera Cruz.

5. The demand of the United States for the retirement of General Huerta.

It is further stated in the article that General Carranza has not been willing to accept mediation of problems internal in their nature, as— 1. The establishment of a new provisional government in Mexico.

2. The settlement of the land question.

3. The recognition, through mediation, of the validity of the acts, loans and debts of the Huerta régime, or in any way make them binding upon the new government in Mexico.

The Mediators evidently regarded this article as an inspired one and argued that so long as General Carranza held to these views it would only retard progress to admit his representatives to the mediation. They pointed also to the publication in this same issue of the Times of the full correspondence between themselves and General Carranza as evidence of a purpose on his part to make manifest and emphasize the fact that from the beginning he had refused mediation as to any internal or other than strictly international questions or problems.

They were willing to receive the Carranza representatives at any time if they came in as the other parties had done.

They had not yet made any answer to Mr. Zubáran’s letter nor determined what kind of answer to make, but expressed the hope that their suspension of this would not delay proceedings as between the parties to the conference.

They argued that if the parties represented reached an agreement General Carranza must accept the result, as it would secure the retirement of General Huerta and the establishment of a provisional government in which the Constitutionalists would be predominant and which would be pledged to the needed internal reforms. So there would be no occasion for a continuance of hostilities as the immediate objects of the revolution would have been attained. Furthermore they argued that this settlement having been reached, and the provisional government having been recognized by Argentina, Brazil, Chile and the United States, the other nations would also recognize it and General Carranza would not then be able to maintain himself, if he attempted to do so, against the provisional government.

We argued that it would be wise, in any event, to admit General Carranza without terms as to his appearance, inasmuch as mediation did not assume to compel the parties, but only to persuade or induce them to agreement, and the moral stress upon General Carranza to concur in any agreement reached by the other parties would be much greater if he had had an opportunity to be heard.

We are confronted with the possibility of a conclusion of the mediation in which General Carranza does not concur, and which may result in the establishment of a provisional government in which the Carrancistas predominate and which, although the result of the mediation, may decline to accept results of that mediation other than those it deems to be international in their character and may object to all else as an interference with the internal affairs of Mexico and an impairment of her autonomy and sovereignty.

As the negotiations proceed and the situation develops, the personnel of the provisional government becomes a question of increasing difficulty, delicacy and importance.

The land question may be pressed upon us at any meeting. We should therefore like suggestions as to how far we are to discuss this. Obviously the details of land legislation, if to be undertaken now; or even a statement of the general principles of such legislation, requires a knowledge of Mexican conditions we do not possess. We feel the need of expert assistance and would like suggestions comprehensive and explicit as may be.

It has been suggested to us that the provisional government should do something in the way of promulgating and furthering the needed reforms. How far is it desired this government should go? We have in mind that the provisional government is a transient institution and an executive rather than a legislative authority, there being as we understand no congress now in existence which our Government recognizes as legitimate. If we are mistaken as to this we would like to be corrected. How far can the provisional government, which has no legislative authority, bind or in any wise affect the action of the full constitutional government which is, as the result of an election, to succeed the provisional government? The members of the provisional government may, we understand, pledge themselves to use their influence to accomplish prescribed reforms, but is it intended that they may make orders or ordinances that will constrain the action of the permanent constitutional government inaugurated by the Mexican people in consequence of the election for which the provisional is to make proper arrangements?

The work grows as we proceed with it, and we desire to keep you fully advised and to get your views as to the various phases of the case as they present themselves and press for attention.

We have [etc.]

J. R. Lamar.

F. W. Lehmann.

[Inclosure 1—Telegram.]

File No. 812.001/12130.

The Mediators to General Carranza.

Washington, April 29, 1914.

We, the plenipotentiaries of Brazil, Argentina and Chile, have been authorized by our respective Governments to offer our good offices to all the parties interested in a friendly and peaceful solution of the conflict between the United States and Mexico. In informing the Chief Commander of the Constitutionalist forces of this fact we trust that, if he accepts in principle our good offices in case his patriotic sentiments should lead him to do it, he will empower us to enter later into the details of the negotiations. We take the liberty to send you directly this communication after having attempted unsuccessfully for several days to communicate it to you through the Constitutionalist agents in Washington.

D. Da Gama, Ambassador of Brazil.

E. Suarez Mujica, Minister of Chile.

R. S. Naón, Minister of Argentina.

[Inclosure 2—Telegram.]

General Carranza to the Mediators.

Chihuahua, April 29, 1914.

I thank you very sincerely for the offer you have made to me in the name of your respective Governments to use your good offices with a view to solving, through friendly and peaceful means, the pending conflict between the United States and Mexico. Making use of the powers vested in my capacity of First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army, I accept in principle the good offices of Brazil, Argentina and Chile, offered to Mexico through your worthy conduct. Leaving for a later time to enter into details of the negotiations, I have the honor to express to you my sentiments of appreciation and high consideration.

V. Carranza.

[Inclosure 3—Telegram.]

The Mediators to General Carranza.

Washington, April 30, 1914.

We have been very pleased to receive your courteous telegram accepting our good offices, which are now accepted by the three parties in a friendly and peaceful solution of the pending conflict between Mexico and the United States. As a consequence of your acceptance it would be necessary to suspend from now on, and during the time that the mediation action develops, all hostilities and military operations by all of the contending parties, for it will doubtless be improper that discussions by means of which we are trying to reach a final solution, and in which the whole world, especially America, have placed their hope, should be disturbed by the painful spectacle of bloody warfare. Please accept the expression of our highest consideration.

Da Gama. Naón.

Suarez Mujica.

[Inclosure 4—Telegram.]

The Mediators to General Carranza.

Washington, May 2, 1914.

Regardless of the answer we await to our telegram dated April 30, we have the honor to manifest to you that, our good offices having been accepted by all the parties interested in the friendly and peaceful solution of the conflict between Mexico and the United States, the time has come when it is necessary to make these negotiations formal. For this purpose it is necessary that each one of the parties should appoint a representative before the Mediators, with a view to proceed to the discussion of the basis of the agreement. Please advise us at your earliest convenience when you have your representatives appointed, and as soon as this is done we will immediately communicate to you the date and the place for the inauguration of the conference.

Da Gama.

Naón.

Suarez Mujica.

[Inclosure 5—Telegram.]

General Carranza to the Mediators.

Chihuahua, May 3, 1914.

I have the honor to refer to your message of yesterday. Having accepted in principle the good offices of the nations which you so worthily represent, I take the liberty now to ask you to be kind enough to make definite the points which are to be covered by said good offices in the pending conflict between the United States and Mexico, so that I may appoint a representative with due authorization.

V. Carranza.

[Inclosure 6—Telegram.]

General Carranza to the Mediators.

Chihuahua, May 3, 1914.

I take pleasure in addressing you again to answer your kind message of yesterday relative to the armistice, and I beg to say that the international conflict between the United States and Mexico (this conflict having been intentionally brought about by Huerta, and for the solution of which I hastened to accept in the principle the good offices of Brazil, Argentina and Chile) is independent of our internal struggle for liberty and right.

I therefore deem it inadvisable for the Constitutionalist cause, which I represent, to suspend hostilites and military operations, because such suspension would only accrue to the benefit of Huerta. The civil war in Mexico between the usurper Huerta and the army under my command, that is to say, the people of Mexico in arms, must continue with all activity so as to reestablish the interrupted constitutional regime as soon as possible, and consequently to obtain peace.

In view of this fact I beg you to be kind enough to excuse me for not accepting the armistice which you have thought convenient to propose to me, and I also beg you to see in this action determination on my part to do whatever is best in the interests of my own country.

V. Carranza.

[Inclosure 7—Telegram.]

The Mediators to General Carranza.

Washington, May 3, 1914.

We have received your courteous telegraphic message of yesterday [to-day?]in which you inform us that you deem it inadvisable for the Constitutionalist cause to suspend hostilities against General Huerta because such suspension would benefit the latter only and in which you state that the international conflict between Mexico and the United States, for the solution of which you accepted our good offices, is independent of the internal strife in Mexico. We consider this unexpected declaration incompatible with the purpose which prompted our tender of good offices. We believe, indeed, that all difficulties which have contributed to bring about the present situation of Mexico, directly or indirectly affect the solution of the conflict pending between Mexico and the United States, and consequently we understand that they must be made the subject-matter of consideration in the settlement of negotiations for the full success of which we have deemed the suspension of hostilities to be indispensable. If you should not so understand, we should be compelled to withdraw as inefficacious our invitation to appoint Representatives of the Constitutionalist Party to attend these negotiations. We greet you with all our consideration.

D. da Gama, Ambassador Brazil.

R. S. Naón, Minister Argentina.

E. Suárez Mujica, Minister Chile.

[Inclosure 8—Translation.]

Señor R. Zubáran Capmany, representing General Carranza, to the Mediators.

Washington, May 28, 1914.

Your Excellencies: The undersigned, the special representative of the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Government of Mexico, Venustiano Carranza, following express instructions, has the honor to communicate to your excellency, the Ambassador of Brazil, and your excellencies, the Ministers of Chile and Argentina, the following:

Prompted by a noble desire to solve in an amicable and peaceful manner the conflict pending between the United States and the Mexican Nation, your excellencies addressed the Government of the United States, General Huerta and the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army, tendering your good offices and inviting each of the interested parties to appoint representatives for the purpose of discussing the details of the negotiations.

The Chief of the Constitutionalist Government, greatly appreciating the good wishes and sympathy of the sister Republics of the American continent, accepted28 the tender29 in principle, and, owing to the complexity of the situation in Mexico, he’ deemed it necessary to request your excellencies to define the scope of the proposed mediation, to the end that he might appoint duly authorized representatives.30

Without having received a specific reply to this inquiry, the Chief of the Constitutionalist Government was notified that if hostilities against Huerta were not suspended—which proposed suspension he deemed to be inconsistent with his duties to the people of Mexico—your excellencies would be compelled to withdraw as inefficacious the invitation to him to appoint representatives.31

He is now informed that the mediation conferences have been taking place for some time, with representatives of the Huerta Government participating in the deliberations, and he regrets that efforts should have been made and continue to be made to solve the conflict between the United States and Mexico without taking into consideration the fact that the Constitutionalist cause, which he represents, has the support of a majority of the inhabitants of Mexico and has the largest armed forces within the Republic, and that these forces, acting under his command, have been able to recover from the power of Huerta, since the initiation of the mediation, the cities of Monterey, Tampico and Saltillo, with the adjoining territory, and the Territory of Tepic.

Under these circumstances, the Chief of the Constitutionalist Government finds himself compelled to state to your excellencies, with all the respect and consideration due your high offices, that he considers the said conflict should not be the subject of negotiations at the mediation conferences in the absence of representatives of the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army.

The undersigned avails [etc.]

R. Zubáran Capmany.

26 Inclosure 8.

26 Inclosure 8.

27 Inclosures 1–7.

28 Inclosure 2.

29 Inclosure 1.

30 Inclosure 5.

31 Inclosure 7.

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners. File No. 812.00/23451.

[Document 780]

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 31, 1914.

This Government is seriously disturbed by the attitude of the Mediators with regard to admitting representatives of the Constitutionalists to the conference, and it wishes in particular most respectfully but most earnestly to protest against the apparent willingness of the Mediators to base their conclusion in this extremely important matter on newspaper articles or upon impressions derived from unauthoritative sources which they suspect to be inspired. Nothing could be so unsafe or so full of serious risk as that. Representation of the Constitutionalists in the conference is not only desirable, it seems to us all but essential to the success of the conference. The pacification of Mexico cannot be hoped for or secured unless the leaders of the revolution assent to the plan suggested by the Mediators. The mere fact that General Carranza has now sent an agent to Niagara Falls seeking admission to the conference, in spite of his earlier refusal to do so, seems to us to show very clearly that he did not at first realize the scope that was to be given to the discussion and to the plan to be proposed, and that it is just because that scope is so inclusive of everything he is interested in that he wishes admission. It is evidence of good faith, for if he participates he will be under the stronger compulsion before all the world to accept the results. Nothing that has come to our knowledge either directly or indirectly would justify the suspicions or the distrust which seems to have taken such deep root in the minds of the Mediators. If the representative of the Constitutionalists is not admitted to the conference we shall have to constitute ourselves judges of what would be just to them and reasonable to expect them to accept without any adequate means of forming the judgment. They might insist upon less, if consulted directly by the Mediators, than we would in the present circumstances think it fair to insist upon for them. We do not mean to say that the continued refusal of the Mediators to receive the representative of the Constitutionalists would necessarily render the conclusions of the conference impracticable and futile; but it would certainly deprive the Mediators of the approval and support of public opinion in this country, which they now enjoy in so gratifying a degree, and would darken the whole outcome with doubt and searching criticism. We would deeply deplore any conclusion which might even seem to throw the least doubt upon the impartiality of the Mediators by any circumstances which we could not heartily justify or successfully explain away.

Upon another matter: It is clear to this Government that its representatives would not be justified in signing minutes which described the present Mexican delegates as Representatives of the United Mexican States or of the Mexican Government, though we should be quite willing to have them spoken of as the Representatives of General Huerta or of the Government of General Huerta or of the Government at Mexico City, or by some equivalent description. We do not see how it would be consistent with the present attitude of the Governments of Brazil, Argentina and Chile towards the de facto government at Mexico City to go any further, inasmuch as their attitude is exactly the same as that of the Government of the United States, to our great gratification, a circumstance which happily made it possible for us to accept their gracious offer of mediation.

Bryan.

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/23453.

[Document 781]

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Niagara Falls, June 1, 1914.

We have just returned from a meeting and while we can report some change in the position of the Mediators we do not know that it means any lessening of the practical difficulty.

We pressed with earnestness the views expressed in your telegram and the danger of mistake in construing Carranza’s letter by newspaper articles.

They replied that their construction was borne out by the words of the Zubáran letter itself.

To this we replied that we found in it no protest; that the American Government construed the letter as indicating Carranza’s willingness to come into the mediation because it was so inclusive of everything in which he was interested and considered the fact that he wished admission to be an evidence of his good faith.

They replied that if there was any doubt as to what the letter meant, the doubt could easily be removed by an explicit statement.

We urged that they must bear in mind Carranza’s position as a leader of a revolutionary army and that they could not expect him to make a statement that would seriously weaken him at home, and that the Mediators had resolved the doubt against Carranza and had indicated an unwillingness to answer his letter or give him an opportunity to say what it meant.

One of them suggested that a reply might be written stating that his letter had been received and found to be susceptible of different constructions and inquiring how they were to understand it, and if he was willing to have all matters mediated.

They said that since the mediation began there had been such a change in affairs as to make an armistice now essential by all the parties to the mediation and that they could not undertake mediation with its consequent delay while Carranza was advancing on one of the parties who had agreed to an armistice. They claimed that the mediation would not only be futile but that they would be put in a ridiculous position if Carranza should take Mexico City while the mediation was in progress and be a party to it.

One of them suggested that the difficulties arising out of delay might be met if Carranza assented to the scope of the mediation and came in with the understanding that it should be completed within a given number of days, during which time an armistice should be declared.

They stated that they desired to be explicitly understood as being willing and anxious to have Carranza a party to the mediation if he would assent to the conditions above referred to.

We said that the American Government was urging the vital importance of having Carranza a party in order to secure the pacification of Mexico; that it considered his presence was so essential to success of mediation that it could consistently and earnestly ask the Mediators to be astute in removing obstacles and devising methods by which Carranza would be brought in as a party and thus bound by the plan that might ultimately be adopted.

The Mediators constantly urged the serious consequence that might arise from delay, and urged that they fear the inevitable result of Carranza being admitted will bring about delay, and they expressed the constant fear that unless matters are speeded Carranza will be in Mexico City before the mediation is completed.

Prompt progress in agreeing upon terms of the mediation may have the advantage of aiding us to secure now assent to terms which would not be acceptable after Carranza had come in. It is possible that it might be advisable for us to agree now on as many details as possible, because Carranza and Huerta might themselves object to some conditions which the United States may regard as essential.

In the light of our meeting this morning we are disposed to think the next step might be to ask the Mediators to promptly write a letter to Zubáran, who could then reply in the light of the facts we have reported.

Commissioners

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/23455.

[Document 782]

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Niagara Falls, June 2, 1914.

We have just returned from a conference where we expressed the hope that the Mediators would as soon as possible reply to the Zubáran communication. The Mediators stated they had already drafted such a letter and read it to us.32 We found it to be couched in the most courteous terms, stating substantially that they wrote to inquire whether they were to understand that the Chief of the Constitutionalist Army desired to have a representative in the conference on the terms stated in the original correspondence and asking that if such was his intention he appoint delegates as soon as possible.

The Mediators then inquired if we were willing to continue the discussion of the plan written by the Mediators. We assented and it was finally agreed that we should put their plan in one column and in another parallel column our modifications, suggestions or substitutes, as a working basis for future discussions. This will require us to present something concrete and we should be glad for you to have the double column prepared.

Commissioners

32 The letter as sent is inclosed with Mr. Dodge’s No. 16 of June 13, post.

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners. File No. 812.00/23455a.

[Document 783]

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

[Extract]

Department of State,
Washington, June 3, 1914.

To the Commissioners: While the Mediators are debating the admission of a representative of the revolutionists, we take the opportunity of setting the whole matter under discussion at Niagara in its full light as it appears to this Government, a light which to us grows clearer every day.

The attitude of the Mediators toward the revolutionists seems to us to indicate as nothing else has their point of view and the radical error of that point of view. They seem to have conceived their outlined plan and to have conducted their discussions with you on the theory that it is the’ Constitutionalists who must be made to yield to the arrangement agreed upon, whereas it is obviously Huerta and the whole body of persons who in any degree support or sympathize with him who must be made to yield.

The discussion does not now turn upon terms of accommodation between the United States and Huerta. At the very outset it was understood and it is now obvious to the whole world that Huerta must be eliminated and with him his whole regime. The problem is how peace is to be secured for Mexico, and that means simply this: How is the triumph of the Constitutionalist party, which is now clearly triumphant, to be accepted and established without further bloodshed? Or, to put it differently, How are representatives of that party to be placed in control of the government under conditions which can be approved and assented to and earnestly pressed for acceptance by the Government of the United States?

We are not seeking a plan which we would be willing to enforce by arms, but a plan which will promptly bring peace and a government which we can recognize and deal with. Recognition or non-recognition is the only means of compulsion we have in mind. A plan which would require the backing of force would if acted on do Mexico more harm than good and would postpone peace indefinitely, not secure it.

With these thoughts and conclusions constantly in view—which we have urged repeatedly and from the first—we feel obliged to say that we could not consider the recognition of a provisional government made up in any part of neutrals. There can be no such persons in Mexico among men of force and character. All men of real stuff must have taken sides in one way or another and those who call themselves neutrals are quite certainly partisans of the kind of order and supremacy which Huerta tried to establish, whether they adhere to Huerta personally or not. We are convinced that peace can be secured only by facing the inevitable and facing it promptly and with the utmost frankness.

The plan, therefore, should be of this sort: an avowed Constitutionalist of undoubted character and ability, other than Carranza or Villa, should be made provisional president and should be personally charged with the formulation and promulgation of the necessary and inevitable reforms as a duty to which he would be definitely pledged beforehand; and a board of three persons acceptable to the revolutionists, but one of whom should be a conservative not actively identified with the revolution, should be associated with him to arrange for and have complete charge of the conduct and oversight of the elections which should be planned for to occur not immediately but at a definite future date to be proclaimed by them in consultation with the provisional president.

We should in no circumstances outline or even suggest the detail of the reforms. The provisional president would of course consult with whom he pleased in formulating them, and their success is entirely dependent upon their being of domestic origin and in no respect dictated by the United States or any outside Government.

Both the provisional president and the members of the election board should be pledged not to be candidates at the elections.

There should, of course, if we can bring it about, be a general amnesty.

This is a very simple plan. The Mexican representatives will, we fear, quite certainly protest against it, and the Mediators may be very reluctant to accept it until convinced by patient argument on the general lines indicated above that that is all that this Government can consider consistently with its avowed policy. But it seems to us in substance inevitable, the only sort of plan that would have the least prospect of producing the settlement and the peace that we desire. You will know how to present and urge it. We are delighted to feel that we have spokesmen whose force and method in handling this tedious and difficult but still hopeful business need no direction or improvement from Washington.* * *

Bryan.

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/23456, 23457.

[Document 784]

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

Niagara Falls, June 4, 1914, 11.45 a.m.

The Mediators discuss the wishes of the Governments in such a matter of course way as to show that they do not consider it improper to confer with A. B. C. Governments which according to the official correspondence had tendered their good offices. At our last meeting the Chilean Minister presented a telegram from his Government agreeing with him that an armistice must be required. In view of the consequences that may follow the failure or success of the mediation, we feel justified in calling your attention to this matter before we have another meeting, and to inquire whether you consider that the Mediators are acting as individuals or as the representatives of their Governments and bound to follow their instructions.

Commissioners.

[Untitled]

June 4, 1914, 6.25 p.m.

Since our telegram of this morning we have been reading Oppenheim and Moore as to the office of mediation and though they indicate that it is a governmental act they furnish no suggestion as to how far the Mediators can be directed by their Governments. Mr. Lehmann is of the opinion that, the mediation being a governmental function, the Mediators may properly maintain themselves in harmony with the views of their Governments and may properly consult their Governments. Judge Lamar takes a different view, unless their countries are parties.

Commissioners.

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners. File No. 812.00/23456.

[Document 785]

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 4, 1914.

The President directs me to say that he does not understand that the Governments represented by the Mediators can or should direct the Mediators as to terms of settlement or course of procedure. Mediation is essentially different from arbitration. The object of mediation is to bring the parties together and secure a peaceful settlement of an international difficulty. The Mediators hear both sides and then, as friends and neighbors, endeavor to find a basis upon which the parties can adjust their dispute. The Mediators being unbiased can have no pride of opinion as to what should be done, neither can their Governments be interested in dictating terms. The only question before the Mediators is, What is desired by the parties involved in the dispute? If the Mediators were compelled to submit terms of settlement to their respective Governments and then bound to follow instructions given by their Governments, we should be compelled to present our views at Rio, Buenos Aires, and Santiago, which is of course impossible. We sincerely hope that the Mediators will see the necessity of dealing with the situation as it presents itself in Mexico, not as it may seem to their own Government officials, who are far removed from the scene and cannot be fully informed as to the difficulties to be met. We feel sure that on reflection they will see their duties in this light.

Bryan.

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12221½.

[Document 786]

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

No. 13.] Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 9, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith a copy of the reply of the Representatives of General Huerta to the Mediators, relative to the plan originally proposed by the Mediators. This copy was handed by the Mediators to our Commissioners at our conference this afternoon.

I have [etc.]

H. Percival Dodge.

[Inclosure.]

[Untitled]

The Mexican delegation accepts the bases proposed by the mediation with very slight modifications, which are stated herewith: 1. The new government, to substitute the Government of President Huerta, shall be composed of a provisional president of the Republic, selected from among neutral elements and whose honor and standing shall be so high as to remove him from any partisan objection; two members to be selected, respectively, from elements of high standing and representative of each of the two great factions into which Mexican political opinion is at the present time divided; and the other two members to be persons of recognized honor and general acceptance, without reflecting particularly the conflicting tendencies. In order to effect the transfer of power from the hands of General Huerta to the new government, and conforming to the machinery provided by the Constitution, General Huerta shall appoint the person selected to be provisional president regularly to the portfolio of Foreign Relations, and shall present at once his own resignation to Congress for its acceptance and turn the power over to the Minister of Foreign Relations.

2. Upon the constitution of the government in the form provided by the preceding base, it shall at once decree a general and absolute amnesty to all Mexicans covering political and related offenses.

3. The new government shall immediately call an election for the election of president and vice-president of the Republic and members of Congress, so that the operation of the public powers may conform to the constitutional regime within as short a period of time as possible. Inasmuch as there is no electoral law of a general and permanent character, these elections shall be governed by the provisions of the law of May 22, 1912, which the government shall expressly put into force for the purpose, supplementing it in similar terms to govern the election of president and vice-president.

4. The new government will be requested to give immediate and special attention to the following matters: The agrarian question.

Electoral legislation.

Primary and agricultural education.

5. The suggestion will likewise be made to the new government of the advisability of adopting measures for the creation of international commissions for the solution of the claims of foreigners for damages arising out of military acts or the acts of established authorities. Upon similar bases, a special commission will be constituted to settle the claims of nationals.

6. The provisional government of Mexico, organized in the form stated, shall be recognized without delay by the Government of the United States and by the three mediating countries.

7. The American forces of occupation shall proceed to evacuate the Mexican territory they occupy, within fifteen days after the date the provisional government, through regular channels or through the mediators, notifies the Government of the United States that it is organized, and such evacuation shall be fully completed within not to exceed thirty days.

The Mexican delegation accepts this basis, subject to consultation with its Government as to the period of the military occupation and the withdrawal of the naval forces.

It is understood that as a result of this agreement, the contending forces in Mexico will lay down their arms, submitting to the Provisional Government, which will reorganize the public forces of the nation.

On this point a new base will be prepared if deemed necessary.

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/23469.

[Document 787]

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Niagara Falls, June 11, 1914.

We have just returned from a meeting of the Mediators Which began with the discussion of Paragraph 1, as to the transfer of power.* * * As a result of a lengthy conference it was substantially agreed that Paragraph 1 should read as follows: Paragraph 1. A Provisional Government for the United Mexican States, constituted as hereinafter provided, shall be recognized at Mexico City at noon on the day____of___, 1914, at which time it shall assume and thereafter exercise governmental powers until the election and inauguration of a constitutional president.

It is proposed that this paragraph be protocolized tomorrow, the Mediators claiming that the only way to make progress is to put in definite and final form what has been agreed upon by both parties, and unless you object we will enter the meeting and agree to the protocolization of the above, for which we have been contending for ten days. While the language is somewhat different, we think it carries out in substance and detail our understanding of the views of the President.* * *

Commissioners

Specially Commissioner Lamar to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12263½.

[Document 788]

Specially Commissioner Lamar to the Secretary of State.

No. 14.] Niagara Falls, June 12, 1914.

Sir: After returning this afternoon from the [third plenary]conference, at which the first item33 of the plan was definitely agreed upon,34 we received a note from Mr. Rabasa with an enclosure setting out the objections of the Mexican delegates to the plan proposed by the American commissioners. That note and enclosure we send herewith, calling attention to several unfavorable expressions.

With assurances [etc.]

J. R. Lamar.

[Inclosure.]

The Mexican Delegation to the American Delegation.

Mexican Delegation,
Niagara Falls, June 12, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Lamar: I beg to send you a memorandum in which are set forth the objections which the Mexican Delegation has to the propositions submitted by the Delegation [over]which you preside. My colleagues and I have thought it advisable to clearly explain the bases of our objections, so that the American Delegation can consider them carefully and weigh their importance.

With assurances [etc.]

Emilio Rabasa.

[Subinclosure.]

memorandum.

The proposition submitted by the American Delegation show that the aim and end of its policy is to obtain an unconditional and absolute triumph for the revolution, and in pursuing it it takes upon itself the direction of Mexico’s internal affairs, definitely decides to follow the way which leads to immediate intervention and assumes the responsibility for the new order of things which it establishes.

The American Government, through its Delegates, exacts: (1) That the Provisional President shall be a Constitutionalist; (2) That the electoral board shall contain a Constitutionalist majority; (3) That the land and naval forces of the United States of America shall remain in Mexico and in Mexican waters for a length of time which the Washington Government can make indefinite and extend to the time of the election. All the foregoing conditions imply the right to impose a President on Mexico at the forthcoming elections; for, if all the elements of the Provisional Government are to be revolutionary, the liberty of the elections will be a fraud.

By insisting now that Carranza and his followers shall form the Provisional Government, the Washington Government forces the elections in favor of the former. This is bad for Mexico, bad for the United States of America, and even bad for Carranza. Bad for the two nations because of the natural and just feelings of hostility which the procedure of the United States of America will create in Mexico. Bad for the revolutionary chief and his partisans because public opinion in Mexico will accuse them of having brought about the intervention of a foreign power in the country’s affairs and of being subject to a foreign government.

For the above reasons the Mexican Delegation has immediately declared to the Mediators that it rejects the proposal to hand over the government of Mexico to the Constitutionalists, and that it does so of its own accord, without consulting the Government, as it firmly refuses to be made a party to proceedings which place the election of the President of Mexico in the hands of the Washington Government.

What are the Washington Government’s objections to the proposal made by the Mediators for the establishment of a neutral provisional government—a proposal accepted by the Mexican Delegates without discussion? The world will have but one answer to this question, and that will be that the Washington Government does not want Mexico to have electoral liberty. It is obvious that a free election in a country unused to the exercise of suffrage can only be held under an impartial government. The establishment of a neutral government is the only course that can be proposed in fairness to the Mexican people, whose welfare has constantly been proclaimed by President Wilson as the motive of his attitude. If the good of the Mexican people is really under consideration, the views of that people on the matter must be consulted; their good cannot be imposed upon them.

The Washington Government and its Delegation draw an inference which is illogical. “The advance of the revolution,” they say, “shows that the national sentiment is with it, and, consequently, that the nation wants Carranza for President.” Better logic makes an opposite deduction. It takes into account the fact that the revolution holds no sway in the central and western States (among which are Oaxaca, Vera Cruz, Guanajuato, Jalisco, Puebla and Mexico, each with over a million inhabitants) and, all of them together, with a total population of over ten million—an undeniable fact which proves that two-thirds of Mexicans are anti-revolutionary.

But let us accept the supposition on which the Washington Government founds its strange demand. If the nation really wants Carranza for President his election is a foregone conclusion under a neutral government, and it is therefore unnecessary to impose him by means of a provisional government of his partisans. If the nation wants Carranza, why stain his election with the suspicion of fraud and violence, why foul it with the show of American intervention?

Carranza raised to the dignity of First Magistrate by the national will, expressed through a free election, will be a President worthy of respect, capable of unifying the public spirit and of laying the foundations of definite peace in Mexico. Carranza owing his position to a prearranged move from Washington will be a President without the slightest prestige, rendered useless for anything good, against whom will be raised the popular clamor to accuse him of treachery and of an abiding subjection to the will of the White House.

If the Washington Government insists on the propositions which the Mexican Delegation can under no circumstances accept, an agreement will be impossible and the negotiations are doomed to failure. The struggle in Mexico will continue, and the Washington Government cannot deny that a rebel triumph means the bloodiest battles, the death of thousands of combatants, the death or outrage of numberless peaceful citizens, the sacking and pillage of cities and the devastation of property. It is not for the Washington Government, the representative of a civilized people of high moral culture, to assume the responsibility for these atrocities for a mere matter of form. If the national sentiment of Mexico upholds the revolution, it is better that this should be made plain at the polls, which honor a people, than in those horrors which shame humanity.

To resume: the matter is of minor importance according to the ideas held by the American Government, as it is one of form. Carranza will become President of Mexico in one way or another, it is asserted. The discussion is whether this end is to be achieved by means of a rebel Provisional Government which shall force his election or by means of a neutral Provisional Government, which will preside over the elections honestly and impartially. And if the question is one of mere form, it is inconceivable that it should be sufficient to cut short the conference and to urge on the combatants in the bloody strife which will continue the devastation of Mexico.

These reasons also prevent our acceptance of a proposition which establishes an electoral board with a Constitutionalist majority and therefore created with the express purpose of obtaining the victory for a given party.

The same reasons prevent us from accepting the proposal which prolongs indefinitely the stay of the naval forces in Mexican waters and that of the land forces in the city of Vera Cruz. Elections in Mexico cannot and must not be held in the presence of a display of material pressure on the people of the country.

Niagara Falls, Canada,
June 11, 1914.

33 See telegram of June 11, supra.

34 And protocolized.

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12240.

[Document 789]

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

No. 16.] Special Commission of the President of
the United States, near the Mediators,
Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 13, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose to you herewith a copy of the letter, dated the 2nd instant, sent by the Mediators to Sr. Zubáran in reply to his letter to them of the 28th ultimo. This letter was read by the Mediators to us prior to its being sent, as reported in the Commissioners’ telegram of the 2nd instant, but no copy was offered us. It was only made public on the 11th instant. The present copy is sent to the Department, notwithstanding that this letter has appeared in the press, in order that the Department may have its authentic text. A copy of the letter to which it is in answer was enclosed in the Commissioners’ despatch No. 8 of the 31st ultimo (Inclosure 8).

I have [etc.]

H. Percival Dodge.

[Inclosure.]

The Mediators to Señor Zubáran.

Niagara Falls, Canada, June 2, 1914.

Sir: We have had the pleasure of receiving your courteous communication of the 28th of May last, which we have noted very carefully.

We must in the first place acknowledge the recognition by the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army of the wishes and sympathies which prompted the tender of our good offices toward the settlement of the conflict pending between Mexico and the United States, a tender inspired by the declared purpose of “furthering the interests of peace and civilization on our continent and the earnest desire of avoiding further bloodshed, to the impairment of the cordiality and union which have always governed the development of the relations of the governments and peoples of America.”

In carrying out these purposes, we could not but welcome the advent to our conferences of representatives of all parties interested, provided they agree to submit to the consideration and counsel of the Mediation the differences which now divide them, in order that a peaceful settlement thereof may be sought in an atmosphere of tranquillity and conciliation. Hence, it would be a source of great satisfaction to us if we knew that we are authorized to interpret the suggestion contained in the last paragraph but one of your communication, as an expression on the part of the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army of that spirit of compromise which in our judgment should prevail at the conferences of the Mediation, and as an adhesion to the terms set forth in our last telegraphic communication of the 3rd of May last.35

If this is so, we would take the liberty of suggesting through you to the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army that he hasten the appointment of his representatives to the conferences in which we are now engaged.

We avail [etc.]

D. da Gama.

R. S. Naón.

E. Suárez Mujica

35 Inclosure 7 in Mr. Dodge’s No. 8 of May 31

Commissioner Lehmann to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12241.

[Document 790]

Commissioner Lehmann to the Secretary of State.

No. 17.] Special Commission of the President of
the United States, near the Mediators,
Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 13, 1914.

Sir: I received yesterday, June 12, 1914, a letter from Senor Licenciado Don Luis Elguero, one of the Huertista Representatives, relative to the interview I had with him on the evening of June 9th. A copy of this letter is sent herewith. He enclosed a memorandum made by him of our conversation, a copy of which is also sent herewith. I replied to him today and enclose herewith a copy of my reply.

I have [etc.]

F. W. Lehmann.

[Inclosure 1.]

Señor Elguero to Commissioner Lehmann.

Mexican Delegation,
Niagara Falls, Canada, June 12, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Lehmann: I have thought it convenient to draw up a memorandum of the conversation I had the pleasure of holding with you, on the night of the ninth of this month, as I have wished to give a precise form to the ideas which I expressed on that occasion and which my lack of English may not have rendered clear to you. At the same time I have set down the honorable and straightforward declarations which you made to me, just as I understood them. If I have incurred in any error in doing so, I shall be deeply obliged if you will kindly correct it.

I avail myself of the opportunity to entreat you to give thought to the reasons I have advanced, the excellence of which I am convinced of, before coming to a decision which might bring our conferences to a close.

With the assurances [etc.]

Luis Elguero.

[Subinclosure.]

Memorandum of the conversation held between the Hon. Frederick W. Lehmann and Licenciado Don Luis Elguero, on the night of the 9th of June, 1914.

The Hon. Frederick W. Lehmann began by setting forth, in the most frank and spontaneous manner, that which follows:

The United States take part in Mexico’s political affairs with absolute disinterestedness; they do not seek any territorial aggrandizement nor other advantage of any kind; they only want peace restored along their southern frontier, in order to avoid the complications which continued disorder might create with the possibility of even leading to a conflict with Mexico. The interests of Americans and other foreigners resident in Mexico, all of whom have suffered enormously through the revolution, oblige the United States to take measures not only to protect them, but also to avoid any other nation interfering in political matters pertaining to America. For these reasons and with the sole purpose that all disorder in Mexico shall cease, that peace shall be restored and that the law shall prevail, the United States wish in some manner to influence Mexico’s internal affairs. For the same reason they accepted the invitation to the Mediation conferences. Mr. Lehmann thought that the best way of restoring peace to Mexico was to put in as Provisional President a man of honor and of high standing who belonged to the Constitutionalist party, since this party, in view of its recent victories and of the vigorous elements which it commands, assuredly represents the opinions of the majority of the Mexican people. The Provisional President, whose term of office is only to last until new elections are held, supervised by a special committee appointed for that purpose, would be unable to stay in power indefinitely, and his authority could not be suspected by anybody.

To the above Don Luis Elguero answered: That precisely because the Mexican Delegation believed that entirely disinterested motives of high policy guided the conduct of the United States, it had consented to discuss the internal affairs of Mexico with the Mediators; and precisely to bring about the fulfillment of the desire which it shares with the United States for the restoration of peace to Mexico, it had accepted the plan for pacification proposed by the Mediators, which consisted, firstly, in the withdrawal from power of General Huerta on the condition that the Government succeeding his shall be capable of maintaining order in and ensuring peace for the whole Republic; and, secondly, the constitution of a neutral government composed of a President whose qualities of honor, morality and patriotism shall be beyond doubt, but who shall not belong to either of the contending parties in Mexico, albeit he shall be persona grata to all; and of four Ministers of whom two shall belong to the Constitutionalist party and two shall be selected by General Huerta. This Government, which would be immediately recognized by the United States and the Mediating Powers, would be able to pacify the country inasmuch as it would have been accepted by the two principal contending factions, and could call the elections for the eventual President and the members of the other governing powers in a short time, and could guarantee free elections which would express the will of the country. If the Constitutionalists are sincere in their professions and really seek the country’s welfare they must approve this plan for a Government which provides for the retirement of General Huerta, whom they consider the principal obstacle to the reestablishment of a constitutional regime. The United States of America, who really do seek peace with Mexico, should also accept it, as it favors no party and ensures a free election for the Executive and other governing powers.

The Mexican Delegation cannot accept the plan proposed by the American Delegation, firstly, because it means the immediate transfer of the Government, without any obstacle, to only one of the contending parties. It is not true that the (Constitutionalist party represents the will of the nation. The principles it proclaims are considered by a large majority to be contrary to the social order established up till now in Mexico, and unfortunately the excesses of all kinds which its partisans have committed hitherto everywhere they have dominated, have alienated the orderly elements of the country, which, horror struck at these disorders, have had to gather around General Huerta. Secondly, if a Constitutionalist President is put in power at present, it is certain that he will hold fraudulent elections, as has always been the case in Mexico after the triumph of a revolution, none of which put into practice the electoral liberty they preach, once they are in power. Thirdly. The electoral committee mentioned in the American plan is not sufficient to ensure a free election, since two of its members must be chosen from the Constitutionalist ranks and only one may be independent. The majority will cause the election to be turned in favor of its party. Moreover, such a committee is hot authorized by the laws of Mexico which entrust the supervision of elections to the Secretary of the Interior (Gobernación) and the declaration of their validity to Congress. Such a committee cannot exercise its functions according to our political system and its acts would have no legal value.

Don Luis Elguero pointed out that the fact cited by Mr. Lehmann as a proof that the Constitutionalist party represents the opinion of the majority of Mexicans has not the value as a proof which is attributed to it. The recent triumphs of the party are due to the aid of all kinds which it has received from the United States, after the embargo on the exportation of arms to Mexico was raised. Before this the revolution in Mexico made no headway. On the contrary, the Federals recovered most of the towns and territory which had fallen into rebel hands. Once the embargo was raised, the rebels found effective aid in American territory and were able to revive the revolution in the northern States of the Republic, which are the least densely populated. The central and western States, more thickly populated, have remained quiet, not even the example of the northern States or the rebel proclamation offering to distribute the land amongst the peasants being sufficient to move them. Many of these States, such as Jalisco, Guanajuato, Hidalgo, Oaxaca and Yucatan, have Governors who find no difficulty in maintaining the peace, and have hitherto remained perfectly quiet.

The Mexican Delegation came to the conferences to enter into an agreement which will protect the real interests of Mexico. The American plan, which only takes care of those of the Constitutionalists, cannot be accepted by those who have come with no personal or party interest to strive to find a means of rescuing our country from its difficult situation. They cannot authorise the surrender of the Government to one party. To do so would mean the continuation of the revolution.

Don Luis Elguero also drew attention to the fact that, according to the Constitutionalist proclamations the chief of their party must occupy the Presidency of the Republic, and that they only intend to hold elections after their triumph is complete and they have annihilated opposing political parties. They therefore desire to bring into being another dictatorship with their chief as dictator, and they give no hope of early elections. Once the Constitutionalists are in power as the result of an agreement arrived at here, it is possible that they may put into practice this part of their revolutionary plan, which is most opposed to electoral liberty.

If the American Delegation insists on upholding the plan it has proposed, it will without doubt incur censure to the effect that its Government seeks only the triumph of one given party in Mexico, and not the restoration of peace. If the conferences come to a sudden end, all Mexican questions will have to be settled by force of arms. It is possible that the Constitutionalists may triumph, and it is also possible that the excesses which have hitherto accompanied their victories may be repeated. Public opinion in America and in Mexico will blame the American Government for the atrocities that could have been avoided by the acceptance of the just and moderate plan put forward by the Mediators.

Luis Elguero.

[Inclosure 2.]

Commissioner Lehmann to Señor Elguero.

The American Delegation,
Niagara Falls, June 13, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Elguero: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your valued favor of the 12th instant, including a memorandum of the conversation we had on the evening of the 9th, which reports in a spirit of entire fairness but perhaps not fully enough What was said by me at that time. As outlining the views of the American representatives, I said in substance:

The United States is seeking no advantage at the expense of Mexico. It makes no claim for indemnity, either of land or money. The claims of individuals, whether our own citizens or citizens of other countries, to be settled upon, principles of international law.

The United States has a neighbor upon the north with whom it is and for a hundred years has been on terms of friendship and good will, and it desires to be an like terms with the neighbor on the south. It is essential to this that the people of Mexico be at peace among themselves and that there be an end of the disorders which mean destruction of life and property, not alone of Mexicans but also of Americans and of citizens of other countries, involving possible international complications which it is highly desirable to prevent.

While the ardent desire of the United States in the present emergency is the restoration of peace, it is for permanent peace, and this is not possible unless the settlement is made on a basis of justice to the great body of the Mexican people.

No adjustment is likely to prove a lasting one which does not carry with it substantial assurance of the agrarian and other reforms which have been promised by Diaz, Madero and Huerta, but have not been put into effect by any of them.

A peace which means only repression of the aspirations of the Mexican people would not be a satisfactory one nor would it be enduring. Order could not be maintained forever by the iron hand nor is it desirable that it should be. The result of thirty years of rule by Diaz was that as soon as its rigor was relaxed revolutions broke loose, because, whatever may have been done for the material development of Mexico, the great body of the people had not been benefited in the measure to which they were entitled, if at all, by his regime.

We are of the opinion that in the present division of the Mexican people the great majority are with the Constitutionalists in principle and in purpose, and that this party more than any other gives substantial hope of accomplishing the reforms believed to be necessary to an enduring peace.

Evidence of this is to be found in the rapid expansion of the Constitutionalist movement from small beginnings and its continued success upon the battlefield. This growth and these successes can not be due alone to any facilities for the introduction of arms across our border, existing at any time, since arms alone could do nothing. There must be men willing to use those arms. And meanwhile the Huerta forces were not lacking in the munitions of war.

The Constitutionalist cause is assured of success, and this should be recognized now and so make an end of war with its bloodshed and devastation.

The plan of adjustment proposed by us has been submitted in writing to the Mediators and is before you, and you of course are familiar with its terms.

This plan does indeed provide that the provisional government shall be essentially Constitutionalist, and it is proposed by us in the view that a provisional government of a different character would not be acceptable to nor accepted by the great majority of the Mexican people, who could not fairly be expected to yield everything they had gained by the arduous struggles at a time when complete victory seemed to be within their reach.

The hope has always been indulged by us that, however much we may differ in theory as to the mode in which the provisional government should be constituted, we may find men of honor, character and ability, possessing the confidence of the Mexican people, upon whom all concerned can agree as equal to the duties and responsibilities of this grave emergency; and to this hope we still hold.

The statement of your views made by you is in substantial harmony with my recollection of the conversation. Our meeting was for the purpose of a frank exchange of opinions rather than for a discussion or determination of points of difference, and the interview was limited accordingly.

In earnest desire and ardent hope that this conference may be fruitful of good results to both our countries and to all America, and with renewed assurances of profound esteem,

I am [etc.]

F. W. Lehmann.

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12270.

[Document 791]

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

No. 18.] Special Commission of the President of
the United States, near the Mediators.
Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 15, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose to you herewith copies of part of the correspondence between the Mediators and General Carranza which were handed by the Mediators to our Commissioners at our conference of this afternoon.

This correspondence consists of the telegram from the Mediators to General Carranza of May 3, Sr. Zubáran’s reply of May 28, copies of both of which were enclosed in despatch No. 8 of the 31st ultimo;36 the Mediators’ reply to Sr. Zubáran, dated the 2nd instant, a copy of which was enclosed in despatch No. 16 of the 13th instant; and Sr. Zubáran’s reply to the Mediators, dated the 11th instant, which they state was received by them this morning. It will be noted that the last letter states that General Carranza has appointed Messrs. Calderon, Cabrera and Vasconcelos as his delegates to attend the conference “to settle the international conflict which has arisen between the United States and the Mexican Republic,” and that he requests a reply in order to give instructions to his representatives to proceed to Niagara Falls.

I have [etc.]

H. Percival Dodge.

[Inclosure.]

Senor Zubáran to the Mediators.

Confidential Agency of the Constitutionalist Government of Mexico.
Washington, June 11, 1914.

Your Excellencies: The undersigned, special representative of the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army of Mexico, Don Venustiano Carranza, in pursuance with instructions received, has the honor to transcribe to your excellencies the following communication received this day by telegraph:

“I have had the honor of receiving your courteous note dated at Niagara Falls the 2nd instant, which you had the kindness to send me through Licentiate Rafael Zubáran. In said note you again see fit to express to me your wish that as First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army I appoint delegates to represent me at the conferences which are being held in that city, in connection with the good offices you offered to the United States, to General Huerta and to myself, to settle the international conflict existing between the United States and Mexico.

“Having accepted in principle as far back as April 29th last your good offices and as you are now awaiting the appointment of my commissioners, I have the honor to inform you that I appoint for my part as representatives of the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army under my command, Messrs. Fernando Iglesias Calderón, Licentiate Luis Cabrera and Licentiate Jose Vasconcelos to attend as my delegates the conferences you are holding, at which it is sought to settle the international conflict which has arisen between the United States and the Mexican Republic.

“I would thank you to kindly reply to this note in order, in a proper case, to give instructions to my representatives so that they may proceed to that city for the discharge of their mission duly authorized by me.

“I take pleasure [etc.]

“V. Carranza.”

The undersigned renews [etc.]

R. Zubáran Capmany.

36 Inclosures 7 and 8.

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12271.

[Document 792]

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

No. 19.] Special Commission of the President of
the United States, near the Mediators,
Niagara Falls, June 15, 1914.

Sir: Referring to my despatch No. 18 of the present instant, I have the honor to enclose you herewith a copy of the reply of the Mediators to General Carranza which was sent this afternoon and made public here at the same time.

I have [etc.]

H. Percival Dodge.

[Inclosure—Telegram.]

The Mediators to General Carranza.

Niagara Falls, June 15, 1914.

To the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army, Venustiano Carranza, Saltillo, Mexico:

We have had the honor of receiving this day the communication you addressed us through your Representative, Mr. R. Zubáran Capmany, and with reference thereto we hasten to advise you of our fear that you have not duly considered the final paragraphs of our note of the 2d instant.37

We greet you with our highest consideration.

Domicio da Gama,
Ambassador of Brazil.

Romulo S. Naón,
Minister of Argentina.

Eduardo Suárez Mujica,
Minister of Chile.

37 Inclosed in despatch No. 16 of the 13th.

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12288.

[Document 793]

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

No. 20.] Special Commission of the President of
the United States, near the Mediators,
Niagara Falls, June 16, 1914.

Sir: Referring to previous correspondence, I have the honor to enclose to you herewith a copy of a letter dated the 15th instant addressed by Mr. Justice Lamar to Mr. Rabasa, the senior Huerta Representative, in reply to Mr. Rabasa’s letter of the 12th instant38 stating his objections to the plan submitted by the American Commissioners to the Mediators.

I have [etc.]

H. Percival Dodge.

[Inclosure.]

The American Delegation to the Mexican Delegation.

The American Delegation,
Niagara Falls, June 15, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Rabasa: Your note of June 12 is received, with the accompanying memorandum. In it you state at length your objections to the plan submitted by the American Representatives to the Board of Mediators.

That memorandum shows that you entirely misunderstand the motives and objects of the President, for your arguments are based upon the theory that the American Government has a choice as to who should be Provisional President and is proposing to have that choice forced upon the people of Mexico by the presence of an army destroying the country’s electoral liberty. The American Representatives utterly repudiate that suggestion. The President recognizes facts and he sees in the past success of the Constitutionalist Army indisputable evidence of the approval of the Mexican people. But he also sees that the full triumph of that army means an indefinite continuance of the war, with the suffering and bloodshed and death which every war involves. These consequences the President seeks to prevent through mediation. But we greatly fear that the language of your note implies that his efforts may be thwarted because of your unwillingness to have a Constitutionalist as Provisional President, even though that promises the only practicable means by which the horrors of war can be prevented.

We sincerely hope that you will not further oppose the only plan which promises peace, when its rejection means suffering and death to so many. You view the situation with the deepest concern and have evidently written with deep feeling, and no less so do we.

We are convinced that your objections to the plan itself and your fear of the ill consequences that may follow its adoption, are not well founded; and that in attacking the details you lose sight of the large and controlling motive which, from the beginning of this trouble has been in the mind of the President and which has influenced the American Representatives in all that they have said or proposed to the Mediators.

Our Government seeks only to assist in securing the pacification of Mexico. It has no special interest in the method or in the person by which that great end is to be accomplished; and if it presses for any particular methods, or for the selection for a particular type of men, it is only because it believes them to be the only means to the end desired by your country, our country, the mediating countries and the whole civilized world.

So, likewise, our objections to the plan proposed by the Mediators, and approved by you, have been based upon the profound conviction that the adoption of that plan would not stop the progress of the victorious army nor bring that speedy peace which the American Government so sincerely desires.

It would be easy at this Conference to write an agreement which many would consider desirable; but unless the most excellent of plans and the most excellent of men are accepted by the Constitutionalists we would only have a paper plan, perfect in form and just in expression, but wholly ineffective to secure peace in war-worn Mexico. To bring that war to a close, to restore peace and constitutional government, is the aim of the President; and that end can only be attained by consulting the just wishes of the Constitutionalists, who are not only in numerical majority but are now the dominant force in the country.

Most of those in that party will necessarily be long ignorant of the terms agreed on at Niagara Falls; but they do know men and they do know for what men stand. And if the right man is selected for Provisional President they can, and we hope will, accept his appointment as concrete and satisfactory evidence that the Provisional Government is not intended to prevent the adoption of the reforms to secure which the Mexican people have risen in arms.

If those selected by the Mediators to administer the Provisional Government have the confidence of the Constitutionalists, a long step will have been taken towards the pacification of Mexico and at the same time furnish no occasion for alarm to those whom you represent since it is the purpose to offer a general amnesty for all political and related offenses. If the plan is accepted both by General Huerta and General Carranza the cessation of arms follows; a Provisional Government is established to maintain order, to protect life and property and to call an election, at which every qualified voter may cast his ballot for the President of his choice.

On the other hand, if the plan you endorse should be adopted and a neutral should be chosen as Provisional President, we would have secured no practical results, but still be confronted with the insurmountable fact that the Constitutionalists, now almost completely triumphant, would reject the plan, repudiate the man and press forward with renewed zeal to Mexico City with all of the loss of blood and life that may involve.

So evident is the advisability of selecting a Constitutionalist that it seems to be conceded that it is both necessary and proper that the Provisional President should be appointed from that party, though you say that he should be one who, though a member of that party, has been so inactive that he might be classed as a neutral. But it is manifest that in such a contest as that which has been waged in Mexico for years, it is not only fair but necessary to assume that every intelligent man of any prominence is at heart on one side or the other and the country might well question the patriotism of any Mexican who has been colorless in such a contest. And, as the Provisional President must be to some extent identified with one party or the other, it necessarily follows that to meet the requirements of the present situation his sympathies, which really mark the man, must be with the dominant element. The effort, therefore, should be, not to find a neutral, but one whose attitude on the controlling issues would make him acceptable to the Constitutionalists while his character, standing and conduct would make him acceptable to the other party. Such a man, and only such a man, can reasonably be expected to have the confidence and respect of the entire country. The concession that the Provisional President should be a Constitutionalist ought to make it possible to find the proper man, and if those discussed do not possess the requisite qualifications it is only because we have not succeeded in finding what we sought. You can well appreciate how difficult it is for us, under the circumstances, to do more than we have and to further promise diligently and earnestly to continue the search.

In objecting to the composition of the proposed election board, you wholly ignore the fact that in the past all elections in Mexico have been under the supervision of a single cabinet member representing the dominant party. By analogy the next election should be supervised by only one officer representing the dominant Constitutionalist party. The plan proposed by the American Representatives, however, was intended to avoid the just criticism against that method. That plan contemplates that this, the most important election in the history of Mexico, shall be supervised by a board composed of representatives of both political parties. It is wholly incorrect to assume, as you do, that, thus supervised, it will be unfairly conducted; and you may rest assured that all the influence the United States can legitimately use will be exerted to secure an honest election. Indeed it is the earnest desire of our Government that the permanent President shall be chosen in a manner so free from objection that his title to that high office and to the confidence and respect of his people will be strengthened by their knowledge that he represents their free and unfettered choice, at an election held, not by one party as in the past, but by representatives of both factions.

It is true that the American plan proposed that a majority of this Board shall be Constitutionalists, but that is because they now represent the sentiment of the majority of the people of Mexico. That, however, does not mean, nor should it be construed to mean, that thereby the American Government seeks, as you say, “to force an election in favor of the Constitutionalists.” So far from that being true, our experience in this country, with bi-partisan boards, leads us to believe that this is the most efficient method that can be devised to secure a fair election and a true count of the ballots.

You object to those provisions in the plan relating to the withdrawal of the American troops from Vera Cruz and you write as though it was the desire of the American Government that those troops should remain there indefinitely. The fact is that the President is most anxious that the Army and Navy should return to our shores at the earliest moment that can be properly done. But in the uncertainty as to what is the proper time, we have suggested that the question be settled—not by the Mediators—but by the American Government and the Provisional Government—both being alike interested in having the army withdrawn at the earliest date possible. But to the American Representatives it seems that, in the present disturbed condition of Mexico, it would be both unwise and unsafe to attempt to decide now a matter of such vital importance, where the happenings of a day may make it desirable for the army to remain there longer than the date fixed in the Mediators’ plan.

We greatly regret that you made the suggestion that the army is to be detained in Mexico as a means of coercion and depriving Mexico of electoral liberty. There is nothing to which you can point which lends the slightest foundation for such an implication. The overwhelming facts—the conduct of the American Government since the army landed, the repeated assurance that our country desired no war indemnity, no cession of territory and nothing but the peace and prosperity of Mexico—ought to have convinced you to the contrary. But we are happy at the opportunity your note gives us to repeat that the United States wants nothing except the good of her sister Republic. The United States is a party to the mediation in the hope that it might lead to peace and that the peace would lead to prosperity. The plan which the American Representatives propose, and on which we must insist, has been formulated solely with that end in view. Actuated by these motives, we feel that we may appeal to you, and through you to the other Mexican Representatives, to read again our plan in the light of these words, remembering that in proposing it and in writing this reply our good wishes go out to you and your party, as well as to all others in your great country.

With the assurances of my high esteem, I am, [etc.]

J. R. Lamar.

38 Inclosed with Commissioner Lamar’s No. 14 of June 12.

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/23477.

[Document 794]

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Niagara Falls, June 16, 1914.

We have just returned from Buffalo where we had a four-hour talk with the representatives of the Constitutionalists in which at great length they set out their position.* * * At the end of the long statement of which this is a brief and necessarily hurried summary, they stated, in answer to our specific inquiries, that the Mediators ought to stop attempting to settle internal affairs of Mexico.

We then stated in detail the substance of the plan proposed by the American representatives: that the transfer should be made without recognition of Huerta; that a provisional government, representing Constitutionalist sentiment, should be appointed; that the president should be pledged to carry into effect the agrarian and other reforms; etc. We called their attention to the fact that this would give them, now, all that they could hold at the end of a bloody war and was in effect a present surrender to the Constitutionalists by Huerta.

They insisted that they might be willing to take up the question of surrender with someone outside the mediation with which the United States had nothing to do, but that so far as mediation was concerned they would absolutely decline to receive anything from the Mediators or through the mediation; that they would not accept as a gift anything which the Mediators could give them, even though it was what they were otherwise seeking; that they would not take it “on a silver platter.” They declined to discuss names or propose names for provisional president, saying that no one would be satisfactory that was appointed by the Mediators, even if it was Carranza himself, because anything that came from the Mediators would not be accepted by their party or by the Mexican people.

Their manner was courteous, expressing regret that they should decline what was [offered]in mistaken kindness; but their statement was so explicit, their objection so positive, their spirit so defiant, that we asked them if we were to understand that they were expressing their own views or the views of Carranza. To this they emphatically replied that they were absolutely instructed by Carranza to deliver this as his final answer. We inquired again if they meant this to be accepted as final and to be reported to Washington; they said they did, and that under no consideration would Carranza accept the result of mediation, no matter how far it might be in his favor.

Commissioners

Collector Cobb to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12266.

[Document 795]

Collector Cobb to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, June 16, 1914.

De la Garza, Commercial Agent of General Villa at Juarez, is authority for the following information:

Generals Carranza and Villa disagreed about Zacatecas campaign. Carranza ordered Villa send soldiers to Natera. Villa insisted on accompanying them. Carranza ordered him to serve under Natera. Villa resigned to Carranza last Saturday [the 13th]. Carranza accepted resignation by telegraph and ordered Villa back to Chihuahua as Governor. Villa and his generals—who are said to have been Angeles, Aguirre, Behavides, Monclova, Herrera, Urbina, Ortega, the two Rodriguez, Contreras, Peireira, Robles and others—met at Torreon last Sunday [the 14th]. They agreed to principle of a civilian for President and demanded that Villa remain their chief military officer, leaving it to Carranza to determine his course. Constitutionalists are seeking to heal the breach. * * *

Cobb.

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12313.

[Document 796]

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

No. 21.] Special Commission of the President of
the United States, Near the Mediators,
Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 17, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose to you herewith a copy of a memorandum in which, for greater convenience, the plan submitted by the Mediators to serve as a basis for discussion and the suggestions for modifications of this plan contained in your telegram of the 3rd instant, have been placed in parallel columns.

I have [etc.]

H. Pergival Dodge.

[Inclosure.]

[Untitled]

mediators’ plan. united states plan.

I. I.

In order to effect a transfer of power from the hands of General Huerta to a new government and conforming to the machinery provided by the Constitution, according to which the Minister of Foreign Relations assumes the Executive power in the event of the inability to act or resignation of the Chief Executive, General Huerta will appoint a person to take charge of the portfolio of Foreign Relations now vacant, and thereupon submit his own resignation to the Congress and turn the reins of Government over to the Minister of Foreign Relations. The latter would in his turn organize his Cabinet distributing all of the portfolios among four members who would constitute with him the Board of Government. In order to effect a transfer of power to a Provisional Government General Huerta will withdraw and the Provisional Government to be organized as hereinafter provided shall be recognized at Mexico City.

II. II.

The personnel of the Board of Government shall be selected on the following basis: One member who shall be the Provisional President of the Republic to be selected from neutral element, and whose honor and standing shall be so high as to remove him from any partisan objection; two members to be selected respectively from elements of high standing and representatives of each of the two great factions into which Mexican political opinion is at the present time divided; and the other two members to be persons of recognized honor and general acceptance without reflecting particularly the conflicting tendencies. The Provisional Government to consist of:

One member of high standing and honor who shall be the Provisional President of the Republic and be selected from the Constitutionalists;

Three persons of high standing and honor to constitute a Board of Elections; two of such Board to be Constitutionalists and one a person who has refrained from active participation in recent affairs and who is the representative of other political elements.

III. III.

The constitution of this Board to be accompanied by an immediate grant of a general and absolute amnesty to all Mexicans. The constitution of the Provisional Government to be accompanied by the immediate grant of general and absolute amnesty to all Mexicans for political offenses.

IV. IV.

The first and most fundamental duty of this Board of Government would be an immediate call to election for President of the Republic and members of Congress so that the operation of the Mexican public powers should be placed on a constitutional basis within the shortest reasonable time possible. There being no electoral law of a general and permanent character, these elections shall be governed by the provisions of the law of May 22, 1912, which the Board of Government shall expressly adapt thereto. The Board of Elections shall not be associated with the Provisional President in any administrative matters, but shall have complete authority to arrange for and conduct the elections. The first and most fundamental duty of the Board of Elections, after the organization of the Provisional Government and the promulgation of reforms by the President, shall be, within a reasonable time and on a date to be proclaimed by them after conference with the Provisional President, to call election for President of the Republic and Members of Congress so that the operation of the Mexican public powers shall be placed on a constitutional basis within the shortest reasonable time possible. There being no electoral law of a general and permanent character, these selections shall be governed by the provisions of the law of May 22, 1912, which the Board of Elections shall expressly adapt thereto. Neither the Provisional President nor the members of the Board of Elections shall be candidates for office at any such elections.

V. V.

The Board of Government will be requested to devote special attention to the following problems: The agrarian question;

Electoral legislation;

Laws of compulsory primary education and agricultural education;

Organization of the necessary schools and experimental institutions.

The Provisional President shall be pledged to promptly formulate and promulgate at the earliest possible time such agrarian, political and electoral reforms as are necessary to quiet the revolutionary agitations of the Republic.

VI. VI.

The Board of Government will likewise be requested to devote special attention to the advisability of taking steps for the creation of international commissions for the solution of the claims of foreigners for damages due to military acts or to the acts of the national authorities. A special commission would be organized on similar bases to settle the claims of nationals.
It is understood that the Government of the United States will not present any claim whatsoever for a war indemnity. The Provisional President will also be pledged to devote special attention to the advisability of taking steps for the creation of international commissions for the solution of the claims of foreigners for damages due to military acts or the acts of the national authorities. A special commission would be organized on similar bases to settle the claims of nationals.
It is understood that the Government of the United States will not present any claim whatsoever for a war indemnity.

VII. VII.

The Provisional Government of Mexico, organized in the form stated, shall be recognized without delay by the Government of the United States and by the Governments of the three mediating countries. The Provisional Government of Mexico, organized in the form stated, shall be recognized by the Government of the United States and by the Governments of the three mediating countries as soon as it is made evident that the plan is to be carried out as agreed upon.

VIII. VIII.

The American forces of occupation shall proceed to evacuate the Mexican territory they now occupy fifteen days after the date the Provisional Government notifies the Government of the United States that it is organized through regular channels or through the Mediators, and such evacuation shall be completed within a period not exceeding thirty days, unless the Provisional Government shall, through its Chancellery, give its consent to an extension of this period. The time and manner of evacuation by the forces of the United States In Mexico to be a matter of agreement between the United States and the Provisional Government.

Consul Edwards to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12273.

[Document 797]

Consul Edwards to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, June 17, 1914.

After interviews with local officials here who are in constant communication with General Villa and General Carranza, I am convinced that the differences arising between the two men concerning the movements of the army will not in the least retard the campaign against Huerta Government. It is the claim of Villa’s friends that the contest against Carranza is only for the purpose of freeing the movements of the troops from the dictatorship of Carranza. All army officers are with Villa, who is today advancing on Zacatecas. Villa asked permission to go and attack that city, but Carranza refused this permission, whereupon Villa sent his resignation to Carranza and it was accepted at once and Villa was ordered to Chihuahua to become civil governor. A meeting of all army officers was called, it is said, and Villa was prevailed on to take the field. All indications point to such an adjustment of the matter as will not seriously interfere with the success of the Constitutionalist cause.

Edwards.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12305.

[Document 798]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

El Paso, June 18, 1914, 8 p.m.

It was impossible to prevent breach between Villa and Carranza, but Villa’s plan, if carried out, will not interfere with progress of revolution. His troops have left Torreon for Zacatecas and will push forward toward Mexico rapidly. Whenever he encounters other revolutionary leaders he will give them the option of fighting under him or of going to some other division: to Gonzalez or Obregón. When they reach Mexico, Villa says, he will bend to the will of all the generals and deliver the presidency to whomsoever they select in a council of generals, even if it be to Carranza. He does not intend hostilities toward Carranza, but says he will still receive orders from him when they do not interfere with his military operations.* * * I asked him his position as to mediation and he replied that should the United States recommend a certain course to him it would receive profound consideration as he knew the friendship that exists towards Mexico and that the United States would recommend nothing that would not be beneficial to the country.

Carothers.

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12314.

[Document 799]

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

No. 22.] Special Commission of the President of
the United States, Near the Mediators,
Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 20, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith an English translation of a letter, dated the 17th instant, addressed by Señor Rabasa, the senior delegate of General Huerta, to Mr. Justice Lamar in reply to his letter of the 15th instant, a copy of which was enclosed in my despatch No. 20 of the 16th instant. I also enclose a copy of Mr. Justice Lamar’s reply, dated the 18th instant, to this last letter from Señor Rabasa.

I have. [etc.]

H. Percival Dodge.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

Señor Rabasa to Mr. Justice Lamar.

Niagara Falls,
Canada, June 17, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Lamar: I ought to limit this letter to an acknowledgment of the receipt of the one which you were good enough to address to me under date of the 15th, which I received during the evening; but I see myself obliged to correct the principal ideas in it since they offer entirely the contents of the memorandum of the Mexican Delegation, and concern themselves in contesting what the memorandum has not stated. If, as I sincerely request, you will read this document again, you will recognize the following mistakes into which your letter has fallen:

First, the letter says that the memorandum is based “upon the theory that the American Government has a choice as to who should be Provisional President and is proposing to have that choice forced upon the people of Mexico by the presence of an army destroying the country’s electoral liberty.” We do not say this in the memorandum nor could we have said so since, as the Provisional President would be the result of an agreement of the opposing parties, the liberty of the Mexican people has nothing to do with his nomination since it is not going to elect him, and the American army has as little to do with it since it could exert no pressure upon the agreements which are made in the conferences.

Second, your letter says: “So evident is the advisability of selecting a Constitutionalist that it seems to be conceded that it is both necessary and proper that the Provisional President should be appointed from that party, though you say that he should be one who, though a member of that party, has been so inactive that he might be classed as a neutral.” Neither this phrase nor the idea which it expresses are to be found in any part of the memorandum.

Third, your letter says: “We greatly regret that you made the suggestion that the army is to be detained in Mexico as a means of coercion and depriving Mexico of electoral liberty.” The memorandum does not say this. Here are the lines whose sense you change completely and which refer to the continuance of the American forces until the period of the election: “The elections of Mexico neither can nor ought to take place under a display of material pressure upon its people.” This phrase says clearly, not that the American forces are to exercise pressure nor that they are there for the purpose of exercising pressure during the electoral process, but that their presence would be a display of material power wholly inconsistent and inopportune at the moment of an election.

The first point to which I invite your attention is the basis of the entire letter which you were good enough to address to me; this has resulted in leaving without a reply everything the memorandum really states.

To what I have said I will add only two observations which refer to the fundamental elements of your reasoning: 1. You say “that end (to restore peace) can only be attained by consulting the just wishes of the Constitutionalists, who are not only in numerical majority but are now the dominant force in the country.” I allow myself to recall a point which is in the memorandum: The States which are under the control of the rebels contain about 5,000,000 inhabitants, while the remainder contain more than 10,000,000. The numerical majority is not, therefore, declared in favor of the revolution.

2. You allege the same reason, which arithmetic does not admit, in favor of an “electoral board “composed of two Constitutionalists and one who is not a Constitutionalist, and you add that I am unaware that past elections have been held in Mexico under the control of a member of the cabinet representing the dominant party. I am not unaware of this; and I have never praised this system, nor applauded such elections, nor do I desire that they shall so continue. You assure me that the experience of the United States shows that the system which you propose is good; but I suppose that in the United States an electoral board is not composed of twice the number of members of one party with respect to the other.

I have desired to make these corrections, because it has greatly pained the Mexican Delegation that, you should misjudge it through error in your appreciation of the sense of its words and because I believe that as well on your side as upon that of your honorable colleague there is the greatest solicitude that the conference shall come to a happy termination.

I beg you to pardon me for troubling you with this letter since I well understand that we ought not to hold a discussion in this form. The object of the memorandum was only to bring to the American Delegation the basis upon which the Mexican Delegation rested, in order that it might be able to consider them with attention.

I am [etc]

Emilio Rabasa.

Mr. Justice Lamar to Señor Rabasa.

Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 18, 1914.

Dear Mr. Rabasa: I have your letter June 17th in reply to my letter of June 15th answering your objections to the American plan.

I agree with you that it is not advisable for us in this manner to continue the discussion of subjects which are before the Mediators. I, however, avail myself of this opportunity to say that the words “Provisional President” in the first paragraph of my letter were obviously a clerical error—not only the immediate context but the whole letter showing that the reference was to a “Permanent President” to be elected by the people of Mexico and not to a “Provisional President” selected through mediation.

With renewed assurances of respect [etc.]

J. R. Lamar.

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State. File No.812.00/23485.

[Document 800]

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Niagara Falls, June 22, 1914.

At the meeting this morning the Mediators outlined the new plan discussed by Doctor Naón, stating that it had been assented to by the Mexican representatives here and that yesterday the Mediators had sent a letter to Zubáran inviting him and the other representatives of the Constitutionalists to come to Niagara Falls or such other near-by point that might be desired for the purpose of conferring with the Mexican representatives on internal affairs.

The Mediators then read a formal statement which they propose to make a part of the record, in which they set out that the Mexicans were the “only” persons who could make the adjustment and that they “exclusively” have the right and authority to settle internal differences.

We called attention to the fact that this might close the door against the resumption of the mediation if the Mexicans failed to agree among themselves, and might prove a source of trouble if in that event it should hereafter be found desirable to resume the mediation between the present parties thereto.

To this they assented by striking out the words “only” and “exclusively.” They then proposed general propositions which they thought could at once be protocolized, after which we might take a recess until it was known whether the Mexicans had agreed on internal matters.

We send today their plan, and instead of drawing a substitute have made amendments, thinking it advisable to use their language as far as possible.

We call your attention to the fact that in their Paragraph 3 they say that upon the constitution of the provisional government in the City of Mexico the United States “will consider the international conflict as definitely closed.” If that language is adopted it could be used as a reason why Vera Cruz should be immediately evacuated when the Mexicans agree on the provisional government. We do not know what is your wish in this regard, nor whether in case the Mexicans fail to agree you desire to discontinue the mediation, leaving responsibility for failure upon the Mexicans, or to have the mediation between the United States and the Huerta delegates resumed.

the mediators’ plan. 39 the american amendments. 39

Paragraph 2. It is understood that the Provisional Government referred to in the foregoing paragraph40 shall be organized in the form and manner determined by the representatives of the two great factions between which the internal struggle in Mexico is taking place. Paragraph 2. The Provisional Government mentioned in the foregoing paragraph40 is that which it is contemplated will be constituted by agreement of the delegations representing the two great parties between which the internal struggle in Mexico is taking place.

Paragraph 3. Upon the constitution of the Provisional Government in the City of Mexico, the Government of the United States of America will consider the international conflict as definitely closed and immediately recognize said Government.
The Government of the United States of America will not in any form whatsoever claim a war indemnity or other international satisfaction. Paragraph 3. The Provisional Government being constituted and recognized, the international matters shall be settled upon these terms: A. The Provisional Government shall proclaim an absolute amnesty to all foreigners for any and all political offenses committed during the period of civil war in Mexico.

B. The Provisional Government shall provide for international commissions for the settlement of the claims of foreigners on account of damages sustained during the period of civil war as a consequence of military acts or the acts of national authorities.

C. The Government of the United States of America will not in any form whatsoever claim a war indemnity or other international satisfaction.

D. The Government of the United States of America agrees to evacuate the territory of the United. Mexican States now occupied by its military and naval forces within the time and under the conditions to be agreed on with the Provisional Government.

Paragraph 4. The Provisional Government shall organize international commissions for the settlement of the claims of foreigners for damages sustained during the period of civil war as a consequence of military acts or the acts of national authorities.

Paragraph 5. The Government of the United States of America agrees to evacuate the territory of the United Mexican States now occupied by its military and naval forces within the time and under the conditions agreed on with the Provisional Government.

Commissioners

39 The italicized passage of each plan corresponds with no passage in the other.

39 The italicized passage of each plan corresponds with no passage in the other.

40 For Paragraph 1 see the Commissioners’ telegram of June 11, ante, and Protocol 3 with Mr. Dodge’s No. 25 of July 1, post.

40 For Paragraph 1 see the Commissioners’ telegram of June 11, ante, and Protocol 3 with Mr. Dodge’s No. 25 of July 1, post.

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners. File No. 812.00/23486a.

[Document 801]

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 23, 1914.

The President approves of including in the protocol the subjects covered by your amendments, which read as follows:

[Quotes the amendments submitted in the telegram of June 22.]

If the Mediators fail to secure the consent of the Mexican delegates to the last provision, leaving the question of evacuation to be arranged with the provisional government, you will please to have that subject passed for the present. The President is not willing to fix a definite time for evacuation.

Bryan.

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/23487, 23488.

[Document 802]

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Niagara Falls, June 24, 1914.

The Mediators were furnished last night with a copy of the paragraphs you are willing to protocolize. They requested us to meet them at 3.30 today and submitted their draft covering the same points. After discussion it was amended to read as follows:

Paragraph 2. The Provisional Government referred to in protocol No. 341 shall be constituted by agreement of the delegates representing the parties between which the internal struggle in Mexico is taking place.

Paragraph 3. A. Upon the constitution of the Provisional Government in the City of Mexico, the Government of the United States of America will recognize it immediately, and thereupon diplomatic relations between the two countries will be restored.

B. The Government of the United States of America will not in any form whatsoever claim a war indemnity or other international satisfaction.

C. The Provisional Government will proclaim an absolute amnesty to all foreigners for any and all political offenses committed during the period of civil war in Mexico.

D. The Provisional Government will negotiate for the constitution of international commissions for the settlement of the claims of foreigners on account of damages sustained during the period of civil war as a consequence of military acts or the acts of national authorities.

You will notice that, following your suggestion, the provision relating to the evacuation of Vera Cruz was postponed.

We called attention to the fact that provisions for amnesty were limited to foreigners solely for the reason that amnesty for Mexicans was a matter of domestic policy, but expressed the hope that the representatives for the two Mexican parties would provide for a broad and general amnesty for all Mexicans.

We objected to the phrase “thus closing the international incident “at the end of 3, A, as proposed by the Mediators. We called attention to the fact that this language might be construed so as to make it incumbent upon the United States to withdraw from Vera Cruz immediately upon the recognition of the provisional government. At last the Mediators proposed to strike out those words and insert “and diplomatic relations between the two countries will then be restored.”

After the paragraphs had been protocolized we called attention to the fact that they had been drafted and adopted in expectation that the Mexican representatives would agree among themselves upon matters of internal policy; but if that expectation should unfortunately fail we understood that the adoption of those paragraphs was without prejudice to have the matters again brought before the Mediators in case that course was found to be desirable or necessary.

Commissioners

41 See Mr. Dodge’s No, 25 of July 1, post.

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12363.

[Document 803]

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

No. 24.] Prospect House,
Niagara Falls, N. T., June 25, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith a summary of the proceedings of the fourth plenary conference of the mediation, which was held last evening at 9.45, the substance of which appears in the Commissioners’telegram.

I have [etc.]

H. Percival Dodge.

[Inclosure.]

Summary of the Proceedings of the Fourth Plenary Session of the Mediation Conference, June 24, 1914.

The session was opened by the reading of the minutes of the third plenary session, which were approved.

Mr. Da Gama, the Brazilian Ambassador, who presided, then had a statement of the Mediators read, relative to the consideration of Mexican internal questions by the conference and as to the reason why the Mediators had now thought it their duty to invite representatives of both contending factions to meet, in order if possible to agree upon bases of adjustment. A copy of this statement, which was referred to in the Commissioners’ telegram of the 22nd instant, is enclosed. This statement was made a part of the minutes of the session without comment.

The three articles to be protocolized, of which the English text was telegraphed in the Commissioners’ telegram of the 24th instant, were then read in English and in Spanish.

Mr. Justice Lamar, after the reading of Section C of Article 3, drew attention to the fact that the provision of amnesty was limited to foreigners solely for the reason that amnesty for Mexicans was an internal question, expressing the hope that the representatives of the two Mexican parties would provide for a broad and general amnesty for all Mexicans. After the reading of the three articles he further drew attention to the fact that they were protocolized in the expectation that the Mexican representatives of both parties would agree upon internal questions and that, if this expectation should unfortunately fail, the American Commissioners understood that the adoption of these articles was without prejudice to these matters being brought again before the Mediators, in case such a course was found to be desirable or necessary. To this the Mediators and the Huertista representatives assented. The articles were thereupon approved without further discussion. A copy of these articles is enclosed. The session thereupon adjourned.

H. Percival Dodge.

[Subinclosure 1.]

Statement of the Mediators included in the Minutes of the Fourth Plenary Conference.

The internal question of Mexico constitutes an essential difficulty in the way of the full solution of the conflict pending with the United States of America. We so understood when we extended to all the parties interested the tender of our good offices toward the peaceful settlement of this conflict.

Unfortunately, circumstances we respect did not permit the Constitutionalist Party, notwithstanding its acceptance in principle of our tender, to participate in the Conferences of the Mediation under the conditions which we considered as indispensable if they were to be conducted in that atmosphere of cordiality and confidence which would facilitate the solution sought. Notwithstanding this, we, the Mediators, understand that at the present moment it is our duty to remove all obstacles which might stand in the way of the attainment of the purpose which prompted the tender of our good offices, and the study we have made of all the circumstances connected with that conflict has shown us that its settlement is dependent, at the present moment, on the solution of the internal question between the contending parties, and that it is the latter to whom peculiarly belongs the right and the authority to solve it. It is for this reason that we have thought it our duty to invite, as we have, both the Representatives of the Constitutionalist Party and those of the Government of General Huerta accredited to the Conferences of the Mediation to meet at a place near that where they are being held, in order to discuss and agree between themselves on the bases of an arrangement whereby the political pacification of the country could be consummated, with the termination of the civil war and the organization of a provisional government to conduct the general elections for the establishment of the powers of a permanent government.

In this manner, if an unprejudiced and compromising spirit could prevail at said conferences, we trust that Mexican patriotism will remove, by itself and without outside interference, the causes of the sorrowful situation in which the country finds itself at the present time, reestablishing thereby the exercise without reservations of her national sovereignty and of her material and moral prosperity.

Furthermore, the mediation in which we are engaged, it should be unnecessary to repeat, has not proposed in any form whatsoever to interfere in, decide or legislate on internal questions of Mexico, but seeks, as at all times it has sought, to bring about between the contending parties a serene discussion of the conflicting interests which now divide them in order to procure or facilitate an agreement between them with the aid of our friendly counsel, without prejudgment or partiality.

[Subinclosure 2.]

Text of Mediation Protocol No. 4.

I.42

The Provisional Government referred to in protocol No. 343 shall be constituted by agreement of the delegates representing the parties between which the internal struggle in Mexico is taking place.

II.44

A. Upon the constitution of the Provisional Government in the City of Mexico, the Government of the United States of America will recognize it immediately, and thereupon diplomatic relations between the two countries will be restored.

B. The Government of the United States of America will not in any form whatsoever claim a war indemnity or other international satisfaction.

C. The Provisional Government will proclaim an absolute amnesty to all foreigners for any and all political offenses committed during the period of civil war in Mexico.

D. The Provisional Government will negotiate for the constitution of international commissions for the settlement of the claims of foreigners on account of damages sustained during the period of civil war as a consequence of military acts or the acts of national authorities.

III.

The three mediating Governments agree on their part to recognize the Provisional Government organized as provided by Section I of this protocol.

42 Corresponding to Paragraph 2 of the telegram of June 24.

43 See the text in Mr. Dodge’s No. 25 of July 1, post.

44 Corresponding to Paragraph 3 of the telegram of June 24.

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/23490.

[Document 804]

The Special Commissioners to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Niagara Falls, June 29, 1914.

Referring to and repeating our conversation over the long-distance telephone this afternoon:

The mediation was offered to settle the conflict between the United States and Mexico. The delegates who were here claimed to represent the United States of Mexico and are so referred to in the minutes. We, however, filed a protest stating that we could not recognize them as representing the United States of Mexico, and all the minutes are signed subject to that protest.

In view of that protest and the protocols agreed to last week we are, however, in the position of having made a settlement of the international matters between the United States and Mexico when there is no representative of Mexico before the Mediators.

The Mediators have asked us to sign the protocols and we do not see how we can refuse, but cannot refrain from calling attention to the apparent incongruity of making an agreement as to international affairs when we ourselves claim that there is no representative of Mexico before the Mediators. These minutes contain a statement that these protocols are signed on the supposition that internal matters would be adjusted between the representatives of the Mexican factions; but if unfortunately that expectation was not realized, then the protocols could be reconsidered if necessary.

Of course this incongruity was originally occasioned by our expectation that the Constitutionalists would either become a party to the mediation or accept its decision, and the technical difficulty will still be removed if the Constitutionalists do enter into negotiations as to internal affairs with the representatives who are now here.

In view of the fact that the Mediators are very earnest in their desire to have the minutes signed, and our promise to give it immediate attention, we should be glad to hear from you as soon as convenient.

Commissioners

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners. File No. 812.00/23490.

[Document 805]

The Secretary of State to the Special Commissioners.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 1, 1914.

As the minutes expressly state that the agreements covered by the protocols are conditional upon the establishment of a provisional government in Mexico acceptably to the contending factions, the President directs you to sign the minutes stipulating in so doing that— In signing these minutes the representatives of the President of the United States feel it to be their duty to declare that they do so with the express understanding that nothing contained herein is to be construed as a recognition of the government of General Huerta by the Government of the United States.

Bryan.

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12395.

[Document 806]

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

No. 25.] Special Commission of the President of
the United States, Near the Mediators,
Niagara Falls, N. Y., July 1, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose to you herewith copies of the English text of the protocols of the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Plenary Conferences held, respectively, on May 20, May 23, and June 12 last, which have now been received from the Mediators. Summaries of these protocols with the more important portions of the text have been forwarded by me to the Department immediately after each Conference took place and the Department has also been fully informed of them through the Commissioners’ telegrams.

While adding that a copy of the protocol of the Fourth Plenary Conference,45 the last so far held, will be forwarded as soon as it is received, I have the honor [etc.]

H. Percival Dodge.

[Inclosure.]

Protocols of the Conferences held by the Delegates of the United States of America and of the United Mexican States in connection with the Mediation offered by the Republics of Argentina, Brazil and Chile.

protocol no. 1.

[Extract.]

At the City of Niagara Falls, Province of Ontario, Dominion of Canada, in the Conference Hall in the Clifton Hotel, at 3 p.m., the twentieth day of May, nineteen hundred and fourteen, there met, for the purposes of the mediation offered by the Governments of Argentina, Brazil and Chile, in the conflict pending between the United States of America and the United Mexican States, the representatives of both parties, under the presidency of the Plenipotentiary Mediators, to wit:

For the United States of America: Messrs. Joseph R. Lamar, Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States; Frederick W. Lehmann; and the Secretary, Mr. H. Percival Dodge.

For the United Mexican States: Messrs. Emilio Rabasa, Agustin Rodriguez, Luis Elguero; and the Secretary, Mr. Rafael Elguero.

And the Plenipotentiary Mediators: The Brazilian Ambassador, Domicio da Gama; and the Argentine Minister, Romulo S. Naón.

The Ambassador of Brazil stated that, due to unforeseen causes, the Minister of Chile was unable to attend this first meeting and that he had expressly requested that the Delegates be informed of his wish that the inaugural session should not be postponed on that account.

Thereupon the Brazilian Ambassador said:

[Text of the speech.]

Upon the conclusion of the address of the Brazilian Ambassador, Joseph R. Lamar, Delegate for the United States of America, took the floor stating that his country was following with close attention the initiative of the Mediators, whose task awakened a just sentiment of sympathy, inasmuch as the earnest efforts of the Latin-American Republics were fully appreciated.

Emilio Rabasa, Delegate for the United Mexican States, made reply in his turn and stated that, prompted by a sentiment which was both personal to him and to his Government, he wished to make the words of the Ambassador of Brazil his own; that the aspiration of this Conference responded in its general principles to the existing world sentiment in favor of peace; that on behalf of the Mexican Nation and Government it was incumbent upon him to thank the Mediators for their noble initiative, and he closed giving assurance of the earnest wishes of the Delegation of which he is the head, to solve the present conflict and arrive at an amicable agreement.

Thereupon the Brazilian Ambassador announced to the Delegates that the following had been appointed the Secretaries of the Mediation: Alberto de Ipanema Moreira, First Secretary of the Brazilian Embassy; Manuel Salinas, First Secretary of the Legation of Chile, and Enrique Gil, First Secretary of Legation ad hoc of Argentina.

Thereupon there was submitted to the Delegates the order of business to govern the deliberations of the Conference, and which, upon approval thereof, was ordered spread on the minutes. The order of business reads as follows:

[Order of business.]

The Brazilian Ambassador stated that it had been agreed that the work of the Mediation should be developed at private sessions between the Mediators and the Delegates and that a full session should be called only in accordance with the order of business to which reference has been made.

Before signing these minutes Mr. Lamar requested that the following statement be made a part thereof: In the minutes of this plenary conference Messrs. Emilio Rabasa, Agustin Rodriguez, Luis Elguero, and Rafael Elguero, Secretary, are described as the “Representatives of the United Mexican States.” The Government that we represent has not recognized as the Government of Mexico the authorities by whom the gentlemen named have been accredited to this Conference and, while pleased and ready at all times to meet them, we can not consistently with the attitude maintained by our Government accept them as Representatives of the United Mexican States.

With this reservation and explanation, we are prepared to sign this and future minutes and protocols.

It was resolved to consider the above statement as forming a part of the minutes.

Domicio da Gama.

F. W. Lehmann.

Ed’o Suarez Mujica.

Emilio Rabasa.

R. S. Naón.

Ag’n Rodriguez.

J. R. Lamae.

Luis Elgueeo.

Enrique Gil, Sec.

A. de Ipanema Moreira, Sec.

N. Salinas, Jr., Sec.

protocol no. 2.

At the City of Niagara Falls, Province of Ontario, Dominion of Canada, in the Conference Hall in Clifton Hotel, at 6:20 p.m., the twenty-third day of May, nineteen hundred and fourteen, there met for the purposes of the mediation offered by the Governments of Argentina, Brazil and Chile, in the conflict pending between the United States of America and the United Mexican States, the representatives of both sides under the presidency of the Plenipotentiary Mediators, to wit:

For the United States of America: Messrs. Joseph R. Lamar, Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States; Frederick W. Lehmann; and the Secretary, Mr. H. Percival Dodge.

For the United Mexican States: Messrs. Emilio Rabasa, Agustin Rodriguez, Luis Elguero, and the Secretary, Mr. Rafael Elguero.

And the Plenipotentiary Mediators: The Brazilian Ambassador, Domicio da Gama; the Argentine Minister, Romulo S. Naón, and the Chilean Minister, Eduardo Suarez Mujica; the Secretaries of the Mediation acting as the Secretaries of the Conference.

The Brazilian Ambassador stated that this full session had been called at the request of the Mexican Delegation which desired to place before the Plenipotentiary Mediators and the Delegates of the United States a communication from their Government; but that before hearing them, it was necessary to submit to the Conference the minutes of the last session, which was done, and after they had been read in Spanish and English they were approved without objection.

The floor having been granted to the Mexican Delegation, Mr. Rabasa stated: That the Mexican Delegation had requested the Plenipotentiary Mediators to call this full session for the purpose of making a declaration, in compliance with instructions received from their Government. Before doing so, they wished to make some explanation. During the course of the various conversations which the Mexican Delegates have had with the Plenipotentiary Mediators ideas have been extensively interchanged as to the best means of arriving at the solution sought; and among them the possibility of constituting a provisional government was also discussed, which idea appeared during said conversations to be of great value in assuring said solution. For this reason the Delegation thought it should consult its Government on this point, and it did so, expressing an opinion favorable thereto. The Government of Mexico replied at once, transmitting the following declaration of President Huerta: President Huerta declares that if his separation from power is an element which can lead to a solution of the pending international questions and to the pacification of Mexioc, he is ready to resign, because his sole purpose in continuing in power has been to assure peace, according to the solemn promise he made to the Nation; but he presents as an indispensable condition for his resignation, that it actually result in peace by the establishment of a stable government capable of combining the necessary elements of public opinion, a condition without the fulfillment of which he cannot abandon the government, nor will he do so.

President Huerta, who takes this action guided by a spontaneous sentiment of patriotism and not due to the suggestion of any foreign agent, directed the Mexican Delegation to make this declaration at the first full session held, as soon as it was opened. Inasmuch as it had not been heretofore possible to have a conference, and as the fulfillment of the instructions of President Huerta was being delayed, the Mexican Delegation was compelled to request the Plenipotentiary Mediators to call a full session in order to make this formal declaration.

Delegate Lamar then requested to be heard and was given the floor in order to state that the Representatives of the American Government had heard with great interest the declarations made by Mr. Rabasa with regard to the decision of General Huerta and that, understanding that this decision was conditional as it depended on the establishment of a stable government, he desired to know the form in which the end which said condition implied could be attained.

Delegate Rabasa then said that he had really not considered details of procedure, because the Mexican Delegates understand that, following the method proposed by the Mediation and accepted by the Conference, such details should be considered at private conversations with the Plenipotentiary Mediators, and he trusts that by this means they may have an opportunity to meet the wishes of the American Delegation.

Replying to another question of Delegate Lamar, as to whether the declaration made at this session by the Mexican Delegation could be made public or should be considered as of confidential nature, Delegate Rabasa added that he would desire that it be kept absolutely confidential, which wish Delegate Lehmann said would be strictly observed.

Thereupon, at the suggestion of the Plenipotentiary Mediators, it was resolved that, in order to insure the greatest exactness possible in the minutes, the Secretaries of the American and Mexican Delegations should deliver to the Secretaries of the Mediation the exact text of the remarks made at each session by their respective Delegates. The meeting adjourned at 7 p.m. In testimony whereof the following signatures were affixed:

Domicto da Gama.

Romulo S. Naón.

J. R. Lamar.

Emilio Rabasa.

F. H. Lehmann.

Ag’n. Rodríguez.

Ed’o Suárez Mujica.

Luis Elguero.

A. de Ipanema Moreira.

Enrique Gil.

N. Salinas, Jr.

protocol no. 3.

At the City of Niagara Falls, Province of Ontario, Dominion of Canada, in the Conference Hall in the Clifton Hotel, at 4 p.m., the twelfth day of June, nineteen hundred and fourteen, there met, for the purposes of the mediation offered by the Governments of Argentina, Brazil and Chile, in the conflict pending between the United States of America and the United Mexican States, the representatives of both parties, under the Presidency of the Plenipotentiary Mediators, to wit:

For the United States of America: Messrs. Joseph R. Lamar, Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States; Frederick W. Lehmann; and the Secretary, Mr. H. Percival Dodge.

For the United Mexican States: Messrs. Emilio Rabasa, Agustin Rodriguez. Luis Elguero; and the Secretary, Mr. Rafael Elguero.

And the Plenipotentiary Mediators: The Brazilian Ambassador, Domicio da Gama; the Argentine Minister, Romulo S. Naán, and the Chilean Minister, Eduardo Suárez Mujica; the Secretaries of the Mediation acting as Secretaries of the Conference.

The Brazilian Ambassador stated that this full session had been called for the purpose of protocolizing the decision reached between the Representatives accredited to the Mediation, regarding the first point of the plan of pacification under consideration; but that before proceeding with such protocolization, the Minutes of the last session should be submitted to the Conference.

These minutes having been read in Spanish and English, they were approved without remarks.

Thereupon the form of the resolution to be protocolized was read as drawn in English by Mr. Lamar, Delegate of the United States of America, as follows: A Provisional Government for the United Mexican States, constituted as hereinafter provided, shall be recognized at Mexico City at noon on the_____day of_______________________1914 from which time it shall exercise governmental powers until the inauguration of a Constitutional President.

The version of this form in Spanish gave rise to a brief discussion, being finally drawn as follows: El dia_______________de 1914, a las doce meridiano se constituirá y reconocera en la Ciudad de México un Gobierno Provisorio organizado en la forma que mas adelante so indica y que ejercera desde ese momento y hasta la inauguración de un Presidente Constitutional el Poder Público de la Nación.

The resolution as evidenced by the forms transcribed above was declared as protocolized, and the session adjourned at 4.50 p.m.

In testimony whereof the following signatures were affixed:

Domicio da Gama.

Edó Suárez Mujica.

R. S. Naón.

Agn. RodrIguez.

Emilio Rabasa.

Luis Elguero.

J. R. Lamar.

F. W. Lehmann.

Enrique Gil, Sec.

A de Ipanema Moreira, Sec.

N. Salinas, Jr., Sec.

45 Not printed; a summary of the proceedings and the text of Protocol No. 4 are to be found with Mr. Dodge’s No. 24 of June 25, ante.

The Secretary of State to certain American Consuls File No. 812.00/12392a–j.

[Document 807]

The Secretary of State to certain American Consuls 46

Department of State,
Washington, July 1, 1914.

Sir: The Department is about to send Mr. Leon J. Canova to Mexico as a special representative to act in conjunction with Mr. George C. Carothers, who for some time past has been engaged on special and confidential work in northern Mexico for the Department.

The work of these men is of a nature which the Department feels cannot well be delegated to officers assigned to specific posts with other duties to perform and their appointment is in no way intended as a reflection upon any officer in the Service.

The Department asks for the fullest and most sympathetic cooperation between the officers in the Service and these special confidential agents.

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

46 Those at Chihuahuia, Ciudad Juárez, Ciudad Porflrio Díaz, Durango, Hermosillo, Matamoros, Monterey, Nuevo Laredo and Tampico.

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.00/12411.

[Document 808]

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 26.] Special Commissioners of the President of the
United States, near the Mediators,
Washington, July 3, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith the original of a note dated the 1st instant, received by the Commissioners from the Mediators, together with an English translation of the same which I have made.* * * I also enclose a copy of a note dated today, addressed by the Commissioners to the Mediators in reply to the foregoing.* * * I further enclose a clipping from the New York Times of the 3d instant, in which is given the reply of the Huertista delegates to an identic note of the Mediators addressed to them.* * *

I have [etc.]

H. Percival Dodge.

[Inclosure 1—Identic note—Translation.]

The Mediators to the United States Special Commissioners and the Delegates of General Huerta.

Niagara Falls, July 1, 1914.

Sirs: I nave the honor to inform you that the Representative in Washington of the Chief of the Constitutionalist Party of Mexico, Mr. Carranza, has sent us his reply47 to our communication of the 21st ultimo, of which we informed you in the [fourth]Plenary Session, of the 24th, in which we invited him to appoint representatives to discuss and agree directly with the Delegates of General Huerta as to the organization of the Provisional Government constituted to consolidate the pacification of the country and to provide for the reestablishment of a normal regime. In that reply the said Representative informs us that Mr. Carranza, duly considering the well-conceived purpose of our invitation and being inspired with the desire to give to Mexico a stable peace, has nevertheless felt bound to consult the opinion of the generals of the Constitutionalist Army relative to the appointment of delegates, as much on account of the necessity of authorizing a modification in what is provided in the Plan of Guadalupe as in order to insure the strict fulfillment of the settlement that might be arrived at. On this account, he adds, Mr. Carranza has already taken the necessary steps to consult the said generals, “and only desires earnestly to request that a short delay may be conceded, in the course of which he hopes to receive the answers of his companions in arms so as to be able to appoint delegates to confer with the delegates of General Huerta.”

The undersigned believe, in view of the communication which they have just quoted, and taking into consideration the sense of the agreements protocolized during the session of June 24, that all that remains to be done for the fulfillment of the task which it was their good fortune to enter upon two months ago does not require for the moment their presence at this place, and that the work, now belonging to the Mexican delegations, can be renewed without any difficulty when the arrival of the representatives of the Constitutionalist Party is announced. In fact, the protocol of June 24 having settled satisfactorily all the matters deriving from the incidents that originated our good offices and the subsequent mediation of the Governments of Argentina, Brazil and Chile in the conflict between the Government of the United States and that of General Huerta, nothing more remains to be done but the organization and establishment of a Provisional Government in Mexico, a patriotic work reserved exclusively to the delegation of the two parties there contending.

Therefore the presence of the undersigned here during the days included in the term alluded to in the communication from the Representative of Mr. Carranza would be devoid of any useful object; but, it is unnecessary to add, at the moment when the Mexican delegations begin their common work the Mediators will be ready to continue, at any place selected, to assist, as they have promised, in the work of adjustment and concord which the patriotic endeavor of these delegations will doubtless accomplish. Consequently any communication from yourselves may be addressed to the Brazilian Ambassador at 2419 Massachusetts Avenue, Washington, D. C.

We renew [etc.]

D. da Gama.

R. S. Naón.

Ed’o Suarez Mujica.

[Inclosure 2.]

The United States Special Commissioners to the Mediators.

Special Commissioners of the President of
the United States, near the Mediators,
Washington, July 3, 1914.

Excellencies: We have the honor, to acknowledge the receipt of your esteemed communication dated the 1st instant, by which you have been good enough to inform us of the reply which you have received from General Carranza requesting a short delay in the course of which he hopes to receive the replies of his companions in arms so as to be able to appoint delegates to confer with the Delegates of General Huerta. Your excellencies state that your presence at Niagara Falls during this interval would have no useful object but that as soon as the Mexican Delegates begin their work you will be disposed, wherever it may be, to continue to assist them by your mediation.

Agreeing with you that anything remaining to be done growing out of the matters derived from the incidents which originated your good offices can best be done after the arrival of representatives of the Constitutionalist party is announced, we note that your excellencies have decided to take a recess, and we will accordingly hold ourselves in readiness to reassemble at any time at which you may reconvene the Conference. In the meantime, should occasion require, we will avail ourselves of the opportunity to communicate with you at the address indicated in your note.

We have [etc.]

J. R. Lamar.

F. W. Lehmann.

[Inclosure 3—Translation.]

The Delegates of General Hueria to the Mediators.

Niagara Falls, July 2, 1914.

Your Excellencies: The courteous note of your excellencies of yesterday informs us that the Chief of the Constitutionalist Party, Senor Carranza, answered an invitation which your excellencies addressed to him to send representatives who would confer with us on the pacification of Mexico, setting forth the need he has of a short time in which to consult other military chiefs as to the appointment of delegates, both to authorize the modification of the revolutionary plan and to insure the fulfillment of any arrangement which may be arrived at. The note we have the honor to refer to adds that, to make effective and to carry out the international agreements concluded, all that remains to be done is to organize and establish a provisional government in Mexico, a work of patriotism exclusively reserved to the delegations of the two parties there contending. And in this connection your excellencies are pleased to add that the Mediators continue disposed to help the parties in the struggle with their good offices in that work of harmony for the success of which you hope as a result of the patriotic efforts of the delegations.

We thank you for communicating to us the facts referred to and, with a full appreciation of its worth, your offer to continue using, for the achievement of internal peace in our country, the same good offices which have already and so efficaciously served to solve the international conflict; and in accepting them, with the best of good will, we assure your excellencies that your appeal to our patriotism finds it already active as the chief thing that has inspired and guided our conduct.

The undersigned delegates, foreign to the struggle of which Mexico is the scene and perhaps because of this circumstance selected to form the delegation, did not come to the international conferences to represent any party, because the national honor and external peace are the highest interests of all parties and all Mexicans. Neither do we need to represent any party in the conferences we may possibly hold with the delegates of the other, because it suffices us to represent the national aspiration for peace, which is the real national sentiment and which is above all the animosities aroused by civil war.

Our powers authorized us to confer in the name of the Government constituted in Mexico and presided over by General Huerta; before receiving them we had taken soundings to see of what resolves the Chief of the Government was capable, and we came to the conferences in the confidence, which he has not betrayed, that he would make every sacrifice of himself which was not incompatible with his dignity, always provided it was for the good of the nation. This has been done, and nobody can deny the high merit that lies in those personal concessions, without sacrifice of either national or personal decorum, which have brought to a close the peace negotiations.

The basis of the agreements will insure external peace, the restoration of internal harmony; in a word, national rebirth and national honor lie in the organization of a provisional government in Mexico. If it is organized, all that will remain to be done will be the execution of the agreements that promise these boons; if it is not organized, the agreements, lacking their base, will be destroyed and Mexico’s situation will be the same as before—uncertainty for the future and evil for the present.

As your excellencies know, it is the patriotism of rival Mexicans which must now work to save Mexico. Both the Government he presides over and General Huerta himself have done all that is necessary on their part to bring the situation to the present point. We delegates have put forth our utmost efforts in order that the peace agreements may be carried out by means of the organization of a provisional government effected in accord with the Constitutionalist delegates.

We must trust that patriotism will do its part among the Constitutionalists, but should this not be the case we will not bear the burden of so grave a responsibility.

We have made this exposition of our conception of the present situation in order that your excellencies, if you see fit to do so, may communicate it to the responsible agent of the Constitutionalist Party, as a step toward the rapprochement which your excellencies wish to bring about and maintain.

Once more we thank your excellencies for your noble effort to obtain the pacification of Mexico, and we beg, if you wish to communicate either your orders or your news to us, that you address them to the first of the undersigned in the care of the Mexican Consulate, New York.

We avail [etc.]

Emilio Rabasa.

Agustin Rodriguez.

Luis Elguero.

47 See text inclosed with Mr. Dodge’s No. 29 of July 6, post.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 812.00/12425a.

[Document 809]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 3, 1914.

Allow me to urge upon you again the importance of bringing the Constitutionalist leaders into hearty cooperation. If the opinion of this Government has weight with them show them how suicidal it will be for them to fall out at this time. They must have confidence in each other and work together until they secure the reforms necessary for the restoration of permanent peace and prosperity.

Vice Consul Silliman will reach Saltillo early next week. He can keep in touch with Carranza while you use your friendship with Villa to restore harmony.

Urge upon Carranza the imperative necessity of sending representatives at once to confer with Huertista representatives. We feel sure they can secure an agreement which will give the Constitutionalists control of the provisional government and thus secure by peaceful means all that they could secure by arms.

Bryan.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. Pile No. 812.00/12472.

[Document 810]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

Gómez Palacio,
Durango, July 5, 1914.

Sir: I saw General Villa Saturday morning, July 4, and had a very confidential talk with him. He is really well disposed, and realizes that a break now will be disastrous, and I am very confident that the whole matter will be patched up. It is possible that General Villa will eliminate himself for a while, going back to Chihuahua, letting Carranza’s troops take San Luis Potosi, then join in the general move on the City of Mexico.* * *

I told him that it was the desire of the American Government that the differences between him and Carranza be settled. He replied with a question, “Is it possible that a great nation like yours can not see what kind of a man Carranza is, and that he stands alone in many of his statements?” I replied that it was not a question now of what Carranza is, but that it would be very embarrassing to us to have a severe break come up now, and that I considered it a patriotic duty of his to conform to the decision of the conferences that are being held, and that in my estimation the more he bent to their will now, the bigger man he would become in the eyes of the world. He gave me to understand that he would do everything possible to arrive at an understanding, and I believe he will.* * *

I have [etc.]

G. C. Carothers.

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12432.

[Document 811]

Secretary Dodge to the Secretary of State.

No. 29.] Department of State,
Washington, July 6, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith a copy, which I have now been able to obtain, of the material part of the letter addressed by General Carranza to the Mediators in reply to their letter to him of the 21st ultimo. This letter is quoted in the Mediators’ letter to our Commissioners announcing a recess, of which a copy was enclosed in my despatch No. 26 of the 3rd instant.

I have [etc.]

H. Percival Dodge.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

[Untitled]

Material portion of a letter addressed by General Carranza to the Mediators in reply to their letter dated June 21, 1911

The Chief of the Constitutionalist Government duly appreciates the noble purpose of the Mediators in addressing him an invitation to treat directly with the Delegates of General Huerta on the organization of a provisional government capable of bringing about in a prompt and consistent form the pacification of Mexico. But notwithstanding his good will to give to the country an organic and durable peace by any means which will not bring to naught the great sacrifices which the Mexican people have made in the present struggle, he is compelled to consult the opinion of the generals of the Constitutionalist Army before deciding on the appointment of delegates to confer on his behalf with those of General Huerta regarding the possibility of reaching an agreement putting an end to the war.

This obligation arises from the promise made by Mr. Carranza and by all Constitutionalists faithfully to carry out the Plan of Guadalupe, which proposes to restore the constitutional order by means of a provisional president and which would be modified if such a government were made to emanate from a possible agreement with the Delegates of General Huerta, as well as from his earnest desire that any agreement reached be strictly fulfilled.

With this end in view and in furtherance of the efforts of the Mediators to procure a peaceful solution of the struggle which the Mexican people have been compelled to sustain in the defense of its institutions, the. First Chief has already addressed the generals of the Constitutionalist Army in consultation, and only desires to request the Mediators to allow him a short period of time during which he hopes to receive answers from his companions in arms, in order to appoint delegates to treat with the Delegates of General Huerta.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12429.

[Document 812]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Saltillo, July 6, 1914.

General Carranza has requested me to communicate to you the reason why the Constitutionalists consider the acceptance of the plan proposing Provisional President inadvisable. He declares that it would be tantamount to compounding felony for it would be a makeshift which would promise only unstable peace and insure another revolution as it did when Madero consented to De la Barra’s becoming Provisional President. He declares that certain reforms can be successfully accomplished only when they are approached as they were by Juarez at Vera Cruz while the country was under revolutionary military rule pending elections when the Government by decree permitted immediate inauguration reforms which if submitted to Congress would have resulted in interminable discussion and assured defeat. A provisional president would necessarily have to convene Congress as it is now constituted in order to even attempt to adopt reforms, and such effort would be labor wasted.

A memorandum of the reforms deemed urgent is being prepared and will be mailed to you in a few days. Pie declared that in order to accept such a plan a conference of army officials must assemble to amend the Plan of Guadalupe which provides that when the Mexican capital has been captured the chief of the army will assume executive power only for the time necessary to call elections to name his successor. All the Constitutionalist generals have been consulted and all except Obregon division, who have not been heard from, have expressed themselves against the plan.

He declared that if arms and ammunition can be obtained through Tampico so he can distribute them to the different divisions of the army he will assuredly be at the capital in a short time and will guarantee establishment of peace upon a firm basis and not on the quicksands of a transaction where no guaranties could be given.

Canova.

The Secretary of State to the Missions in Argentina, Brazil and Chile. File No. 812.00/12430.

[Document 813]

The Secretary of State to the Missions in Argentina, Brazil and Chile.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 7, 1914.

Convey the following to the Minister for Foreign Affairs: The President of the United States desires me to express to the President of [name of country]the deep appreciation of this Government of the friendly services rendered by the Government of [name of country]to the Government and people of the United States in offering its good offices to accommodate the differences which have unhappily arisen between the Government of the United States and the de facto authorities at Mexico City; its admiration for the ability, the patience and the gratifying success with which the distinguished representative of the Government of [name of country]in association with the other Mediators conducted the conference at Niagara Falls; and its great satisfaction that so much has already been accomplished by the mediation in the interest of the peace of America.

Bryan.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12717.

[Document 814]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Extract]

Gomez Palacio, July 9, 1914.

Sir. I have the honor to enclose herewith a memorandum of the agreement arrived at between Mr. Carranza and General Villa. This was given me by General Villa, and contains all but two of the clauses. The two that are not included refer to General Angeles and to the railroad situation.* * *

I have [etc.]

G. C. Carothers.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

Agreement between Generals Carranza and Villa.

1. The Division of the North recognizes Senor Venustiano Carranza as First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army.

2. General Francisco Villa will remain at the head of the Division of the North.

3. Señor Carranza will furnish the Division of the North with all the implements required for the speedy and proper conduct of military operations leaving to its Chief freedom of action in administrative and military affairs when circumstances so demand, under the obligation to report his acts to Senor Carranza for rectification or ratification.

4. The Divisions of the North and of the Northeast submit to Senor Carranza the following list of persons for him to choose from among them the members of his cabinet: Fernando Iglesias Calderón, Luis Cabrera, General Antonio I. Villarreal, Doctor Miguel Silva, Engineer Manuel Bonilla, Engineer Alberto Pani, General Eduardo Hay, General Ignacio L. Pesqueira, Licentiate Miguel Diaz Loinbardo, Licentiate José Vasconcelos, Licentiate Miguel Alessio Robles and Licentiate Feclerico González Garza.

5. On assuming, in accordance with the Plan of Guadalupe,48 the office of Provisional President of the Republic, the citizen First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army will call a convention, whose object will be to discuss and determine the date on which the elections shall be held, the plan of government to be put in practice by the functionaries who shall have been elected, and the other topics of national interest. The convention shall be made up of delegates of the Constitutionalist Army named in councils of military chiefs on the basis of one delegate for every thousand men in the ranks. Every delegate to the convention will be accredited as such by credentials visaed by the chief of the division to which he belongs.

6. For the good of the triumph of the revolutionist arms and to allay feeling in the State of Sonora, the suggestion is respectfully submitted to the citizen First Chief that he take such action as he may deem best to settle the conflict existing in that State without violation of its sovereignty or attack on the person of the constitutionally elected Governor, citizen Jose Ma. Maytorena. Appeal shall also be made to Señor Maytorena’s patriotism to induce him to resign the office of Governor of the State, a person of influence, impartial and affiliated to the Constitutionalist cause being nominated to take charge of the Government of Sonora and afford guaranties to the people whose sacred interests are in danger.

7. It is the citizen First Chief’s exclusive province to appoint and remove employees of the Federal Administration in the States and Territories controlled by the Constitutionalist forces and to assign to them their jurisdiction, duties, and powers.

8. The present conflict being a struggle of the impecunious against the abuses of the powerful and understanding that the causes of the evils that bear down the country spring from pretorianism, plutocracy and clericalism, the Divisions of the North and of the Northeast solemnly pledge themselves to fight until complete banishment of the ex-federal army, which shall be superseded by the Constitutionalist Army, to set up democratic institutions in our country, to bring welfare to labor, financial emancipation to the peasant by an equitable apportionment of land, and other means tending to solve the agrarian question, to correct, chastise, and hold to their responsibilities such members of the Roman Catholic clergy as may have lent moral or physical support to the usurper, Victoriano Huerta.

Torreon, July 8, 1914.

Gen. AntonioI. Villarreal.

Dr. Miguel Silva.

Ing. Manuel Bonilla.

Gen. Cesáreo Castro.

Gen. Luis Caballero.

Gen. Jose Isabel Robles.

Col. Roque González Garza.

Ernesto Meade Ferro, Sec’y.

48 For the text of the Plan of Guadalupe, see footnote 58.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12449.

[Document 815]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate General,
Monterey, July 9, 1914.

General Carranza says a satisfactory understanding between all chiefs is assured. Says he and his chiefs and people greatly appreciate the United States as their great friends. Says he called his chiefs together and that they are all opposed to treating with Huerta’s people and feel that the only way to permanent peace is to fight it out and take Mexico City and the whole country. He says they want the continued patience and sympathy of the United States extended to the end of the fight. He asks that their northern boundary will be kept closed and that Tampico will be kept open to arms and ammunition only when consigned to the First Chief.

Hanna.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12464.

[Document 816]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico49 to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, July 10, 1914.

82. I beg to inform the Department that day before yesterday the protocol signed at Niagara Falls50 was read before Congress and that to-day Licenciado Francisco Carbajal, Chief Justice of the Suprenn Court, was appointed Minister for Foreign Affairs and according to reliable information he will become Provisional President.

For my guidance, and if agreeable to the Department, I should like to learn its views in the event of the above-mentioned change.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

49 Representing the interests of the United States in Mexico; see “Severance of diplomatic relations between the United States and Mexico, etc.”

50 Protocol No. 4; see page 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807]. For the text of Protocol No. 4, concluding the proposal of the Mediators, see page 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 803].

The Chilean Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12479.

[Document 817]

The Chilean Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

No. 560.] Chilean Legation,
Washington, July 10, 1914.

Sir: I hereby perform the pleasant duty of transcribing to your excellency the telegram which I received from the Minister of Foreigi Affairs of Chile, dated to-day, as follows: His Excellency the President of the Republic instructs me to ask you kindly to express to His Excellency President Wilson the profound satisfaction with which the Government and people of Chile received, through Minister Fletcher the cordial message51 which His Excellency the President of the United States saw fit to send them, in which he expresses the gratitude of the American Government and people for the friendly offices offered by my Government in connection with the Argentine and Brazilian Governments on the occasion of the controversy which arose between the United States and the Government of Genera Huerta in Mexico, while referring to the favorable judgment elicited by the action of our representative at the Niagara Falls conferences.

You will likewise express to His Excellency Mr. Wilson the keen pleasure with which the Government and people of Chile received the news of the successful settlement of the differences which gave rise to the mediation intended to obviate the painful consequences of an armed conflict, and you will add that the cordial friendship which binds our two countries together has been substantially strengthened by this new bond of confraternity created by the act of mediation.

Enrique Villegas,
Minister of Foreign Affairs.

I beg of your excellency to kindly bring the contents of the foregoing telegram to the knowledge of His Excellency President Wilson.

I avail myself [etc.]

Antonio B. Agacio.

51 Of July 7.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12469.

[Document 818]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Saltillo, July 10, 1914.

No American should have hoped for a more friendly personal reception than that given me by Governor Carranza yesterday afternoon. Mr. Fabela, Acting Minister of Foreign Relations, and Mr. Canova were present. The desire of the Mediators, the views of the Administration, and the seriousness of the situation, as appearing to the sincere friends of Mexico, were in an unofficial and informal way presented to Governor Carranza in the most courteous and impressive manner possible for me. The deepest attention was given.

While appreciating the good offices of the Mediators, and the past and present attitude of the United States, Governor Carranza appears unwilling to make the least change in plans already formed. He will reply to the Mediators that it is the unanimous conclusion of his generals, accepted by him, that there be no conference with the representatives of General Huerta. At my earnest request that he at least convey some expression to the Huertista representatives he stated that he would telegraph Mr. Zubáran at Washington to announce to the Mediators his willingness to treat with the Huertistas, but only on the basis of unconditional surrender. The telegram is of this date and is as follows: Saltillo, July 10, 1914.

Sr. Lic. Rafael Zubáran Capmany,
Washington, D. C.

Having consulted with the Generals of the Constitutionalist Army which is under my orders as to whether they were of the opinion that I, as Chief of the Constitutionalist Army, should name representatives who would enter into dealings with the representatives of General Huerta for the purpose of designating together a provisional president in order that the present struggle might be terminated, the majority have replied stating that they will not agree to my naming representatives for this purpose. In consequence I instruct you to advise the Ministers of Argentina, Brazil and Chile, in reply52 to their note of June 21 last,53 transmitted by you on the 22d of same month, that, appreciating their proposals that our civil war terminate and thanking them for the interest they have been pleased to show me, it is not possible to send representatives from the First Military Headquarters of the Constitutionalist Army under my charge to deal with the delegates of General Huerta regarding the provisional presidency of the Republic. At the same time express to them in my name that in turn they will please transmit to the delegates of the aforesaid General that the only form acceptable by me to finish our internal struggle is the unconditional surrender of General Victoriano Huerta with the army that sustains him.

Cordially,

The First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army,
V. Carranza.

It was a surprise to learn that no provisional government is deemed desirable. It is not even contemplated. The reforms considered necessary will be made by a government consisting of Governor Carranza in his character as First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army and his associates. It will be a military government and it will continue for such term as is necessary until constitutional order is reestablished throughout the country. When it is considered opportune, elections will be held.

Governor Carranza states that he realizes the advantages that would result from immediate recognition by Argentina, Brazil, Chile and the United States, but that he believes it preferable that recognition come later with himself as First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army and not with him or some other person as provisional president. He says that credit and the confidence of foreign powers will not come with the establishment of a provisional president whose base is unstable but that every one will be able to see a firm foundation for peace in the First Chief sustained by the Mexican people, and that then the foreign powers in a short time will concede as proper and just the recognition of the government.

Governor Carranza does not take into consideration the things attendant upon further continuance fighting until the enemy is annihilated rather than to terminate it, as he says by an arrangement that might result [apparent corruption or omission] in a new and more disastrous revolution, as happened in 1910 in the Treaty of Ciudad Juarez, which placed De la Barra in the provisional presidency, leaving incomplete the revolutionary ideals.

Silliman.

52 This telegram is supplementary to the provisional reply set forth in Mr. Dodge’s No. 29 of July 6.

53 Referred to in the Commissioners’ telegram of June 22, ante.

Chargé Lorillard to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12471.

[Document 819]

Chargé Lorillard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Buenos Aires, July 11, 1914.

In reply to my note, conveying instructions of July 7, Minister for Foreign Affairs replies today as follows: In the name of the Vice President, I reciprocate these declarations which are entirely in accord with the sentiments and intentions which have animated the action of Argentina united with those of Brazil and Chile for the good of American fraternity. It will be always a great cause of pleasure to the Argentine Government to have contributed to a pacific solution doubly flattering as it not only united two nations friendly to us but consecrates the ideal of peace and concord as an efficient force in international relations.

Lorillard.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12497.

[Document 820]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, July 15, 1914.

84. This afternoon General Huerta will resign and Carbajal, the Minister for Foreign Affairs mentioned in my 82, July 10, will take possession as Provisional President, with best disposition to facilitate arrangements for the pacification. Department’s views will be highly appreciated.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/12497.

[Document 821]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 15, 1914.

162. Resignation General Huerta and his departure will greatly simplify matters. We take it for granted that the new President will immediately enter into negotiations with Carranza for the peaceful transfer of authority. No other course seems open. This Government will use its influence to bring the parties together. You will please so advise Carbajal if opportunity presents itself and he desires to know this Government’s position. Congratulate him upon the patriotism which leads him to lend his assistance towards the restoration of order.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 812.00/12519a.

[Document 822]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 16, 1914, 7 p.m.

Accompany General Carranza until further orders so that we may keep in touch with him through you. Advise Department daily of the program for the day following.

We have been assured that the new Provisional President, Carbajal, desires to turn over the Government to the Constitutionalists and that no further bloodshed will be necessary.

Urge Carranza to receive any representative sent by Carbajal and if none are sent advise Carranza to send emissaries to make known to Carbajal the terms upon which transfer of the government may be made. Urge upon Carranza not to allow revenges or cruelties.

The war would seem to be over and all that remains to be done can be done peacefully and a pacific entrance into Mexico City will greatly aid in assuring friendly intercourse with the outside world.

Bryan.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12516.

[Document 823]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, July 16, 1914.

87. Department’s 162, July 15. I have congratulated new President, who expressed his thanks. During my friendly talk with him I noted the following utterances: He is really disposed to make arrangements with the revolutionists but fears complications. He pointed out for instance that he is informed that in Oaxaca some military movements had already started against the Constitutionalists; that the irregular Federal chieftains would be opposed to the immediate triumph of the present revolution and would start a new movement and that the Federal forces themselves would mutiny against the new President unless special guaranties should be afforded them. He would prefer to negotiate in an official way through the Mediators and the Mexican Delegates to the mediation. Principal purpose of the President in accepting the provisional government was to avoid bloodshed and safeguard lives and property and to arrest the advance of the revolutionists towards this capital before an agreement should be reached. Effective steps to this end therefore should be taken.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/12525.

[Document 824]

[Untitled]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, July 17, 1914.

88. The whole diplomatic corps attended today the official reception of Provisional President; Spanish Minister as Dean of Corps made usual address. The President in his reply confirmed his good intentions to promote the pacification of country and frankly added that his person would in no way be an obstacle to it.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/12550.

[Document 825]

[Untitled]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, July 18, 1914.

90. President Carbajal has sent strict orders to all military commanders throughout regions under their control not to execute prisoners under any consideration. He will order that railway line over gap between Tejeria and Tembladeras be repaired and that mail service be properly reestablished. He will also order that Washington’s statue be replaced on its pedestal in Plaza de Dinamarca as a proof of Mexican culture.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

The Secretary of War to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12560.

[Document 826]

The Secretary of War to the Secretary of State.

War Department,
Washington, July 18, 1914.

The Secretary of War presents his compliments to the Honorable the Secretary of State and quotes, for his information, the following telegram from the Commanding General at Vera Cruz, dated July 17, 1914: Huerta, Blanquet and party reached Puerto Mexico 8.15 this evening.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12552.

[Document 827]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Monterey, July 19, 1914.

Governor Carranza received Consul General Hanna, Vice Consul General Robertson and myself this afternoon. The Department’s message of July 16, 7 p.m., was handed him in a formal note. He had previously been fully advised of the contents of the note through a copy furnished Senor Fabela, Acting Secretary for Foreign Relations.

Governor Carranza appreciates the good offices of the Department of State of the United States and expresses his willingness to meet duly accredited and fully authorized representatives of Acting President Carbajal to agree upon the form of the unconditional delivery of the Government at Mexico City to him as First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army and the unconditional surrender of the forces of the opposition.

Governor Carranza names Saltillo as the proper and appropriate place to meet the representatives of Acting President Carbajal.

He suggests that they arrange immediately to attend his representatives there. He also suggests that they come directly north via San Luis Potosí.

Upon notice of their names and of their departure upon their mission, he will arrange for their personal safety and for the temporary suspension of military operations.

Silliman.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/12552.

[Document 828]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 20, 1914, 10 p.m.

167. We have just learned that Carranza is willing to appoint representatives to confer with representatives appointed by Acting President Carbajal at Saltillo. He suggests that they come north by way of San Luis Potosi. He will provide for their protection when he is informed of their names and of their departure from Mexico City. He takes it for granted that they will be duly accredited and fully authorized to agree upon the form of the unconditional delivery of the government at Mexico City to him as First Chief of the Constitutionalists. Carranza will agree to temporary suspension of military operations during conference. This Government will use its influence to secure promise of amnesty and such other guaranties as would properly accompany a transfer of authority.

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 812.00/12552.

[Document 829]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 20, 1914, 10 p.m.

Have asked Brazilian Minister to inform Acting President Carbajal of Carranza’s willingness to meet his representatives at Saltillo. We hope that this will result in a meeting of the representatives of Carbajal and Carranza. We have promised to use the influence of this Government to secure promise of amnesty and such other guaranties as would accompany transfer.

Please say to General Carranza that the President is much gratified at his willingness to suspend military operations and receive representatives of Carbajal. Impress upon General Carranza the important fact that the approval of the outside world, which becomes more and more necessary as he approaches authority, will be dependent upon the extent to which amnesty is granted. The President is anxious that the success of the Constitutionalists shall result in the permanent peace and prosperity of Mexico.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Collector Cobb. File No. 812.00/12552.

[Document 830]

The Secretary of State to Collector Cobb.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 20, 1914.

Please see that the following telegram gets to Carothers, or to Villa if Villa is at Ciudad Juárez: Please see Villa at once and impress upon him the patriotic duty of using his influence to prevent discord among Constitutionalists. It is of vital importance that they do not allow personal feelings or personal quarrels to jeopardize the victory which they have won. Huerta has gone, and the transfer of government can now be secured without further bloodshed. The outlook is bright for peace and prosperity in Mexico, and the President is very anxious that nothing shall occur to delay the reforms needed to restore justice to the people. Villa has played an important part in winning the victory, and the President feels sure that he will use his influence on the side of harmony and cooperation among the Constitutionalists.

Bryan.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12586.

[Document 831]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, July 22, 1914.

94. President Carbajal just told me he is quite willing to treat with Constitutionalist delegates and he suggests that negotiations should take place in New York. For this purpose and for the sake of expediency he is inclined to ratify the powers of the present Mexican delegates or, if it is not desirable, to appoint new ones.

Situation here becoming dangerous on account of persistent daily attacks on places in the surroundings of the capital and also because there are reasons to fear that the army might revolt or disband at any moment incited by the publication of statements attributed to Carranza that he will resort to reprisals and bloodshed upon reaching Mexico and by fear that the arrangement for the transfer of power will not provide sufficient guaranties for them. I believe that a frank statement from Constitutionalist leader disavowing the above charges would greatly contribute towards a peaceful solution and allay public anxiety, thus gaining for him the confidence and good will of the people.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/12586.

[Document 832]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 23, 1914.

170. Answering your No. 94, July 22, please say to Carbajal we think it would be unwise for him to suggest that negotiations take place in New York. It is important that an agreement should be reached as early as possible and in order to save time we advise him to comply with suggestion made by Carranza and send his delegates directly to Saltillo as soon as possible.

We are urging upon Carranza and Villa the importance of amnesty and shall continue to use our good offices to this end. Amnesty is a matter that can be arranged between the delegates of Carbajal and Carranza. It would not be wise to insist upon a promise of amnesty before the delegates are sent. It would hardly be fair to insist upon Carranza denying the statements which are attributed to him. It is safe to assume that he made no such statements. If credence were given to newspaper reports, an agreement would be postponed indefinitely. Please urge the importance of immediate action to the end that a peaceful transfer of authority may be made.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 812.00/14052a.

[Document 833]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 23, 1914, 5 p.m.

By direction of the President I send the following to be communicated by you to Carranza at once:

Not only the United States, but all the world, will watch with the greatest interest and concern the course now to be pursued by the leaders of the Constitutionalist cause in effecting a transfer of power at Mexico City. This Government feels that the critical time has come when the choice which is now to be made by the Constitutionalist leaders will practically determine the success or failure of the government they mean to set up and the reforms they hope to effect.

We venture to say this because of our earnest sympathy with the main purposes of the Constitutionalists and our desire to be of permanent service to them in bringing Mexico out of her troubles. We have been forced by circumstances into a position in which we must practically speak for the rest of the world. It is evident that the United States is the only first-class power that can be expected to take the initiative in recognizing the new government. It will in effect act as the representative of the other powers of the world in this matter and will unquestionably be held responsible by them for the consequences. Every step taken by the Constitutionalist leaders from this moment on and everything which indicates the spirit in which they mean to proceed and to consummate their triumph must of necessity, therefore, play a very important part in determining whether it will be possible for the United States to recognize the government now being planned for.

In the most earnest spirit of friendship, therefore, this Government wishes to call attention to the following matters of critical consequence:

First, the treatment of foreigners, foreign lives, foreign property, foreign rights, and particularly the delicate matter of the financial obligations, the legitimate financial obligations, of the government now superseded. Unless the utmost care, fairness and liberality are shown in these matters the most dangerous complications may arise.

Second, the treatment of political and military opponents. Unless there is to be a most generous amnesty it is certain that the sympathy of the whole world, including the people of the United States, now the real friends of the Constitutionalists, will be hopelessly alienated and the situation become impossible.

Third, the treatment of the Roman Catholic Church and of those who represent it. Nothing will shock the civilized world more than punitive or vindictive action toward priests or ministers of any church, whether Catholic or Protestant; and the Government of the United States ventures most respectfully but most earnestly to caution the leaders of the Mexican people on this delicate and vital matter. The treatment already said to have been accorded priests has had a most unfortunate effect upon opinion outside of Mexico.

You can not too earnestly urge these matters upon the attention of those now in the counsels of the Constitutionalists. It is obvious to us that the whole future of what the Constitutionalists are attempting will depend upon the way and the spirit in which they deal with these questions. Nothing ought to be overlooked or dealt with hastily which may result in our being obliged to withhold the recognition of this Government from the new government to be created at Mexico City as we withheld it from General Huerta. Our ability or inability to serve them they must now determine.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 812.00/14052b.

[Document 834]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 23, 1914, 5 p.m.

By direction of the President I send the following to be communicated by you to Villa at once.

[The remainder is identical with that of the foregoing telegram to Mr. Silliman.]

Bryan.

Vice Consul Bundy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.001H87/3.

[Document 835]

Vice Consul Bundy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Kingston, Jamaica, July 24, 1914.

Huerta arrived by cruiser Dresden July 24, 2 p.m.

Bundy.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12609.

[Document 836]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, July 24, 1914.

96. Department’s 170, July 23. As the result of a long conversation I had with the President yesterday he told me this afternoon that he had decided to appoint two delegates to go to Saltillo by way of San Luis Potosi as suggested in Department’s July 20, 10 p.m. By tomorrow or perhaps tonight I will know and transmit to you their names and date of departure from here. President Carbajal also expressed his desire that Constitutionalist delegates be at Saltillo on the arrival of his, so that negotiations may be started at once. He also told me that inasmuch as he has de facto stopped all hostilities against Constitutionalists it would please him very much if an arrangement could be made to have them do likewise from now on, with the proviso that when delegates meet the matter may be duly ratified.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 812.00/12586.

[Document 837]

The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 25, 1914, 5 p.m.

Department has received information from Mexico City, under date of July 22 that “situation here becoming dangerous on account of persistent daily attacks on places in the surroundings of the capital and also because there are reasons to fear that the army might revolt or disband at any moment incited by the publication of statements attributed to Carranza that he will resort to reprisals and bloodshed upon reaching Mexico and by fear that the arrangement for the transfer of power will not provide sufficient guarantees for them.”

You may use your own judgment as to whether this is an opportune moment to suggest to Carranza the advisability of his issuing a frank statement calculated to allay anxiety and inspire public confidence not only in Mexico City but throughout the whole world.

Phillips.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/12609.

[Document 838]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, July 25, 1914, 6 p.m.

Brazilian Minister, Mexico City, under date of July 24, informed Department that Provisional President Carbajal had told him that afternoon that he had decided to appoint two delegates to go to Saltillo by way of San Luis Potosí. The above is repeated and the following is quoted for your information, to be conveyed to General Carranza if you think desirable: President Carbajal also expressed his desire that Constitutionalist delegates be at Saltillo on the arrival of his, so that negotiations may be started at once. He also told me that inasmuch as he has de facto stopped all hostilities against Constitutionalists it would please him very much if an arrangement could be made to have them do likewise from now on, with the proviso that when delegates meet the matter may be duly ratified.

Department is confident that Carranza will do his utmost to arrange for prompt and amicable transfer of Government.

Phillips.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12622.

[Document 839]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate General,
Monterey, July 25, 1914.

Secretary of Foreign Relations Fabela has acknowledged receipt of a note handed General Carranza by Silliman July 19 containing the points set forth in Department’s July 16, 7 p.m. Fabela says: Referring to your unofficial note in which you embody the telegram from Secretary Bryan, also to the verbal expression made by Mr. Carranza to you, to Mr. Silliman and Mr. Robertson in their conference of the 19th, the First Chief instructs me to thank Mr. Bryan for the expressions which he conveyed through you to Mr. Carranza. Both Mr. Carranza and I desire to express to you, Mr. Consul General, and to Mr. Silliman and Mr. Robertson our appreciation of your desire that our strife may soon end in a satisfactory manner.

Hanna.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12612.

[Document 840]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, July 26, 1914.

98. As stated in my No. 96, July 24, the President appointed today as his delegates to the conference with the Constitutionalists the following: General Lauro Villar, Chief Justice of the Supreme Military Court, and Licenciado David Gutiérrez Allende, Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of Mexico, who will leave tomorrow morning accompanied by one secretary.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/12609.

[Document 841]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 27, 1914.

178. Substance of your 96, July 24, has been communicated to Vice Consul Silliman, now at Tampico, for presentation to General Carranza, if thought desirable.

Department is informed that Carranza will do his utmost to arrange for prompt and amicable transfer of government.

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 812.00/12612.

[Document 842]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 27, 1914.

Brazilian Minister, Mexico City, telegraphs under yesterday’s date President Carbajal has appointed as delegates General Lauro Villar, Chief Justice of the Supreme Military Court, and Licenciado David Gutiérrez Allende, Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of Mexico, who will leave Mexico City today accompanied by one secretary.

Convey the above to General Carranza, and request that full protection be extended to the delegates, and that their transportation be facilitated.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/12612.

[Document 843]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 27, 1914.

181. Substance your 98, July 26, has been communicated to Vice Consul Silliman at Tampico, with appropriate instructions to convey same to General Carranza.

W. J. Bryan.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12644.

[Document 844]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Tampico, July 27, 1914, 4 p.m.

Replying to your July 25, 5 p.m. Governor Carranza, in reply to Department’s suggestions, will issue today a statement which he considers will be calculated to allay anxiety and inspire public confidence in the City of Mexico and elsewhere. In regard to personal guaranties, all concerned should remember that the demand of the Constitutionalists is for unconditional surrender. This will be vigorously insisted upon. Those entitled to protection will not be molested; others will be dealt with as circumstances of each case demand. Property rights will be respected and the property and rights of foreigners will be accorded the most ample guaranties. It is possible that Spaniards may expect trouble, as elsewhere. Excess of any kind will not be permitted.

Silliman.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12637.

[Document 845]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, July 27, 1914.

100. President Carbajal’s delegates have just left for Vera Cruz, whence they will proceed at once to Tampico with instructions to negotiate at any place agreeable to the Constitutionalist delegates in order to save time. The change of itinerary was forcibly adopted because there is a gap of nearly 200 kilometers this side of San Luis Potosí.

The President would like to know as soon as possible the names of the Constitutionalist delegates.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 812.00/12637.

[Document 846]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 28, 1914.

The Brazilian Minister, Mexico City, telegraphed last night that Carbajal delegates had just left for Vera Cruz, whence they will proceed to Tampico, with instructions to negotiate at any convenient place. The change in itinerary was adopted owing to a break in the railway near San Luis Potosí.

Bring the above to the attention of General Carranza and ask him to issue orders to Tampico authorities looking to protection and comfort of delegates and their prompt meeting with Constitutionalist delegates. Telegraph names of Constitutionalist delegates as soon as possible.

Again express to Carranza this Government’s hope that no effort will be spared to secure an immediate armistice, and again urge upon him the importance of arranging a comprehensive amnesty and suitable guaranties.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/12637.

[Document 847]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 28, 1914.

181 bis. Suitable instructions are today being telegraphed to Vice Consul Silliman at Tampico for presentation to Carranza in accordance with your 100, July 27. Names of Constitutionalist delegates will be telegraphed as soon as received.

W. J. Bryan.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12643.

[Document 848]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

Tampico, July 28, 1914.

Governor Carranza leaves tomorrow for Saltillo. He will not name representatives to confer with the representatives of Carbajal. He will treat with them personally. He is disposed to try his utmost to arrange for a prompt, amicable transfer of government and for the surrender of the army.

Silliman.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/12691.

[Document 849]

[Untitled]

Saltillo, July 30, 1914.

Governor Carranza’s Secretary for Foreign Relations, Fabela, called attention today to what he terms a distinction between armistice and suspension of military operations. The latter, as in the present instance, may be a voluntary concession. On arrival of Carbajal envoys with proper credentials and authority, military operations [omission]suspended as announced. But an armistice is not under consideration. It is an altogether different relation and presupposes a pact or agreement, which in the present instance has not been contemplated.

Silliman.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/12759.

[Document 850]

[Untitled]

Monterey, July 31, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith translated copies of a communication received from Señor Isidro Fabela, Acting Secretary of Foreign Relations for General Venustiano Carranza, the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army. This translation is from an acknowledgment of my communication transmitting Department’s telegraphic instruction dated July 23, 1914, 5 p.m., in which, by direction of the President, the Secretary of State sent a communication to me to be communicated to General Carranza.

I have [etc.]

John R. Silliman.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

Foreign Office,
Tampico, July 27, 1914.

I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your note of the 24th instant addressed to the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army. Mr. Venustiano Carranza is grateful to his excellency Secretary Bryan for his good wishes for the welfare of this country, taking into account the circumstances that envelop us.

He also appreciates the interest the Government of the United States has shown in the prompt termination of our civil war and the reestablishment of a constitutional government and peace in the Mexican Republic.

Referring to the first point in the note to which I have the honor of referring, you may tell Mr. Bryan that the lives and properties of foreigners will be protected in the future as they have been in the past, by the Constitutionalist authorities. At the same time I will tell you that all contracts and obligations assumed by a legitimate government in Mexico will be respected.

As far as the other points covered by your note are concerned, I am pleased to say that the First Chief will take them into consideration for careful study. They will be decided according to the best interests of justice and our national interests.

I avail [etc.]

Isidro Fabela.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12760.

[Document 851]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Monterey, July 31, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith translations from a communication signed by Acting Secretary Fabela for General Venustiano Carranza, relative to the communication sent General Carranza through me from the Department54 conveying information relative to the reports furnished the Department regarding the critical situation through which the capital, Mexico City, is passing.

I have [etc.]

John R. Silliman.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

Foreign Office,
Tampico, July 27, 1914.

I have the honor to answer your representation of today relative to yesterday’s telegram from his excellency Secretary Bryan, and to state that the First Chief directs me to say that he appreciates the reports which were furnished him relative to the critical situation through which the capital is passing.

Mr. Carranza has instructed me to communicate to you that, in order to prevent disturbances in the capital of the Republic which might injure foreign interests, he has given proper orders to his representatives in Mexico City that order in that capital shall be preserved. In this way the peaceful inhabitants of the capital will have guaranties of their lives and interests. I reiterate [etc.]

Isidro Fabela.

54 Telegram of July 27, 5 p.m.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12762.

[Document 852]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Monterey, July 31, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith translated copies of a communication received from Senor Isidro Fabela, Acting Secretary of Foreign Relations for General Carranza, First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army, relative to my communication sent General Carranza as to the instruction from the Department55 relative to the naming by Francisco Carbajal of General Lauro Villar and David Gutierrez Allende as his representatives to treat with General Carranza.

I have [etc.]

John R. Silliman.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

[Untitled]

Foreign Office,
Tampico, July 28, 1914.

By instructions of the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army, I beg to thank you for the information which his excellency Secretary Bryan has given him through you, regarding the naming by Licenciado Francisco Carbajal of General Lauro Villar and David Gutierrez Allende as his representatives to treat with Mr. Carranza regarding the unconditional surrender of the ex-federal army and the powers he received from General Huerta.

At the same time I take pleasure in advising you that Mr. Carranza has given orders to General Pablo Gonzalez, Chief of the Army Corps of the Northeast, to protect and facilitate their trip to Saltillo. I also should tell you that the same orders have been repeated to San Luis Potosi, giving the names of the delegates and instructing the Saltillo authorities to protect and respect them.

I appreciate your good will in furnishing this information and am pleased to reiterate [etc.]

Isidro Fabela.

55 Telegram of July 27.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 812.00/12846.

[Document 853]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 31, 1914.

My telegram of July 23d, 5 p.m., was not meant to imply any lack of confidence in the First Chief or in any of the leaders of the Constitutionalist cause, but we deem it imperatively necessary as an act of friendship to apprize General Carranza and his associates, now rather than later, when it might be too late to serve them, of the circumstances upon which we know their success to depend. Excesses of any kind, even towards their own people, and especially extreme measures against political opponents or representatives of the Church, if such things should occur in connection with their assumption of power at Mexico City, might make it morally impossible for the United States to recognize a new government. If we did not recognize, it could obtain no loans and must speedily break down. The existence of war in Europe would clearly make it impossible to obtain assistance anywhere on the other side of the water even if such excesses as we have alluded to did not themselves make it impossible; and such excesses would be quite as certain to alienate sympathy in Europe as they would be to alienate sympathy in the United States. After the new Government is established, it can adopt such deliberate and well and fully considered policies towards its own people and its own domestic institutions as it deems best and can successfully and temperately work out the solution; but vindictive and harsh measures adopted at the outset and carried info effect by military force and authority are quite a different matter, and might have the most far-reaching and disastrous results. This Government would not be dealing frankly with General Carranza and his associates if it did not state these facts very plainly now before it is too late; and it cannot state them too plainly. The success or failure of the Constitutionalist cause is to be determined now, at the outset. It is to be judged by what it does now in connection with the transfer of full power. Our advice offered, and everything stated in our telegram of the 23d, cannot be modified nor can we recede from it in the least without deep and perhaps fatal consequences to the cause of the present revolution which, if that advice is accepted in the spirit in which it is given, may now be made completely and gloriously successful. This Government is reluctant to contemplate the possible consequences to Mexico if it should be forced to withhold recognition from those who are now to succeed General Huerta. It is our plain duty as friends, therefore, to reiterate with deep earnestness all that we have said. Our recent messages have been most deliberately conceived, with a full consciousness of all they implied, and were sent with a very suggestive feeling of our responsibility to Mexico, to ourselves and to the world.

Bring the foregoing to the attention of General Carranza.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/12691.

[Document 854]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 1, 1914.

190. A telegram from our Consul at Saltillo calls attention to the difference which the Constitutionalists make between an armistice and the suspension of military operations. General Carranza’s Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Fabela, informs him that when Provisional President Carbajal’s envoys arrive with proper credentials and authority, military operations will be suspended as announced.

Bryan.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12704.

[Document 855]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.].

American Consulate General,
Monterey, August 1, 1914.

The peace delegates came to this Consulate early this morning and awakened me. They felt sore and discouraged at the treatment shown them by Constitutionalist officials since their arrival in Tampico. They had decided to quit and wanted me to accompany them to Texas. It was only by the strongest appeals to their patriotism and the advantages of peace that this Consulate induced them to continue on to the conference. We did this because we knew how greatly our President and the Department desired bringing the two parties together. We hope our action pleases you.

Hanna.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna. File No. 812.00/12704.

[Document 856]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 2, 1914.

Your course in urging delegates to continue their journey to Saltillo is most cordially approved. Any seeming discourtesy shown by Constitutionalists must have been due to oversight rather than intention. We are very anxious for the conference to take place and see no reason for its failure. Keep us fully informed.

Bryan.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12846.

[Document 857]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate,
Saltillo, August 3, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith copy of a letter to Governor Carranza dated yesterday, communicating to him the views of the Department as expressed in the Department’s telegram to me of July 31, 1914.

I have [etc.].

John R. Silliman.

[Inclosure.]

Vice Consul Silliman to Governor Carranza.

Saltillo, August 2, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your excellency’s esteemed reply to my note of the 24th of July, as conveyed through the Honorable Isidro Fabela, your excellency’s Acting Secretary of Foreign Relations, under date 27th July.56

Your excellency’s views on the matter submitted to me were duly conveyed to the Secretary of State of the United States by telegraph, followed by the transmission by mail of a translated copy of Lie. Fabela’s note.

I have the honor now, in connection with these same matters, to bring to the attention of your excellency the following telegram received by me from the Honorable Secretary of State last night:

[Quotes the Department’s telegram of July 31; see ante.]

Your excellency will please permit me to express again the sincere friendship and best wishes of the Government of the United States for the best interests of yourself and of the Mexican people which prompted the radiogram of the 23d of July, which is now followed by the telegram quoted to you in full above.

Awaiting your excellency’s acknowledgment and reply, I have [etc.].

John R. Silliman.

56 See Mr. Silliman’s first despatch of July 31.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12723.

[Document 858]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Consulate,
Saltillo, August 3, 1914.

The following is a translation of the text of a statement made public by General Antonio J. Villareal and General Luis Caballero in representation of Governor Carranza, issued this afternoon and giving the reasons why there could be no conference with the representatives who have come from the City of Mexico to Saltillo in representation of the Carbajal Government: Upon the resignation by General Huerta of the so-called government in the City of Mexico and the taking over of the same by Lie. Francisco Carbajal, the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army, Don V. Carranza, received various intimations relative to the reception of the peace delegation which Lie. Carbajal wished to send.

The First Chief manifested a willingness to receive the delegation, with the understanding that the subject matter to be treated would be the unconditional surrender of the so-called Carbajal government and the army that supported it, as this was considered the only patriotic and acceptable form of concluding the war.

Lic. Carbajal designed as his representatives General Lauro Villar and Lie. David Gutierrez Allende, with Lie. Salvador Urbina acting as Secretary.

The said commission started from Mexico City to this place before the First Chief had an opportunity of knowing what were the instructions or faculties given by Carbajal to his delegates for the discharge of the mission entrusted them. The First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army, Don V. Carranza, on his part designated the undersigned as his representatives to meet those of Carbajal, whom we awaited in this city of Saltillo.

On their arrival here we had a preliminary conference with the view of examining the credentials and instructions of Messrs. Villar and Allende in the said conference; Lic, Carbajal’s delegates made known to us that the only instruction they had was to submit to the representatives of the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army the propositions which embodied the basis on which Carbajal would be disposed to deliver the situation in the south of Mexico to the Constitutionalist Army. Said propositions are as follows: First. The celebrating of an armistice ordering the Immediate suspension of hostilities as rapidly as possible by all chiefs of the contending parties.

Second. The transfer of authority by the medium of the dissolution of the present congress and the reinstalling of the Congress dissolved by Huerta.

Third. The reinstalled Congress to issue an amnesty for political offenders or offenses in connection therewith, in such a way that no one can be molested on account of political opinion or on account of military operations which have been carried on.

Fourth. Recognition of military rank obtained in conformity with the regulations and laws relative thereto.

Fifth. Admitted the reinstallation of the dissolved Congress, Lie. Carbajal would resign his office by tendering his resignation which would be accepted by the reinstated houses of Congress or through medium of a proclamation of the nation, the designation of the person who would receive the Presidency being made by the reinstated Congress in conformity with the system in vogue prior to the year 1898.

Sixth. Arrangements relative to the financial question, especially with regard to foreign interests.

As the said six propositions are in absolute disagreement in our mind with the articles of the Plan of Guadalupe, and their acceptance would imply an unconstitutional, impracticable process in transfer of authority which would signify a recognition of acts executed by the usurping government, we could not take them into consideration. On the other hand the First Chief of the Constitutional Army had always manifested and in that sense he gave us our instruction with clearness, that the only basis on which he was disposed to hear propositions from the government of Huerta or any other that calls itself his successor, was that of unconditional surrender. We found ourselves, therefore, in a position where we could not enter into a discussion of the propositions formulated. Again, on the other hand, as the delegates of Lie. Carbajal say they have not authority to treat on the basis of unconditional surrender, the proposed conference could neither be instructed nor carried on.

Antonio B. Villarreal.

Luis Caballero.

Silliman.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/12727.

[Document 859]

[Untitled]

Saltillo, August 3, 1914, noon.

At the preliminary meeting yesterday the [Carbajal]envoys manifested surprise that they were expected to make an unconditional surrender.57 When advised that nothing else had ever been contemplated they requested permission to consult their Government by telegraph, which was granted. Pending reply no further meeting is announced and no suspension of military operations has been ordered.

Silliman.

57 See inclosure with Mr. Silliman’s last despatch of July 31.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/12733.

[Document 860]

[Untitled]

Saltillo, August 3, 1914, 6 p.m..

At a second preliminary conference this afternoon the envoys submitted six conditions from the Government at Mexico City and also said that they were not authorized to make unconditional surrender. In consequence the hope of any settlement here has completely disappeared and the campaign will most actively continue.

Silliman.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/12742.

[Document 861]

[Untitled]

Saltillo, August 4, 1914, 8 p.m.

Just as they were leaving, envoys requested me to have Department announce their return to Mexico City.

Silliman.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 812.00/12775a.

[Document 862]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 6, 1914.

Say to General Carranza we regret exceedingly that any lack of attention or consideration has been shown Carbajal delegates. They were sent in good faith and to facilitate peaceful transfer of authority. If the conditions were unreasonable they could have been declined in such a manner as to permit withdrawal thereof. They should have free means of communication with Carbajal so as to hasten agreement. There is no doubt that Carbajal will do whatever is necessary to effect peaceful transfer of authority. Conditions presented by Carbajal delegates were only suggested and not intended as necessary conditions. We are informed that Carbajal is willing to withdraw all conditions except amnesty for political offenders and guaranties of life and property, and these General Carranza ought to be willing to give. They also desire an understanding that the city police shall be regarded as neutral for maintenance of order and be afforded full guaranties. This would seem advisable so as to permit the army to withdraw, otherwise there might be a period of disorder between withdrawal of army and time Constitutionalists are prepared to maintain order. Urge these considerations upon General Carranza.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/12730.

[Document 863]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, August 7, 1914.

When opportunity offers emphasize to Carranza the fact that unless political amnesty is assured there may be fighting in the City of Mexico and that this fighting and the deaths which may occur as a result would be difficult to justify when surrender has been offered upon the terms which are considered sufficient throughout the world. Officers could hardly be expected to surrender without some promise of protection in the form of guaranties as to their personal safety, especially in view of the treatment which some officers have received upon falling into the hands of the Constitutionalists. General Carranza ought to understand that this Government’s action in the matter of recognition of his government must depend in part upon the manner in which his authority is acquired.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/12796a.

[Document 864]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, August 8, 1914.

Word comes from the City of Mexico that the breaking off of negotiations and the return of the delegates has caused great excitement and that the army is disposed to resist the entrance of the Constitutionalists unless assured of their personal safety. We have advised Carbajal through his representatives here to communicate directly with Carranza in the hope that the two may reach an agreement that will bring about what the President has all along urged, namely a peaceful transfer of the government to the Constitutionalists. This is desirable not only from the standpoint of humanity but also because the employment of force by the Constitutionalists when force is unnecessary will embarrass this Government very much and increase the difficulties which the new government will have to meet. We are sure that Carbajal is willing to waive all conditions excepting amnesty to political offenders and guaranties of life and property. Doubtless the guaranties of life and property could be so worded as not to interfere with anything that the Constltutionalists might regard as necessary for the establishment and maintenance of orderly government.

Bryan.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12787.

[Document 865]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, August 8, 1914, midnight.

119. I have the honor to transmit hereby the following from Carranza, which leaves no hope for peaceful transfer of power: Federal troops to remain only till the approach of the revolutionary troops, when they must retire hurriedly. Guaranties cannot be given them. Armed police may remain with arms to assist in the maintenance of law and order. Carranza promises that he will arrive in Mexico City with the least possible delay, to control political situation.

I am asked by President Carbajal to beg you to transmit following message of the Minister of War to Carranza wherever he may be. He approves proposed plan provided that full assurances already given by Constitutionalists of its fulfillment, and that forces remaining against Zapatistas could also retire and join army without molestation.

Mexico, August 8, 1914.

I beg you to reconsider the last decision given regarding the army, which does not intend to be an obstacle to the transfer of power to the new government but will, rather, loyally support it. If proceedings against it are carried to extremes the revolution will continue and it is now indispensable patriotically to seek the way to stop further bloodshed, this being the object of concentrating my forces without resistance to the advance of Constitutionalists. If you accept support of the army, a portion of it will remain to check entry of Zapatistas, and a way will be sought for entry of Constitutionalists into the capital without friction with Federals, who will withdraw if necessary pending their final disposition. Personally I beg you to take into consideration the dangers to which a different course will give room, and the best assurance I can give that I will live up to my promise is my invariable loyalty to all constituted governments. The disbanding of the army will at this moment intensify a great danger to the country.

J. R. Velasco.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/12788.

[Document 866]

[Untitled]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, August 9, 1914, noon.

120. Referring to my 119, August 8, I may add that it would be a deplorable mistake of Carranza if he should decide to decline Velasco’s reasonable suggestion and should carry his irreconcilable attitude to the end, against the proposals of the Diplomatic Corps, the Army and the best people of Mexico, among whom the approach of his army is creating a horrible panic.

I am even reliably informed that in case Velasco’s proposal be refused, the Army is contemplating the idea of starting a new revolution against the Constitutionalists, by proclaiming General Angeles candidate for the presidency and trying to unite with Villa, which would mean neither a stable government for the Constitutionalists nor the so-much-desired peace of the country.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/12795a.

[Document 867]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 9, 1914, 4 p.m.

Please urgently impress upon Carbajal the folly of resistance. He should not take counsel of the military men who by supporting Huerta’s programme made themselves responsible for existing conditions. Those who have been guilty of conduct which might lead to their punishment should leave the country; others are not likely to suffer. It is of the highest importance that Carbajal should reach an agreement with Carranza immediately. Delay simply multiplies the dangers.

W. J. Bryan.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12791.

[Document 868]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, August 9, 1914, 6 p.m.

I communicated to the President the contents of your August 9, 4 p.m., but I think it is too late because this morning General Obregon, who is very near Mexico City, sent a message asking unconditional surrender. The President and the Army are willing to comply with the request, the Army being ready to evacuate the city without fighting. The President and Carranza’s agent, Robles, have requested the good offices of the Diplomatic Corps, especially mine, to help them facilitate occupation of the capital by Constitutionalists without either friction with the Federals or disturbance of public order. The Diplomatic Corps will study the matter tonight.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 812.00/12787.

[Document 869]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 9, 1914, 7 p.m.

Brazilian Minister cables requesting Department to transmit to Carranza’s Secretary of War the following:

[Quotes the message contained in the Minster’s No. 119, August 8.]

Please bring this to the immediate attention of General Carranza and urge upon him the importance of continuing negotiations in a conciliatory spirit until a basis is reached for the peaceful transfer of authority. We feel confident President Carbajal will agree to any reasonable conditions. Department will gladly transmit Carranza’s reply.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/12791.

[Document 870]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 10, 1914, 5 p.m.

Your August 9, 6 p.m. Am gratified to learn prospect good for entry of Constitutionalists without bloodshed. Do everything in your power to assist peaceful transfer. While this Government’s influence will be exerted with the Constitutionalists to prevent harshness and cruelty it will be exerted on the side of the Federals to secure compliance with the plans imposed by the Constitutionalists. In this way we can render to both sides the best service that the conditions permit.

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 812.00/12832a.

[Document 871]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Extract.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 11, 1914.

Dear Mr. Carothers: It is the President’s belief that the differences which are said to exist between Generals Carranza and Villa are not so grave as some would have them appear; at least that they are not sufficient to cause an open break, which would inevitably threaten the success of the Constitutionalist movement or completely nullify it. I think that if these two gentlemen could meet under favorable circumstances, free from partisan influence, and discuss in a spirit of patriotism, which we believe inspires both of them, an amicable understanding and a practical working basis would be reached. Mexico is a great country with a bright future, and there is room in it for the unselfish work of honest reformers inspired by intelligent patriotism.

In urging amnesty the President is considering the fact that Mexico is one of the family of nations, one of the signers of the Hague Convention, and cannot afford to offend the public sentiment of the world in so important a matter. Political amnesty need not be construed as meaning exemption, from civil or criminal responsibilty.

Consul Silliman has been instructed to use his good offices with General Carranza, and you are to do the same with General Villa, to the end that their differences may be adjusted and their progress may be harmonious from this time forward.

W. J. Bryan.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12834.

[Document 872]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, August 12, 1914.

124. I have just returned from the Constitutionalist camp where, in the presence of Robles Dominguez and also Silliman, I held a long conference with Carranza who notwithstanding my most arduous efforts and tenacious arguments did not even accept the idea of any arrangement with Carbajal to save the situation which is really pressing. I have been happy enough to find at least a formula accepted by Carranza for the peaceful occupation of the capital, which I will communicate to you as soon as all details are completed.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

[Untitled] File No. 81V.00/12842.

[Document 873]

[Untitled]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, August 13, 1914.

125. Referring to my 124, August 12, 10 p.m. In accordance with my scheme, Carbajal dissolved his Government last night and left for Vera Cruz with several members of his Cabinet, and delivered the capital to Governor of Federal district. The latter will sign an agreement today with General Obregón for the delivery of the city, and peaceful occupation with guaranties for the people. At the same time I brought together General Obregon and an envoy of General Velasco [General-in-chief of the Federal Army]to combine the complete details of the military maneuvering for occupation and evacuation without friction, and other points.

As the Governor of District [Iturbide]is now chief authority in the capital, I believe the above-mentioned agreement as signed by him and Obregon can with some good will fulfill the stipulations of Niagara protocol for the recognition of the new government at the proper time.

I can absolutely assure you that this formula is the most I was able to obtain from Carranza; so much so that I have the impression, which is also the impression of those intimately acquainted with Carranza and his chiefs, that in framing this formula I have obtained quite a success, inasmuch as something feasible has been gained from that which appeared impossible. I would like to learn the views of the Department.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/12842.

[Document 874]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 13, 1914.

206. From the details which you give we feel sure that you have made the best arrangements possible under the circumstances and we congratulate you most cordially. The people of the United States and the foreigners in Mexico will feel greatly relieved when the agreement is carried out and the peaceful transfer of the government is made. Please present our compliments when you have opportunity to both General Carranza and the Governor of the District and say that we trust that this will be the beginning of an era of peace, prosperity and progress for Mexico.

W. J. Bryan.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12847.

[Document 875]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, August 13, 1914.

126. I have great pleasure in transmitting to you a translation of the agreement signed by the Governor of the Federal District and General Obregón: As a consequence of the departure of Licenciado Francisco S. Carbajal, who, up to last [omission], was the Provisional Depository of the Executive Power of the Republic, I have assumed [that]Power in my capacity of Governor of the Federal District and Chief of Police.

It is my principal duty to endeavor by all means to make sure that order in the city shall not be disturbed and that all of its inhabitants shall enjoy peace and guaranties. In order to accomplish such ends I have solemnly agreed with Senor Alvaro Obregon, General-in-chief of the Northwestern Corps of the Constitutionalist Army, duly authorized by the proper chief, upon the basis hereinafter mentioned, regarding the occupation of the capital.

First. The entry of the above-mentioned forces into the City of Mexico shall take place as soon as the Federals are in the act of withdrawing to the point fixed by agreement between Senor Jose Refugio Velasco, General-in-chief of the Federal Army, and General Alvaro Obregón.

Second. As soon as the capital is occupied, I shall deliver all of the Corps of Police, who will at once be under the command of the new authorities and who shall enjoy all kinds of guaranties.

Third. The army under the command of General Obregon shall effect its entry into the City of Mexico in perfect order, and the inhabitants of the same shall not be molested in any way.

General Obregón has seen fit to promise besides that he will punish with the greatest severity any soldier or civilian who may trespass upon or maltreat any residence, and will remind the people that no military officer shall take the liberty, without express authority from the General-in-chief, to demand or obtain anything pertaining to private individuals.

The present agreement having been read and agreed upon by both parties, we have signed the same and bind ourselves to comply with the agreed stipulations.

At the advance posts at Teoloyucán, this thirteenth day of August, 1914.

E. N. Iturbide.

General Alvaro Obregón.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12861.

[Document 876]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Teoloyucan, August 13, 1914.

Following is translated text of articles of treaty terminating the war: Under the conditions following, the dissolution of the Federal Army has been provided for between General Alvaro Obregón, representing the Constitutionalist forces, and Gustavo A. Salas, representing the Federal Army, and Vice Admiral Blanco, representing the National Navy: First. The troops will leave the plaza of Mexico, distributing themselves among the towns along the Mexican Railway as far as Puebla in groups of not more than five thousand men; no artillery or reserve ammunition will be carried. To effect their disarmament the new government will name representatives who will receive the munitions of war.

Second. The garrisons of Manzanillo and Jalapa and the military headquarters of Chiapas, Tabasco, Campeche and Yucatan will be abolished and disarmed at those places.

Third. Upon the retirement of the Federal troops which garrison the towns of San Angel, Tlalpam, Xochimilco, as well as those confronting the Zapatistas, they will be disarmed at the places occupied by them as soon as the Constitutionalist forces relieve them.

[Fourth.---]

Fifth. During the march the Federal troops will not be molested by the Constitutionalists.

Sixth. The chief of the new government will name the persons to receive the armament from the Government and from the governments of the cities having Federal garrisons.

Seventh. The military establishment and offices will continue under the charge of their employees who will make delivery to those named to receive them by means of an inventory.

Eighth. Officers who for any reason cannot march with their garrisons will enjoy all guaranties in accordance with the laws in force and will be under the same conditions as stipulated in clause [—].

Ninth. General Obregón, on representation of the Constitutionalist chiefs, offers to afford the enlisted men means of returning to their homes.

Tenth. The General-in-chief and officials as well as the navy will be placed at the disposal of the First Chief of the Constitutionalist forces who upon entering into the capital will be invested with the character of Provisional President of the Republic.

Eleventh. The vessels of war in Pacific will be concentrated at Manzanillo and those in the Gulf at Puerto Mexico where they will remain at the disposal of the first chief of the constitutionalist force who, as stated upon his entry into the capital, will be invested with the character of provisional president of the Republic. In respect to other vessels belonging to the navy on both coasts as well as those in the territory of Quintanaroo such will remain at their present stations in order to receive like orders from the first chief.

Done on the national highway from Cuatitlan to Teoloyucán, Mexico, August 13, 1914.

Alvako Obregón.

G. A. Salas.

O. P. Blanco.

L. Blanco.

Silliman.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/12847.

[Document 877]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 14, 1914.

207. Your 126. Agreement satisfactory. Peaceful transfer of power is assured. The President appreciates the ability with which you have handled this matter. Again accept our thanks.

W. J. Bryan.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12907.

[Document 878]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, August 17, 1914.

130. Your 206. I have received the following from Mr. Fabela, Acting Secretary for Foreign Affairs of General Carranza: Duly instructed by the First Constitutionalist Chief, Senor Venustiano Carranza, I beg you to convey to the Honorable W. J. Bryan, Secretary of State of the United States, the sincere appreciation of Senor Carranza for his congratulations sent to him through your worthy channel on account of the end of our struggle and peaceful occupation of the City of Mexico, and also for the desire expressed by his excellency Mr. Bryan in his message to you of the 13th instant for the entering of Mexico into a new era of peace, prosperity, and progress. Senor Carranza sincerely esteems the desire of the Secretary of State and trusts that the Mexican people, who have patriotically won their rights, will be able to preserve peace in the Republic and finally enter into an era of freedom and progress.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12945, 12949.

[Document 879]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Mexico City, August 20, 1914.

General Carranza made a triumphal entry into the capital this morning. The Plaza de Armas was thronged with many thousands. He spoke from one of the balconies of the National Palace. Tremendous ovation and no disorder whatever. The only representative of the local Diplomatic Corps present was the French Chargé d’Affaires. In his speech Carranza made appreciative reference to the Administration’s Mexican policy.

Silliman.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12963.

[Document 880]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, August 22, 1914.

132. Carranza yesterday notified the Governors of States and other Mexican authorities that he had assumed the Executive Power but without stating in what capacity. No notice has been given to Diplomatic Corps, whose existence here they seem inclined to ignore, considering foreign representatives merely as private persons. Were it not for my good offices, British Minister would have received his passports instead of going voluntarily tomorrow. They have also dismissed all Mexican Government secretaries and consuls in all foreign countries.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/12963.

[Document 881]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 22, 1914, 2 p.m.

Please call upon Carranza personally if possible, otherwise on Foreign Office, and urge the avoidance of anything which could be construed as a lack of courtesy to the diplomatic representatives. It is very important that whatever he finds it necessary to do should be done with due regard to diplomatic usage and respect to the diplomatic character of foreign representatives. Airy other course of action might involve him in serious foreign complications.

W. J. Bryan.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12967.

[Document 882]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

Mexico City, August 23, 1914, 9 p.m.

This morning an opportunity was presented to ask the President regarding the relations with Zapata. He replied that nothing has been arranged. I understood that in the attempts so far there has been a lack of confidence on each side. The President intimated that possibly the good offices of the United States might be effective in arranging a conference with Zapata and himself. It is a delicate matter but should not be very difficult if handled with proper intelligence, discretion and tact.

Silliman.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/12970.

[Document 883]

[Untitled]

Mexico, August 23, 1914, 9 p.m. No. 5

I have the honor to transmit the following textual translation of a communication received by me last night: Mexico, D. F., August 22, 1914.

I have the honor to inform you, in order that you may kindly bring it to the notice of His Excellency the President of the United States, Woodrow Wilson, that today, in conformity with the Plan of Guadalupe58 of March 26, 1913, I have assumed the Executive Authority of the Mexican Republic.

In asking you to notify your Government, it is a satisfaction to repeat the assurance of my distinguished consideration.

V. Carranza.

To Mr. John R. Silliman,
Special Representative of the Government of the United States.

Silliman.

58  The following is a translation of this plan or agreement:

Plan of Guadalupe, signed by sixty-four officers of the troops of the State of Coahuila, on March 26, 1913.

declaration to the nation.

Whereas, General Victoriano Huerta—to whom Francisco I. Madero, Constitutional President of Mexico, entrusted the defense of the institutions and the legality of his Government—on uniting with the rebel enemies in arms opposing the same Government, to restore the former dictatorship, committed the crime of treason to reach power, by arresting the President and Vice President, as well as the members of the Cabinet, forcing them under duress to resign their posts, as shown by messages addressed by the same General Huerta to governors of the States, advising them that he had the Chief Executive of the Republic and the Cabinet as his prisoners; and,

Whereas, the legislative and judicial powers have recognized and protected General Huerta and his illegal and anti-patriotic proceedings, contrary to constitutional laws and precepts; and,

Whereas, several governors of States of the Republic have recognized the illegitimate government imposed by that part of the army which consummated the treason, headed by the aforesaid General Huerta, notwithstanding that the sovereignty of those very states, whose governors should have been the first to repudiate Huerta, had been violated—

We, the undersigned, chiefs and officers commanding the Constitutional forces, have agreed upon, and will sustain with arms, the following

plan.

1. General Victoriano Huerta is hereby repudiated as President of the Republic.

2. The Legislative and Judicial Powers of the Federation are also hereby disowned.

3. The Governors of the States who still recognize the federal powers of the present administration shall be repudiated 30 days after the publication of this Plan.

4. For the purpose of organizing the army which is to see that our aims are carried out, we name Venustiano Carranza, now Governor of the State of Coahuila, as First Chief of the army, which is to be called Constitutionalist Army.

5. Upon the occupation of the City of Mexico by the Constitutionalist Army, the executive power shall be vested in Venustiano Carranza, its First Chief, or in the person who may substitute him in command.

6. The Provisional Trustee of the Executive Power of the Republic shall convene general elections as soon as peace is restored, and will surrender the power to the citizen who is elected.

The citizen who may act as First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army in the States whose governments may have recognized that of Huerta shall take charge of the provisional government and shall convene local elections, after the citizens elected to discharge the high powers of the federation have entered into the performance of their duties, as provided in the foregoing bases.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 812.00/12970.

[Document 884]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 24, 1914.

Your August 23, 9 p.m. No. 5. It has given me pleasure to bring General Carranza’s message to the attention of the President.

This Government desires to express the sincere hope that General Carranza and the people of Mexico will from now on bend every energy to avoid internecine strife, in order that the industrial and economic conditions in Mexico may become normal and that a lasting reign of peace, prosperity and progress may follow.

Bryan.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12982.

[Document 885]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Mexico, August 24, 1914, 4 p.m.

In the interview this morning we were informed that General Carranza has not assumed the title of President. The proper address is First Chief in charge of the Executive Authority.

Silliman.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12990.

[Document 886]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, August 25, 1914, 1 a.m.

133. I conferred with Carranza in the sense of the Department’s August 22, 2 p.m., and finally convinced him of the necessity of dealing with the Diplomatic Corps with due consideration; and, to begin with, he promised to notify the Diplomatic Corps tomorrow of his having taken possession of the Executive Power.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 812.00/12967.

[Document 887]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 25, 1914.

Your August 23, 9 p.m. The President will be pleased to render any assistance in his power in securing a conference between the First Chief Carranza and Zapata. You may say that this Government is ready to do all it can in every legitimate way to advance the welfare of the people of Mexico and will be pleased to have the First Chief consult freely and fully about any matter in which he thinks assistance can be rendered.

Bryan.

Mr. R. Zubáran Capmany to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13007.

[Document 888]

Mr. R. Zubáran Capmany to the Secretary of State.

Confidential Agency of the Constitutionalist Government of Mexico,
Washington, August 25, 1914.

The undersigned, Confidential Agent of the Chief of the Constitutional Army of Mexico, Don Venustiano Carranza, in compliance with special instructions, has the honor of informing the Government of the United States, through the very dign conduct of the Honorable Secretary of State, that on the twenty-second day of August of this year, Mr. Carranza took charge of the Executive Power of the Mexican Republic in accordance with the Plan of Guadalupe of March twenty-six, nineteen hundred and thirteen.

The undersigned avails himself [etc.]

R. Zubáran Capmany.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13015.

[Document 889]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Mexico, August 26, 1914.

Zapata’s attitude toward Carranza is decidedly unfriendly. He states that a conference between Carranza and himself is imperative, and must be at his own military camp forty miles due south of Cuernavaca; he will not meet Carranza elsewhere. He is holding some 2,000 Constitutionalists whom he has disarmed.

The Brazilian Minister and myself called upon the First Chief to-day. He said he would not go to the military camp and continues to belittle Zapata.

Villa emissaries are with Zapata and are treated with the highest consideration.

Silliman.

The Department of State to Mr. R. Zubáran Capmany. File No. 812.00/13007.

[Document 890]

The Department of State to Mr. R. Zubáran Capmany.

The Department of State respectfully acknowledges the receipt of the note of Mr. E. Zubáran Capmany, dated the 25th instant, saying that on the twenty-second day of August of this year, General Don Venustiano Carranza, Chief of the Constitutionalist Army of Mexico, took charge of the Executive power of the Mexican Republic.

Department of State,
Washington , August 28, 1914.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 812.00/13015.

[Document 891]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State,
Washington, August 28, 1914.

Your August 26. Say to General Carranza that we are sending to Mexico an American named Hall, personal friend of Zapata, with the view to bringing about a meeting between Carranza and Zapata and for the purpose of urging upon Zapata the use of peaceful and constitutional methods. It would hardly seem wise for Carranza to leave the capital for a conference, but he ought to make every effort to secure a reconciliation.

The President is also sending a personal representative, Mr. Fuller, to confer with Carranza. Fuller and Hall will sail for Vera Cruz to-morrow. Please meet them at Vera Cruz and give them such information as will aid them in their work.

W. J. Bryan.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13040.

[Document 892]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Mexico, August 29, 1914.

Department’s August 28. It is my impression that General Carranza, in accordance with the Mexican spirit, wishes to arrange the meeting himself if possible. If he discovers he cannot arrange it, then he will use the good offices of the United States.

Silliman.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13064.

[Document 893]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Mexico, September 1, 1914.

The Carranza delegates sent to confer with Zapata have returned without having accomplished anything. Zapata heard all their different arguments and offers and then told them that if Carranza would sign the Plan of Ayala, which was his pronunciamento when he revolted, the differences would be settled; otherwise he would agree to nothing Villa had not first approved. He intimated he had an understanding with Villa. The Plan of Ayala stipulates that the land shall be divided and upon the success of the revolution Zapata should be recognized as the President.

Canova.

General Obregon to Collector Cobb. File No. 812.00/13086.

[Document 894]

General Obregon to Collector Cobb. 59

[Translation.]

Senor Zach L. Cobb,
Collector of Customs, El Paso, Tex.

Sir: I have read with great satisfaction the Honorable Secretary of State William J. Bryan’s letter, in which he is good enough to express such sincere congratulations to General Villa and me on the result of our pacifying mission. You may assure that distinguished official that he, his Government and the great American people do not look in vain for a happy solution of the problems our country is laboring under, for our most disinterested and earnest efforts will ever be bent on restoring peace and progress in our land, to which end we rely on the unanimous and powerful will of the majority of our compatriots who have shown their attachment to the cause of freedom and order by their sympathy with the Constitutionalist Party.

This auspicious opportunity affords me the satisfaction of saying to you that both General Villa and I, as well as the Mexican Republic in general, thankfully acknowledge the efforts put forth and the attentions shown by the American Government in aiding us to achieve the end we are pursuing.

General Alvaro Obregón.
El Paso, Tex. , September 1, 1914.

59 Delivered to Mr. Cobb by Mr. Samuel Belden, General Carranza’s attorney and consular representative at El Paso. The letter referred to (not printed) was delivered August 13 by a personal representative.

The Secretary of State to Collector Cobb. File No. 812.00/13086.

[Document 895]

The Secretary of State to Collector Cobb.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 4, 1914.

Please say to General Obregón that Department appreciates the friendly expressions contained in his message transmitted through Mr. Belden. I have taken pleasure in sending a copy of the message to the President.

Bryan.

Special Agent Fuller to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13116.

[Document 896]

Special Agent Fuller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Mexico, September 5, 1914.

I had an interview with Carranza this morning. He disclaims any intention of prolonging the interim government or using it as a step to dictatorial power; realizes the circumscribed sphere of action of a revolutionary régime; and has just issued a call for a convention of governors and generals for October 1, in accordance with the plans of Guadalupe and Torreon, to provide for organization of permanent government.

Zapata adjustment paralyzed by refusal of Zapata to have personal conference with Carranza except at Zapata’s remote headquarters. It would be well to have a message from the President sent direct to Zapata without delay, informing him that he should immediately confer with Carranza at some place more suitable, and that his refusal must precipitate armed collision which it is his patriotic duty to avoid. Such a message might be sent to Silliman for personal delivery.

Fuller.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 812.00/13116.

[Document 897]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 7, 1914.

Please say to Zapata that this Government earnestly desires that he shall confer with the Constitutionalists and cooperate with them in securing the needed reforms. It is advisable that he should call on Carranza personally in the City of Mexico. A frank and friendly exchange of views would be helpful to both. Say to him that the President feels that a peaceful adjustment is both desirable and possible. You should take assurances of Carranza as to Zapata’s safe conduct. If Zapata refuses to go to the City of Mexico, some intermediate place might be agreed upon.

Bryan.

Special Agent Fuller to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13122.

[Document 898]

Special Agent Fuller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Mexico, September 7, 1914, 10 p.m.

Joint programme has been signed by Villa and Obregon for establishment of civil form of government. Provides for cessation of present revolutionary and military rule; the appointment of Carranza as Provisional President; the appointment of judges; provision for elections.

United support of northern and northeastern divisions gives good prospect of acceptance either willing or enforced. This union of forces increases chances of Zapata’s submission.

Call for convention already issued is unsatisfactory as it includes governors who are Carranza appointees, contrary to plan of Torreon. New programme should be carried out and will so tell Carranza at interview tomorrow noon.

Fuller.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13160.

[Document 899]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

Mexico, September 11, 1914, 8 p.m.

At suggestion of the Brazilian Minister, I textually translate and transmit the entire text of a telegram from Obregon to Villa and Gonzalez, as follows: Mexico, September 9, 1914.

General Francisco Villa,
General of Division, Chihuahua:

I have the satisfaction to report that all is working well. I have had an opportunity to talk with the greater part of the revolutionists who have come to this capital, and every one has the same or very similar ideas. It is certain that our people will not differ. The only thing that at present offends our dignity as patriots is the continuation of the American forces at Vera Cruz. With the disappearance of the so-called government of Huerta and the dissolution of the Federal army, whose disarmament is now complete, there should not be in our territory any other flag than that sacred tri-colored emblem at the foot of which we have seen many of our companions fall on the field of battle. It is very humiliating that the flag of the Stars and Bars [sic]continues to wave over the port of Vera Cruz. I desire to suggest to you that with due respect we direct a communication to the Provisional President of the Republic requesting that he take up at once with the American Government, by methods in accord with the national dignity, the evacuation of our territory by its troops.

Alvaro Obregón.

It is hoped that the views of those who believe that a civil government, duly constituted and recognized, should first be established will prevent any hasty action.

Silliman.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/13161.

[Document 900]

[Untitled]

Mexico City, September 11, 1914, 8 p.m. No. 2.

I am in receipt of a formal communication from the Secretary of Foreign Relations addressed to me and dated the 8th instant informing me that, the capital of the Republic having been occupied by the Constitutionalist forces on the 21st of August last and Don Venustiano Carranza having assumed the duties of the Chief Executive of the nation, the Government has been duly installed, with seven secretaries of State; their names and offices are given; the document concludes as per following textual translation by me: With the desire of this Government to sustain the good relations of friendship which have always united Mexico with your country, I will receive with real satisfaction any representation which your Government may think proper to make through your excellency. I improve the opportunity to renew the assurances of my distinguished consideration.

Isidro Fabela.

Silliman.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/13166.

[Document 901]

[Untitled]

Mexico City, September 12, 1914, 9 a.m. No. 3.

Department’s message for Zapata, September 7. The attempts to come to some agreement with Zapata without the assistance of the United States, though repeatedly suggested, have resulted in total failure and increased friction. In fact actual fighting has occurred at several places. The Department’s instructions concerning the President’s wishes will not be overlooked and opportunity will be sought to bring the two parties into agreement.

Silliman.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/13171.

[Document 902]

[Untitled]

Mexico, September 12, 1914, 1 p.m.

Following is reply of Villa to Obregón’s telegram, translation of which was transmitted to the Department September 11: Headquarters in Chihuahua, September 9, 1914.

I have received with satisfaction your message of yesterday,60 in which you are pleased to communicate to me that you have found the majority of the revolutionary leaders who have arrived at the capital entirely willing to support and sustain the ideas and aspirations which we have and which I sincerely believe will save the Mexican people. I accept with enthusiasm your patriotic idea that we should all together approach the President of the Republic to ask how to take up the matter of the departure of the American forces which are in Vera Cruz; for it is really humiliating and shameful for our beloved country that invading forces still remain in Vera Cruz when there exists no justification for it. You are fully authorized to address said note in such terms as you may judge appropriate, having the goodness to sign my name.

Cordially,

The General in Chief,
Francisco Villa.

Silliman.

60 Dated, as transmitted, September 9.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/13180.

[Document 903]

[Untitled]

Mexico City, September 14, 1914, 5 p.m.

In a friendly interview with the First Chief to-day he informed me that he was now in open rupture with Zapata and did not desire an interview with him. He stated that the two envoys imprisoned a week ago would continue prisoners and that he would imprison any other emissaries from Zapata who might enter this city. Under the circumstances, a conference with Zapata would not have the approval of Carranza and would therefore be futile. I believe an agreement could have been easily reached at one time had not Carranza persisted in his own efforts. Carothers thinks that Villa will not approve of armed conflict with Zapata.

Silliman.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13193.

[Document 904]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, September 15, 1914.

Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs Fabela called on me yesterday and tried to persuade me that the Mexican Government, as at present formed, with the First Chief of the Constitutionalists in charge of the Executive Power and having the different departments without formal headquarters but merely directed by sub-secretaries and chief clerks, and with no tribunals, could be recognized by the United States and the Powers represented by the Mediators, according to the document signed for the peaceful occupation of the capital and the Niagara protocol.

More than that, he pointed out to me the necessity of the prompt evacuation of Vera Cruz. He added that there was a strong feeling among the military chiefs to force Carranza to make a forma]request of the United States for the evacuation and that a refusal would greatly increase the bad sentiment already aroused against Americans, with deplorable consequences.

I replied that, not knowing your ideas on either of these matters, I was not authorized to express an opinion.

If the Department finds it advisable and advantageous, it would perhaps be well to let the authorities here know as soon as possible, in the way you deem proper, what are your views and what conditions are judged to be necessary for the accomplishment of the two things above mentioned, namely, the recognition of this government and the evacuation of Vera Cruz.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

The Secretary of War to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13225.

[Document 905]

The Secretary of War to the Secretary of State.

War Department,
Washington, September 15, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: I am just in receipt of a communication from the President, in the course of which he directs me to “issue orders and make preparation for the immediate withdrawal of the troops from Vera Cruz.”

In a subsequent telephone conversation that I had with the President, he requested me to ask you if you would please immediately get in contact with the government at Mexico City and inform it that we are about to withdraw from Vera Cruz and that we desire to have some responsible authority to whom to turn over the custom house, and further that we desire to turn the city over to some properly constituted authorities. With respect to the latter, if it is not within the province of the central government at Mexico City to designate the officials to whom the city government should be turned over, or if they do not desire to exercise this authority even if they have it, or if for any reason we think it wiser to adopt another course, it would be possible for General Funston to select from the eligible residents of Vera Cruz officials to fill the various municipal posts and then turn the government over to such government so erected by him.

May I ask, at the behest of the President, that this be done with the greatest possible speed, so that we may set about carrying out his orders as soon as possible.

Lindley M. Garrison.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/13G30a.

[Document 906]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 15, 1914, 7 p.m.

246. Please deliver the following message to Vice Consul Silliman: Please say to General Carranza that the President is arranging to withdraw the American troops from Vera Cruz and desires that some responsible authority be named to whom the custom house may be turned over; also officials to whom authority in the city may be delivered. Inquire whether it is within the power of the Federal authorities to designate the officials or whether it is desired that the American commanding officer shall select eligible residents of Vera Cruz to exercise authority until the ordinary processes can be utilized.

W. J. Bryan.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13196.

[Document 907]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

Mexico, September 16, 1914.

In company with the Brazilian Minister, Mr. Long and Mr. Belt, at two o’clock this afternoon I complied with the Department’s instruction to say to General Carranza that the President is arranging to withdraw the American troops from Vera Cruz. The message gave the greatest satisfaction. Suitable reply is being prepared.

Silliman.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/13195.

[Document 908]

[Untitled]

Mexico, September 16, 1914

The following reference was made to President Wilson at the official celebration of Mexican Independence from the tribune at Chapultepec by the orator of the day; translation mine: I am sure, gentlemen, that the much-discussed question of Vera Cruz is the only motive which has caused all good Mexicans to appear reserved and not to manifest the immense sentiment of gratitude felt toward the man who has slain evil and who has demonstrated, in the midst of problems most difficult and profound, that the only policy worthy of the age in which we live is the policy of honor and truth. The last shadow, the darkest of all, having vanished from our national life, we now render homage to a great and sincere man, the great representative American. I call upon you, gentlemen, that from this favored land of Anahuac, in the name of Hidalgo, of Morelos, of Guerrero, of Juarez, of Madero, and of Bolivar and of Washington, in the name of all these rich crystallizations of the ages, in the name of all those men whose features will remain engraved on ineffaceable medallions forever, let us give a hearty cheer for Professor Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America.

The hearty cheer was given. The First Chief and his Cabinet and an immense throng were present, including the Diplomatic Corps.

Silliman.

Consul General Hurst to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.001H87/6.

[Document 909]

Consul General Hurst to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate General,
Barcelona, [undated ; received September 17, 1914.]

Ex-President Huerta, with family and suite including five Mexican generals, now in Barcelona. Son of General Zelaya of Nicaragua also here. General Porfirio Diaz stated to have arrived incognito but left some time ago.

Hurst.

General Villa to the President. File No. 812.00/13258.

[Document 910]

General Villa to the President.

[Telegram—Translation.]

Chihuahua, Mexico, September 17, 1914.

I have received with genuine pleasure and great satisfaction the information that the American forces now stationed at Vera Cruz will shortly leave that port, and I am impelled to present to you, in my name and that of the Mexican people, our most cordial congratulations for this action, which as have all those dictated by the American Government of which you are the distinguished head, respecting all matters connected with our country, has so faithfully interpreted the sentiments and aspirations of the patriotic Mexican people.

The General-in-chief of the Division of the North respectfully salutes you,

Francisco Villa.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/13222a.

[Document 911]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 17, 1914, 1 p.m.

Our telegram No. 246 of 15th answered your inquiry of same date relative to evacuation. Please discourage any immediate requests for recognition. You will be advised whenever the President feels the time is ripe for such action.

Lansing.

The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 812.00/13269a.

[Document 912]

The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 17, 1914, 6 p.m.

War Department is making preparations to withdraw American troops from Vera Cruz and desires to have some responsible persons designated by the Constitutionalist authorities to take charge of the custom house and the municipal government of Vera Cruz. With respect to the latter, if it is not within the province of the central government at Mexico City to designate the officials to whom the city government should be turned over, it would be possible for General Funston to select from the eligible residents of Vera Cruz officials to fill the various municipal posts, and then turn the government over to the officials so selected. Confer at once with General Carranza and telegraph definitely and fully his wishes regarding these matters.

Robert Lansing.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13208.

[Document 913]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, September 17, 1914, 8 p.m.

151. I am requested by Vice Consul Silliman to transmit to you the following textual translation of General Carranza’s reply, of this date, to Department’s September 15, 7 p.m.

Please communicate to Mr. Bryan, Secretary of State of the American Union, in order that he may bring it to the attention of His Excellency the President of the United States of the North, that this Government has decided to designate General Candido Aguilar, Governor of the State of Vera Cruz, to proceed thither and receive the port of Vera Cruz, which is incidentally occupied by the forces of the United States of America, and also to appoint the Federal and local authorities that will take charge of public administration of said port.

The Government under my charge sees with satisfaction the decision of His Excellency the President of the United States of America to deliver the city that has been temporarily occupied on account of the lamentable incident between the officials of General Huerta and sailors of the American Union.

Please personally accept [etc.]

V. Carranza.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13217.

[Document 914]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Mexico City, September 18, 1914, 5 p.m.

Department’s September 17, 6 p.m. In conference with General Carranza this afternoon, he confirms the information furnished Department by me through Brazilian Minister last night: General Candido Aguilar has been appointed to receive the entire federal and municipal government of Vera Cruz from the American authorities. He is fully empowered to name the persons who are to assume charge of all posts both federal and municipal. General Carranza awaits the Department’s information as to when it will be appropriate for General Aguilar to proceed to Vera Cruz with his staff. He also requests that if it meets the Department’s approval I be permitted to accompany General Aguilar to Vera Cruz in order to duly present him to General Funston.

Silliman.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of War. File No. 812.00/13225.

[Document 915]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of War.

Department of State,
Washington, September 19, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of September 15, in which you ask this Department to ascertain from the Constitutionalist authorities at Mexico City their wishes in the matter of having some responsible authority take over the custom house at Vera Cruz, and the municipal affairs of that place, in order that the President’s orders providing for the withdrawal of the American forces at Vera Cruz may be properly carried out.

In reply the Department encloses herewith a copy of a telegram61 which it despatched to the American Vice Consul at Saltillo, who is now at Mexico City, together with replies thereto from the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City62 and Vice Consul Silliman.63

It will be seen from these telegrams that General Cándido Aguilar, Governor of the State of Vera Cruz, is to be designated by General Venustiano Carranza to proceed to Vera Cruz for the purpose of taking charge of that port. It will be seen also that General Aguilar is to appoint the Federal and local officers who are to have control of the public administration of that port, and also the municipal government of Vera Cruz.

The Department of State will be glad to be informed when it will suit the convenience of General Funston to receive General Aguilar for the purpose of arranging the transfer of the functions of government at Vera Cruz, in order that General Carranza may be informed in this regard.

I have [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

61 Of September 17, 6 p.m.

62 Of September 17, 8 p.m.

63 Of September IS, 5 p.m.

The Secretary of War to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13384.

[Document 916]

The Secretary of War to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

War Department,
Washington, September 21, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Secretary:* * * I had a consultation with the President this morning, as a result of which* * * the President requested me to ask the State Department to take action in the following particulars:

He desired to have you take up with the Mexican central government the question of exacting a further payment of duties on merchandise which has already gone through the customhouse while in our control and paid us the regular duties. I sent you today a communication from Vera Cruz relating to various matters like taxation, license fees and what not in which moneys have been paid to us while we were running the local government. It is thought that the central government should have this matter presented to it with a view of pointing out to them the desirability of their not exacting a further payment for these Same sums. The equity and fairness of not doing so, I feel, should be pointed out. The community has had the benefit not only of this but of a good deal of our own money, and there does not seem to be any propriety or equity in a further exaction in the way of paying twice.

There are in Vera Cruz, as we are advised, many so-called refugees, among them priests and nuns. We understand generally that they have come to Vera Cruz out of apprehension as to what might happen to them if they stayed wherever they previously were. While we are in control of Vera Cruz, of course, we would not permit any unwarranted or unjustified attack to be made upon them. We have, however, no responsibility with respect to their situation and treatment excepting while they are directly within our lines. The President feels that it would be very undesirable from every standpoint if the Mexican central authorities should countenance or permit any wanton assault or unjustifiable conduct with respect to these people, and he therefore feels that the State Department should take the matter up with the central government with a view of eliciting a statement of their policy concerning these people.

We cannot even approximate a date for evacuation until these matters have been disposed of.

There is another series of questions which you will have to determine and advise me of your decision, so that I may act accordingly. These relate to the financial affairs. For instance: 1st. Shall we turn over to Carranza’s representative all of the customs moneys that we have on hand?

2d. Shall we turn over any balance that we happen to have on hand in any of the accounts of the local administration?

3d. What should we require from the representative of Carranza in the way of acknowledgment, or receipt, or audit, or voucher, or what not?

4th. Should we at this time request that an auditor, or fiscal agent, or agency, be designated by Carranza, who can utilize the time between now and the evacuation in going over these accounts and certifying to their correctness, or what not?

In general, we would like to have any instructions, directions or suggestions from your Department as to anything, from the international standpoint, you desire to have observed or done.

Sincerely yours,

Lindley M. Garrison.

The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 812.00/13258.

[Document 917]

The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 22, 1914.

Please say to General Villa that the President has received his telegram of September 17 in which he expresses his appreciation of the President’s action in ordering the American forces to withdraw from Vera Cruz; that it has given the President much pleasure to receive General Villa’s message; and that he hopes that the withdrawal will be regarded by the Mexican people as another evidence of this Government’s desire to lend its aid to bring about the speedy establishment of a truly just and representative government in Mexico.

Robert Lansing.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/13384.

[Document 918]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 22, 1914, 9 p.m.

252. Certain rumors have reached this Government as to the actions that possibly may be taken by the authorities at Vera Cruz after its evacuation, namely:

The exaction of further payments of duties on merchandise that has passed through the customhouse since the American occupation on which the duties have been paid. The exaction of further payments of local and municipal taxes paid since the American occupation, such as license fees, property taxes, street taxes, etc. The imposition of fines or other penalties upon Mexican citizens who have been employed in connection with the civil government of the city since American occupation.

You are requested to call these subjects to the attention of General Carranza and state to him that this Government, while it does not give credence to these rumors, as such actions would manifestly be unjust, considers that to avoid possible improver conduct by subordinates and to allay misapprehension at Vera Cruz, it is hoped that General Carranza will give a specific assurance in regard to each subject that the rumored action will not be permitted.

You will please intimate to General Carranza the advisability of giving these assurances in definite form and as soon as possible in order that there may be no delay in carrying out the proposed evacuation of Vera Cruz by the American forces.

You will also please call to General Carranza’s attention the fact that there is in Vera Cruz a large number of so-called refugees, among them many priests and nuns, who came there because of apprehension as to their personal safety while civil strife prevailed in Mexico. This Government earnestly hopes that General Carranza will be willing to announce that the Mexican central authorities will not countenance or permit any wanton mistreatment of these people, but will assure them that protection which an enlightened and orderly government affords to individuals within its jurisdiction.

Robert Lansing.

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War. File No. 812.00/13384.

[Document 919]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War.

Department of State,
Washington, September 23, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of September 21 in regard to the exaction of further payments [etc.]

In reply I have the honor to enclose herewith, for your information, a copy of a telegram which the Department despatched on September 22 to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City in connection with these matters.

The Department will be glad to take up the other matters mentioned in your letter when a reply is received from the Brazilian Minister.

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State,

Robert Lansing.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13377.

[Document 920]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico City, September 23, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith copy of my communication to General Carranza regarding the President’s decision to withdrawn the American troops from Vera Cruz, and also a copy of General Carranza’s reply to the communication referred to. I have [etc.]

John R. Silliman.

[Inclosure 1.]

Vice Consul Silliman to General Carranza.

Mexico City, September 16, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor and great pleasure to inform your excellency of the receipt by his excellency the Minister of Brazil of the following communication: Washington, September 15, 1914.

Brazilian Minister: Please deliver the following message to Vice Consul Silliman.

“Please say to General Carranza that the President is arranging to withdraw the American troops from Vera Cruz and desires that some responsible authority be named to whom the custom house may be turned over; also officials to whom authority in the city may be delivered. Inquire whether it is within the power of the Federal authorities to designate the officials or whether it is desired that the American Commanding Officer shall select eligible residents of Vera Cruz to exercise authority until the ordinary processes can be utilized.

Bryan.

Awaiting your excellency’s reply in order that I may duly convey it to the Department of State of the United States,

I have [etc.]

John B. Silliman.

[Inclosure 2—Translation.]

General Carranza to Vice Consul Silliman.

National Palace, September 17, 1914.

Sir: I acknowledge receipt of the note from Mr. Bryan, Secretary of State of the United States of the North, received by you through his excellency the Minister of Brazil, by which I am informed that the President of the American Union, His Excellency Mr. Woodrow Wilson, is arranging for the evacuation by the American troops of the port of Vera Cruz, and that it is desired that competent authorities be named to take charge of the customhouse and of the several branches of the local government. I have the honor to reply to this note through yourself in the following terms:

Please say to Mr. Bryan, Secretary of State of the American Union, in order that he may call it to the attention of His Excellency the President of the United States of the North, that this Government has decided to appoint General Cándido Aguilar, Governor of the State of Vera Cruz, to receive the port of Vera Cruz, which is now de facto occupied by forces of the United States of America, and also to name the Federal and local authorities who will take charge of the public administration of the port.

The Government in my charge views with satisfaction the act of His Excellency the President of the United States of America in delivering the place that has been temporarily occupied because of the lamentable incident arising between officials of General Huerta and marines of the American Union.

Accept [etc.]

V. Carranza.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13278.

[Document 921]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Mexico City, September 23, 1914, 9 p.m.

Immediate reply requested. Break between Villa and Carranza is now hopeless. Villa in telegram to Carranza yesterday disowns him as First Chief and states that he will not participate in convention. It is now expected that convention will be held as announced. It will represent a large majority of the Constitutionalist movement regardless of Villa and Zapata and will formulate a provisional government that, it is hoped, will meet the approval of the United States. The convention will be loyal to Carranza.

Carranza, thinking that my presence might be of service at this time to Mexico and the United States, has urgently requested that I go immediately to Washington. He has placed a special train to the border at my disposal. After consulting with the Brazilian Minister I assume all the responsibility and am leaving Mexico tonight. Mr. Belt remains to represent me.

Silliman.

Special Agent Carothers to the Department of State. File No. 812.00/13304.

[Document 922]

Special Agent Carothers to the Department of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, September 26, 1914.

General Villa has to-day telegraphed the following to Generals Blanco, Pesqueira, Buelna, Hay and Medina in Mexico City: I have taken note of your telegram of to-day in which you request that I suggest some means by which the differences that have arisen between Sr. Venustiano Carranza and the Division of the North may be peacefully settled.

In order to demonstrate to the country at large and the whole world that if I have repudiated the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army in charge of the Executive Power, it has been because of the firm conviction of his incapacity to reestablish a democratic government.

With the object of avoiding any armed conflict between the revolutionary elements, unprovoked and not desired by me, I propose to you that Senor Carranza deliver the Provisional Government to Senor Don Fernando Iglesias Calderon, in order that he may call the elections. We will support him with the greatest patriotism and all the Constitutionalist forces will collaborate for the complete pacification of the country.

I declare that in all my acts I am guided by no other aspiration than the happiness of my country, and I solemnly reaffirm that I will not accept the presidency or vice presidency of the Republic, either provisional or constitutional.

Confidently expecting your assistance in solving this conflict, I remain [etc.]

General F’co Villa.

Carothers.

Mr. Belt to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13327.

[Document 923]

Mr. Belt 64 to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Mexico, September 29, 1914.

The following seven salient points constitute Carranza’s answer to the demand by Villa’s generals for his resignation: 1. (Resignation.) I have no other desire, than to leave as soon as possible the two higher charges which the beloved people of the Republic have conferred on me.

2. (Depository of power). But in view of the fact that the deposit given into my hands by the Constitutionalist Party is so sacred, I believe that when I withdraw it is my absolute duty to give back said deposit into the hands of those who gave it to me, and those are the highest chiefs of the Constitutionalist Army, among whom may be counted the chiefs whom I am now addressing.

3. (Purpose of the convention.) With this object and with the object of treating and solving all affairs of public interest, I convoked a convention for October 1 at which all the generals of the States should designate a new depository as trustee for the high authority with which I am invested.

4. (Complete representation requested.) If when this convention takes place a few of the chiefs should not take part in it [or] should not be present, then the convention will take care to call them and tell them to be present in person or through representatives.

5. (Resignation of Villa.) As the solicitude to which I refer arises from the insubordination and disobedience of General Villa in disavowing me as First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army in charge of the Executive Power, it is my view that in order to be absolutely impartial—as I do not know that you have used your influence to bring back General Villa to fulfillment of his duty—you ought first to require from General Villa relinquishment of the command of the Northern Division and his retirement to private life, the same as you request of me.

6. (Fulfillment of designated duty.) If the chiefs for whom I will withdraw in the convention of October 1 accept this withdrawal, I will retire with pleasure and satisfaction to private life, with the consciousness of having complied with my duty as a citizen, as Governor of the State of Coalyiila, as First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army and as Encargado of the Executive Power of the nation.

7. (Resistance against reaction.) But if my resignation is not accepted, with the same firmness of mind and the same energy with which I fought the usurpation of General Huerta, I will fight the reaction which is showing itself led by General Villa, the perhaps unconscious instrument of Porfirism and Cientificism.

Belt.

64 Representing Vice Consul Silliman during the latter’s absence in Washington.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13430.

[Document 924]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate,
Chihuahua, September 30, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to forward herewith the manifesto of General Francisco Villa against the Provisional Government of General Venustiano Carranza, which manifesto has just been issued at Chihuahua although Villa has been actively in the field against Carranza for some days past.

I have [etc.]

Marion Letcher.

[Inclosure—Translation—Extract.]

manifesto to the mexican people.

* * * Although the Plan of Guadalupe, drawn up by Venustiano Carranza, Only offered the reestablishment of the Constitutional Government, It was nevertheless accepted by the revolutionary chiefs because they felt sure that the First Chief of the Revolution was in favor of establishing not only a democratic government but also the social and economic reforms indispensable to the betterment of the condition Of the poor.

Unfortunately the acts and declarations of Mr. Carranza have created in many revolutionaries the fear of not seeing realized the promises made by the Revolution to the people.

The Division Of the North, which has been the object Of Mr. Carranza’s political intrigues, fearing above all else that they would be cheated out of their revolutionary ideals, proposed, in accord with the Army Corps of the Northeast, at the Conferences Of Torreon, the organization of a Convention on a democratic basis, in order to force the First Chief to carry out the revolutionary program, guaranteeing the establishment of a democratic government and the execution of the reforms necessary for the betterment Of the people.

Mr. Carranza refused to accept the Convention on the bases proposed at the Conferences of Torreon, and resolved that upon the entrance of the Constitutionalist Army into the Capital of the Republic he would call a Council of Generals and Governors to study the political as well as the social problems brought out by the revolution.

If the Division of the North had lost confidence in the First Chief it would naturally have none in any council whose members were chosen by him, he being the one having the power to confer the rank of General and to name the Governors, and having therefore always an assured majority.

[Review of the acts of Carranza after his entry into the City of Mexico.]

Confronted by a situation that menaces the triumph of the revolution, the Division of the North sent a delegation to Mexico City to present to the First Chief a program of provisional government which is, in substance, a program for the immediate reestablishment of constitutional order by means of elections, and for agricultural land reforms—a program signed by General Obregon representing the Army of the Northeast and by me representing the Division of the North.

Mr. Carranza refused to immediately call the elections, deciding that the Council of Generals and Governors convoked by him for October 1 should be the authority to set the time and manner of the elections. This showed that in the end it would be Mr. Carranza who would fix the time and manner of the elections.

Nevertheless, and in proof of their conciliatory attitude, the Chiefs of the Army of the Northeast and the Division of the North agreed to send their delegates, exacting only the condition that in the Council preference should be given to the three following questions: (1) The confirmation of Venustiano Carranza as Provisional President of the Republic, which pertains to him by virtue of the Plan of Guadalupe; (2) the reestablishment of constitutional order through popular elections at the earliest possible moment; and (3) the adoption of measures guaranteeing the solution of the problem of the agricultural lands.

While General Obregon and certain of the delegates were on their way to the City of Mexico, the First Chief Suspended all traffic with the regions occupied by the Army of the North, showing in this way his determination to begin hostilities against any who tried to bring pressure for forcing him to comply with the pledges of the revolution.

Realizing that every peaceful method would be useless in trying to induce the First Chief to deliver in due time the Executive Power to whomever might be chosen by the people, and realizing also that the salvation of our country depended upon the immediate solution of its problems, the Division of the North has resolved to repudiate Mr. Carranza as First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army in charge of the Executive Power.

This repudiation does not embrace any ambition of my own nor of the generals of the Division of the North, and I do solemnly declare that neither they nor I will accept the post of Provisional President or Constitutional President of the Republic, nor those of Vice President or Governors, and that, in accord with any other chiefs, generals and officers of the Constitutionalist Army who wish to cooperate with us, we will struggle to establish a civil government that will guarantee all the rights and liberties of our citizens. I therefore invite all Mexican citizens—

First, to repudiate Venustiano Carranza as First Chief in charge of the Executive Power of the Nation;

Second, to unite with the Division of the North, contributing in the most effective possible way toward effecting the removal of Venustiano Carranza from the offices of Chief of the Constitutionalist Army and of the Executive Power.

Immediately upon effecting this removal, the generals in command of troops will designate a civilian who, in the character of Provisional President, will call the elections, establish constitutional order and initiate the economic and social reforms which the Revolution demands.

In order that electoral agitation shall not be repeated too soon after such elections and the president elect be enabled to carry out the program of the Revolution, the Provisional President shall submit for the approval of the Congress the proposition that the term of office of President shall be that of six years, beginning with the date on which the president elect shall take office.

The Division of the North offers to reestablish order and peace wherever it may be stationed and to respect the lives and interests of residents whether native or foreign.

Fellow-countrymen, it is very painful for me to exact of the Mexican people further sacrifice to the end that the Revolution may realize its ideals, but I am sure that every honest citizen will see that without this last effort of the people the entire work of the Revolution will be broken up, for we have thrown down one dictatorship only to set up another. The Mexican who will not contribute to the finish of this grand movement of liberation will carry in his own conscience the remorse of not having known how to love and serve his country.

General Francisco Villa.
Chihuahua , September—, 1914.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/13384.

[Document 925]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 1, 1914, 7 p.m.

267. Department anxiously awaiting reply to its September 22 with reference to guaranties against the exaction of further import duties, municipal taxes, etc., upon American evacuation of Vera Cruz.

W. J. Bryan.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13367.

[Document 926]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Zacatecas, October 2, 1914.

The convention of generals65 which met in Mexico City yesterday will adjourn to hold an open caucus in Aguascalientes beginning on the 5th and lasting until the 10th, when the convention will be called to order and will terminate its work in Aguascalientes.

A telegram received here today by Governor Acuña Navarro from General Lucio Blanco, who signed as secretary of a committee of fifty-eight generals, gives this information, and states that the First Chief has expressed his entire conformity with this program and his willingness to abide by the decision of the convention.

Canova.

65 See Mr. Belt’s telegram of September 29, paragraph 3.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13396.

[Document 927]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, October 5, 1914, 11 a.m.

176. Instead of receiving any reply from Foreign Office to my notes sent as per your No. 252, September 22, 9 p.m., and No. 267, October 1, 7 p.m., the papers to-day announced as reported in official circles that they are going to ask the American Government if order for withdrawal from Vera Cruz is still in force and if so to fix a date on which evacuation will take place.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/13397.

[Document 928]

[Untitled]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, October 5, 1914, 11 p.m.

178. Confirming my 176, October 5, 11 a.m., the Foreign Office, without even mentioning my notes, sent me tonight two notes. The first one informs you that the convention at its meeting yesterday refused to accept Carranza’s resignation of his two offices as First Chief of the Army and as Head of the Executive Power. The second note says: Please inform His Excellency the President of the United States, Woodrow Wilson, with reference to his message of September 15 and to that of Carranza of the 17th relative to the evacuation of Vera Cruz, that the First Chief has already given full instructions to General Aguilar, Governor and Military Commander of the State of Vera Cruz, to receive the port from the authorities designated by the American Government; that General Aguilar has appointed his representatives duly authorized to receive said city; that he has issued all necessary instructions to insure the keeping of order during the moment of delivery so as to afford ample guaranties to all the inhabitants of the port of Vera Cruz; that the only detail lacking is the fixing of an exact date for the evacuation so that the representatives of General Aguilar and the delegates of the American Government may come to an agreement as to the turning over of the city. I entreat you to consult with President Wilson as to what date has been fixed for said act, explaining to him that General Funston offered to a representative of General Aguilar to be ready to embark on the 6th or 10th instant.

Awaiting your reply as soon as possible, I reiterate [etc.]

Fabela.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/13431a.

[Document 929]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 7, 1914, 5 p.m.

281. Please deliver to Acting Secretary of Foreign Affairs Fabela the following message from Vice Consul Silliman: Washington, October 7, 1914, 5 p.m.

Arriving here I learn that your reply of October 5 through the Brazilian Minister to the Department’s telegram of September 22 regarding the Department’s wishes respecting guaranties for Vera Cruz is not considered sufficiently explicit. The Department is informed that there is apprehension as to the possibility of duplicate or additional collections of customs charges and other contributions apart from those already paid to the American authorities on the same accounts. The Department is also informed that lists of persons are being made who are assumed to be offensive to the Constitutionalist authorities. These lists are said to include names of Mexican citizens who have been in the employ of the Amercan authorities in various capacities and whose interests are threatened upon the retirement of the American troops. The Department trusts that this information is incorrect and the fears unfounded; but in order that there may be no possible misunderstanding and no unnecessary delay in the withdrawal of the American troops, the Department greatly desires immediately a clear, explicit and public statement from General Carranza that in all cases where customs charges and other contributions have been paid to American authorities the receipt for such payment will exempt the holder from any repetition of the same charges and that full guaranties will be given to all persons excepting those guilty of crime, with the understanding that the acceptance of employment under the American authorities by Mexican citizens since the occupation of Vera Cruz shall not be construed as criminal or otherwise prejudicial, the provisions of any law to the contrary notwithstanding. I respectfully urge that you make immediate reply conceding the Department’s desire.

Silliman.

Bryan.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13507.

[Document 930]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Aguascalientes, October 14, 1914, 1 p.m.

The temporary organization of the convention, adjourned from Mexico City, was made permanent last night and the Military Contention declared its sovereignty. The Convention will not take up the question of the First Chief until Zapata is fully represented.

Canova.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13510.

[Document 931]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, October 14, 1914, 10 p.m.

187. Department’s No. 281, October 7, 5 p.m. Foreign Office has just advised me that my note, in which I transcribed Department’s said telegram, has, by order of General Carranza, “been transcribed to the Convention of Generals and Governors at Aguascalientes so that said Convention may decide on the same, after which Carranza will give an answer.”

Cardoso de Oliveira.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13521.

[Document 932]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Aguascalientes, October 15, 1914, 9 a.m.

The Convention met this afternoon and decided to telegraph General Zapata and Governor Maytorena to suspend all hostilities. In stead of telegraphing Zapata invitation to attend Convention as a delegate, out of courtesy the Convention appointed a committee to invite him; they will leave tonight.

Canova.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13531.

[Document 933]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Guadalupe, October 18, 1914, 6 p.m.

General Villa authorized me this afternoon to inform Department of State that he will support any provisional president that may be selected by the Convention except Carranza.

Carothers.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13570.

[Document 934]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Mexico City, October 22, 1914, 6 p.m.

Carranza has not heard further from Convention regarding Vera Cruz. Regardless of Convention, his reply to American Government through Brazilian Minister, who on October 8 communicated my telegram of 7th, 5 p.m., to Fabela, will be to the effect that he considers it inexpedient for him to issue such a statement as the Department desires. At the same time he says that no one will be molested on account of service rendered Americans and no back duties or taxes will be collected.

Silliman.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13580.

[Document 935]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Aguascalientes, October 22, 1914, 7 p.m.

I have been asked if Silliman’s telegram to Fabela of October 7, 5 p.m., is to be considered as a transmission of the Department’s desires or as a stipulation for the evacuation of Vera Cruz. I respectfully recommend that the Department communicate its desires to the Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs through letter to the Brazilian Minister.

Canova.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13578.

[Document 936]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Guadalupe, October 23, 1914, 9 a.m.

General Villa this morning said that as long as Carranza believed he could control a packed convention he was willing to submit his resignation and consider the convention sovereign, but that as soon as a really representative convention composed of all factions was convened in neutral territory, his ambition came to light and he now will stop at nothing. Villa stated that he is waiting here patiently for Convention to act; that he is using no pressure whatever; and that when he is ordered to move south against Carranza he will do so with keen pleasure.

If consistent before acting upon Canova’s October 22, 7 p.m., please let me know Department’s wishes regarding Vera Cruz.

Carothers.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13581.

[Document 937]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Aguascalientes, October 23, 1914, 11 p.m.

Replying to Convention’s telegram beseeching him to submit his resignation, Carranza answers he will not do so; that he will deliver the Executive Power only to the president who shall have been elected by the people.

Canova.

The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova. File No. 812.00/13580.

[Document 938]

The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 24, 1914.

Your October 22, 7 p.m. Mr. Silliman’s telegram of October 7, 5 p.m., to Mr. Fabela, is a restatement of the Department’s desires as expressed in its telegram to the Brazilian Minister on September 22, 9 p.m., in which is clearly set forth the wishes of this Government respecting the evacuation. If the Convention has not a copy of the Department’s September 22, 9 p.m. to the Brazilian Minister, Acting Foreign Minister Fabela should be asked by the Convention to furnish such a copy.

Repeat this telegram to Carothers as reply to last paragraph of his October 23, 9 a.m.

Robert Lansing.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13603.

[Document 939]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Mexico, October 26, 1914, 2 p.m.

The press yesterday published a proclamation by Carranza of about 4,000 words, replying to the Chihuahua proclamation of Villa.66 It charges Villa with insincerity— First, in glorifying the revolution of 1910 when he and his companion Orozco on May 13, 1911, attempted to destroy it at its beginning by arresting Madero himself.

Second, in failing to turn over public utilities to the central authority after he had agreed to do so at the Torreon conference and in still retaining them without rendering any account.

Third, in protesting against military trials of Mexicans while he himself has notoriously used military trials not only of Mexicans but also of foreigners.

Fourth, in his apparent consideration for the Catholic clergy when he more than anyone else has been their greatest persecutor and is on record in a telegram of July 29 from Chihuahua approving the radical decree of General Villareal of the State of Nuevo Leon.

Fifth, in pretending to represent the ideals of the revolution when he is surrounded and influenced by reactionaries.

Sixth, insubordination in the matter of Zapata; bad faith in making reflections on the character of the convention called for October 1 at Mexico; great extravagance and dishonesty in maintaining his army and issuing paper money.

Carranza defends himself in changing the oath of public officials, forming his Cabinet, annexing to Yucatan of adjoining territory, suspending traffic in the north, and issuing paper money. Says he assumed the executive, legislative and judicial authorities of the Constitution because of the exigencies of the revolution, but only temporarily and in conformity with the Plan of Guadalupe.

The latter part of the proclamation is significant, radical; it confirms previous information furnished to the Department to the effect that the movement is essentially revolutionary. It criticizes as inopportune at present references to reestablishment of Constitutionalist Government and conciliation while the social and economic reforms demanded by the people and which can best be wrought by revolutionary measures remain unaccomplished.

It was said of the proclamation that Carranza was to express his views concerning the Convention, define his attitude and possibly make some reference to Vera Cruz; but not one of these points was mentioned.

Silliman.

66 See Mr. Letcher’s September 30.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13610.

[Document 940]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, October 27, 1914, 10 p.m.

191. My October 14, 10 p.m., No. 187. Notwithstanding that the Convention had authorized Carranza to grant the guaranties desired by the Department, I have just received a note from the Acting Secretary for Foreign Affairs in which, after having enumerated the Department’s requests,67 he says:

[Text of part of the note; see the complete text in the next paper.] Translation of the note will follow in the mail tomorrow.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

67 As conveyed by the Brazilian Minister in his note of October 8 embodying the Department’s telegram No. 281 of October 7, 5 p.m.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/13699.

[Document 941]

[Untitled]

No. 66.] Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, October 28, 1914.

Sir: Confirming my telegram No. 191 of October 27th, 10 p.m., I have the honor to enclose herewith translation of the note referred to in said telegram, relative to the evacuation.

With assurances [etc.]

J. M. Cardoso de Oliveira.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

[Untitled]

Mr. Minister: With further reference to your note dated the 8th inst, I have the honor to advise your excellency, by express order of the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army in charge of the Executive, and for the information of the Department of State in Washington, as follows:

In the note referred to, the statement is made that the Department of State of the United States of America does not consider my note of the 5th instant as sufficiently explicit and a request is made to the effect that Mr. Carranza as in charge of the Executive, make a public statement as follows: First. That in all cases when customs charges and other contributions have been paid to American authorities at Vera Cruz, such persons shall not be required to pay again such customs charges or contributions to the Mexican authorities;

Second. That upon the evacuation by the American forces, full guaranties will be given to all persons, excepting those who have been guilty of crime; and

Third. That all persons who served the American Government during the occupation of Veracruz, shall not be regarded as enemies and will also enjoy full guaranties.

Mr. Carranza as in charge of the Executive power has given me full instructions to inform you that he did not anticipate the State Department would make such request in so far as it would be regarded as a requisite condition for the evacuation of Veracruz, as Bryan on September 15 last addressed a message to Mr. Carranza in which he stated that they were taking steps relative to the evacuation of Veracruz, and in said message no statement was made relative to any conditions to effect the evacuation. Besides, Mr. Carranza as First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army in charge of the Executive had already given amplest instructions to General Candido Aguilar, Governor and Military Commander of the State of Veracruz, to the effect that he, acting as his representative, arrange with the person designated by the American Government the transfer of the port, such representatives being now agreed as to the manner in which such transfer would be made, and General Aguilar having already issued a manifesto in which he declared that guaranties would be given the inhabitants of Veracruz. Therefore, Mr. Carranza as First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army in charge of the Executive cannot make any statements or issue any manifestos to comply with the requests of the American Government, as the affairs to which such requests have reference ought to be of the exclusive initiative of the Mexican authorities, as such requests, being of an international character, as in the present case, would affect the sovereignty of the Republic. Mr. Carranza as First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army in charge of the Executive considering that this affair should end in a satisfactory way for the better harmony between both countries, I entreat you to please inform the State Department that, sustaining its explicit decision of September 15, it please to fix the date for the evacuation of the port of Veracruz by the American forces, instructing the representative there to proceed, in accord with General Aguilar, to make the final arrangements toward the evacuation.

I again assure you [etc.]

Isidro Fabela.
Mexico, D. F., October 27, 1914 .

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13638.

[Document 942]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

Aguascalientes, October 29, 1914.

My October 23, 11 p.m. The communication of General Carranza came before the Convention tonight. General Chao, one of the committee who went to invite General Carranza to attend, stated that he had refused to come in person or send a delegate, and had refused to recognize the sovereignty of the Convention until he was informed how far that sovereignty went, when he would decide as to recognizing it. Carranza’s communication was then read; it announced his willingness to retire if Villa and Zapata were also retired to private life; if not, he was prepared to use the army at his command to fight the enemies of the Government; he accused Villa of wishing to put himself in a position where he could dictate the naming of the President and Congress, but expressed ignorance of Zapata’s aspirations.

Canova.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/13658.

[Document 943]

[Untitled]

Aguascalientes, October 30, 1914, 11 p.m.

The report of the committee to which General Carranza’s communication had been referred, when read this morning won applause from all the delegates.

In the preamble regret was expressed that Carranza could not come to the Convention; that the Convention made no charge against him but gave him full credit, rather, for the great work he has done; at the same time it believed his retirement from power indispensable to the organization of a formal government on the basis of revolutionary union; that it was impossible to treat the details of Carranza’s communication but only its principles.

The report consists of seven articles: (1) The necessity for the retirement of Carranza from the Executive Power and of Villa from the command of the Division of the North. (2) The Convention should proceed to name a provisional president. (3) Said provisional president should take oath before the Convention to comply with the program of government emanating from it and with other decisions on social and political reforms required during the pre-constitutional period. (4) Recognition of Carranza as General of Division from the date of the Plan of Guadalupe. (5) A vote of thanks to Carranza and Villa for their patriotic attitude and exalted services. (6) Abolition of all the army corps and divisions; their chiefs, including Villa, to become subject to the war department of the provisional government emanating from the Convention. (7) Notice to Carranza that his stipulation regarding Zapata in his communication on resignation will be discussed when Zapata’s delegates form part of the Convention and recognize its sovereignty.

Canova.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/13610.

[Document 944]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 1, 1914, 10 p.m.

311. Your 191, October 27, 10 p.m. You may say to the Acting Secretary for Foreign Affairs that Department’s telegram of September 15, to which he refers, expressly stated that the President was arranging to withdraw the American troops from Vera Cruz and that the Department’s September 22, 9 p.m., was in furtherance of the arrangements contemplated in its telegram of September 15. This Government is ready at any time to proceed with the evacuation of Vera Cruz but, in view of the fact that it has given assurances of protection to the Mexican citizens who were induced by General Funston to assist in the administration of the custom house and municipal affairs at Vera Cruz, it feels morally bound to comply with its promises. The same thing is true of the promises made to shippers with reference to the collection of double duties on merchandise passing through the port of Vera Cruz. All details of the arrangements contemplated for the evacuation of Vera Cruz have long since been completed, with the exception of the guaranties requested of General Carranza. It is the understanding of the Department that General Carranza referred these matters to the convention at Aguascalientes and, in view of the fact that the convention acted favorably upon the Department’s requests, it was hoped that there would be no cause for further delay on the part of General Carranza.

The Department does not consider that the proclamation issued by General Aguilar is in compliance with its requests, as the central government at Mexico City might feel justified in repudiating the guaranties promised by General Aguilar. General Carranza has not even stated that he endorsed or would regard as binding the guaranties promised by General Aguilar in his proclamation of September 22.

You may assure the Acting Secretary for Foreign Affairs that there is no disposition on the part of this Government to delay the evacuation of Vera Cruz and that as soon as General Carranza gives definite assurances in accordance with the requests contained in the Department’s September 22, 9 p.m, the date for the evacuation will be fixed without further delay.

Robert Lansing.

The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova. File No. 812.00/13610.

[Document 945]

The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 2, 1914.

You are instructed informally to bring to the attention of the Convention the following paraphrase of telegram No. 311 which the Department sent to the Brazilian Minister on November 1, 10 p.m.

[Text of paraphrase.]

Robert Lansing.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13649.

[Document 946]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

Aguascalientes, November 2, 1914, 1 p.m.

At midnight the Convention declared General Eulalio Gutiérrez. Governor of the State of San Luis Potosí, elected Provisional President of the Republic of Mexico. The Zapatistas declared themselves perfectly satisfied and avowed their allegiance to the President-elect.

General Gutiérrez is elected for a period of twenty days, when the Convention, with a full attendance of thirty authorized Zapata delegates, will ratify his permanency as Provisional President until his duly elected successor can assume office or another be named to fill out the provisional term.

Canova.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/13666.

[Document 947]

[Untitled]

Aguascalientes, November 2, 1914, midnight.

The Convention to-day approved the committee report outlined in my October 30, 11 p.m., and a committee of six was named to visit Carranza and officially inform him of Convention’s action; Villa will be similarly informed. Villa telegraphed President Gutiérrez this morning reiterating allegiance and placing himself under his orders.

Canova.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13685.

[Document 948]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Guadalupe, November 3, 1914, 6 p.m.

General Gutiérrez has authorized me to say that immediately upon taking oath as Provisional President he will issue a proclamation conceding the request of the Department regarding the evacuation of Vera Cruz. General Villa has authorized me to say that he will support with his sword the proclamation of the President. They both expressed the hope that when these assurances shall have been fulfilled the Government of the United States will not further delay the evacuation. General Gutiérrez informed me that the spirit of the Convention was that, taking into consideration the extraordinary circumstances under which Vera Cruz was occupied, those who served the Americans should be pardoned.

Carothers.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13704.

[Document 949]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Aguascalientes, November 5, 1914, 11 p.m.

The Convention to-day received telegram from Carranza insisting on his conditions, and telegram from Obregón asking for an extension of time for Carranza so as to date the twenty days of Gutiérrez as Provisional President from his assumption of office. It was decided to send Carranza. telegraphic ultimatum that he deliver the Executive Power to Gutiérrez by November 10, 6 p.m. General Gutiérrez will take the oath of office to-morrow.

Canova.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13729.

[Document 950]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Mexico, November 9, 1914, 11 a.m. No. 2.

Carranza has issued another manifesto disowning the Convention and its proceedings, calling on all proxies to retire from the Convention at or before 6 p.m. of the 10th to report to principals, and on all generals personally in attendance to retire at the same time and take immediate charge of their commands; otherwise, the officer next in grade to assume command and hold election to select successor to the disobedient general. All government officials and employees are reminded that the acts of the Convention are disowned and that no orders are to be obeyed except those from the First Chief.

Silliman.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13735.

[Document 951]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Aguascalientes, November 9, 1914, 11 p.m.

The committee sent by the Convention to see Carranza telegraph Gutiérrez that Carranza now asks for more time and states his willingness to deliver the Executive Power if the Convention will elect the Provisional President not for twenty days but until the constitutional president is elected and inaugurated. This would take two weeks and upset the work of the Convention, therefore inadmissible.

Canova.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13730.

[Document 952]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, November 10, 1914.

201. The Acting Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Fabela, now with Carranza at Cordoba, has just transmitted to me by telegraph the following note with request that it be sent to you at once.

Cordoba, November 10, 1914.

Mr. Minister: Referring to your excellency’s note68 dated the 2d instant, relative to the evacuation of Vera Cruz by the forces of the United States of America, by order of the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army in charge of the Executive Power of the Republic I have the honor to inform your excellency as follows:

The Chamber of Commerce and the owners of real estate at the port of Vera Cruz, as well as the employees who have served in various capacities in the administration of the port during the American occupation, have addressed themselves to the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army in charge of the Executive Power through the Governor and Military Commander of the State, stating that the taxpayers will be satisfied with such decisions of the National Government as may be made by it in reference to the collection of such fiscal dues as have been paid to the American authorities at that port; also that the employees are disposed to submit to such disposition as the Mexican authorities may find suitable.

The First Chief in charge of the Executive Power is now of the attitude assumed by the Chamber of Commerce, the owners of the city real estate and the said employees, and, considering it fit for the welfare of the national interests, has been pleased to issue, under date of the 8th and 9th instant the following decrees: I, Venustiano Carranza. First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army in charge of the Executive Power of the United Mexican States, using the extraordinary authority in me vested, and considering that the Chamber of Commerce and the majority of owners and administrators of real estate at the port of Vera Cruz have addressed the Executive in my charge renouncing the protection requested in their behalf by the United States Government as a condition precedent to the evacuation of Vera Cruz, stating categorically that they will abide by all the just decisions which the Mexican Government may render in relation to the collection of fiscal dues previously collected by foreign authorities, and because I consider it advantageous to the national interests, have seen fit to decree as follows: 1. On the occupation of Vera Cruz by the Mexican authorities no exaction will be made from the inhabitants of the port of the payment of taxes or any other contributions of Federal character which may have been previously paid to the foreign authorities which temporarily occupied the port.

2. In order to be entitled to the privilege granted by this decree it will be sufficient for the interested persons to present to the Tax Collector’s office the receipts showing that such payments were made to the authorities established during the occupation of Vera Cruz by the American forces.

V. Carranza.

General Headquarters at Cordoba, November 8, 1914.

The second decree reads as follows: I, Venustiano Carranza, First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army in charge of the Executive Power of the United Mexican States, by virtue of the extraordinary authority in me vested, and considering First, That Mexican and foreign employees who have served the authorities established in Vera Cruz during its occupation by American forces, have addressed this First Office of the Constitutionalist Army through the Governor and Military Commanders of this State, declaring of their own accord that they recognize only the National Government as entitled to solve the questions of interior order such as refer to the punishment or pardon of persons who, like themselves, have served the foreign authorities;

Second, That they expressly declared that they will conform to the decisions that the National Government may render in regard to them, in order that they may not be considered an obstacle to the eminently patriotic act of obtaining a speedy evacuation of Vera Cruz; and

Third, That the spontaneous and patriotic attitude of said employees has made them deserving of amnesty for such penalties as they might have incurred—

I have seen fit to issue the following decree:

Sole Article. General amnesty is hereby granted to all persons who have served as employees in the several branches of the public administration that has exercised de facto control during the temporary occupation of Vera Cruz by American forces.

V. Carranza.

General Headquarters at Cordoba, November 9, 1914.

General Candido Aguilar, as Military Governor of the State of Vera Cruz, has today issued the following decree: That the Government in my charge is obligated to extend its protection to such persons as have paid the fiscal dues in the port of Vera Cruz to the American authorities, and such protection should extend to the collection, a second time, of such dues as have been paid, considering that a large majority of the residents of said port, recognizing that the Mexican Government is the only one that ought to protect them, place themselves under its protection as an act of pure patriotism. I have therefore seen fit to decree as follows: 1. Upon the evacuation of Vera Cruz by the American forces and its occupation by the Mexican authorities, no exaction will be made from the inhabitants of the port for either municipal or State dues that have been previously paid by them to the foreign authorities who occupied the port.

2. In order to enjoy the benefits of this decree it will suffice to present to the Collectors’ offices the receipts showing the payments made to the functionaries of the administration that had control of affairs during the American occupation.

General C. Aguilar.

Cordoba, November 10, 1914

In view of the fact that the Mexican Government has issued the decrees which I have had the honor to transcribe to you above, the causes pointed out by the Government of the United States of America for the continued occupation of Vera Cruz have disappeared.

In consequence, the First Chief of the Constitutional Army in charge of the Executive of the Union trusts that, as offered in your note of November 2, the Government of the United States, of America will not delay any longer the evacuation of Vera Cruz, and will proceed at once to evacuate the port. I have [etc.]

Isidbo Fabela.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

68 In pursuance of Department’s instructions No. 311 of November 1, 10 p.m.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13741.

[Document 953]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Aguascalientes, November 10, 1914, 7 p.m.

The Convention has just declared Carranza in rebellion.

Canova.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13770.

[Document 954]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Mexico City, November 13, 1914, 11 a.m.

Generally speaking the Carranza generals appear to have allied themselves with him yesterday as against the Convention on the presumption that Villa will not be eliminated. Convention appears to have committed itself to Villa, appointing him Commander-in-Chief, and has declared Carranza in rebellion.

Silliman.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13774.

[Document 955]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Aguascalientes, November 13, 1914, 7 p.m.

President Gutiérrez has requested me to transmit the following to the Secretary of State: Hon. Leon J. Canova,
Confidential Agent of the American Government:

I have to ask you the favor of transmitting to his excellency the Secretary of State of the United States of America, for him to bring to the attention of His Excellency the President, the following note:

The Republic has undergone in the last few years a terrible crisis in which the democratic ideals of government and the yearnings of the people for justice and economic improvement have triumphed. The last civil strife ended with the overthrow of General Huerta’s dictatorship; since then the Constitutionalist forces have occupied the capital of the Republic and Senor Venustiano Carranza has assumed charge of the executive power ad interim. It was thought, in view of the prevailing disagreement, that the best way to establish a government acceptable by all was to hold a national convention where all militant factions should be represented. After various conferences between the various chiefs, it was agreed to designate this city of Aguascalientes as the meeting place, and on October 10 the Military Convention of Aguascalientes was organized, with representatives of all the revolutionist elements. Subsequently the said assembly declared itself to be the sovereign power of the Republic, as being the representative of the people in arms who had fought to reconstitute the nation.

By virtue thereof the Convention proceeded to elect the Provisional President of the Republic, and I was designated by a majority of votes to hold that office. In so proceeding the Convention gave expression to the purposes of the revolution and endeavored to demonstrate that no government can exist in Mexico that does not emanate from the will of the people, for the time of dictatorships born of violence and personal ambitions has passed forever.

In the same democratic form and voicing the sentiment of the revolutionary and reforming majority, the Convention is continuing its work in formulating the program of government with which my Provisional Administration must comply, and preparing the reforms which are the object of the revolutionary movement. It will also appoint a date on which the elections will be held to designate the Constitutional Powers of the Republic.

In the meanwhile I will strive to adapt the policy of the Government to the needs of the country and scrupulously guarantee the life and property of the foreigners who have come, under the protection of our hospitality and laws, to cooperate with us in the aggrandizement of the nation.

The new Government in my charge will move to Mexico City and achieve the complete pacification of the country; it will try to meet the just demands of all the inhabitants, although without swerving from the performance of its duties.

In announcing to your excellency’s Government the establishment of a new regime in Mexico, I rely on the strong sympathies which the President of your Republic has always shown to the Mexican people and their institutions, and I am gratified to hope that the good relations that have united us with the powerful and civilized American nation will subsist in the future and that the forces of your Government will very soon be withdrawn from our port of Vera Cruz; then will our relations be again completely cordial and close, as is to be desired between adjoining peoples who are brothers by civilization and common ideals.

The Provisional President of the Republic,
E. Gutiérrez.

Aguascalientes, November 13, 1914.

Canova.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/13766a.

[Document 956]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. 69

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 13, 1914, 11 p.m.

323. Please convey to General Carranza and make public the following statement given out by the Secretary of State to-night: Both General Carranza and the Convention at Aguascalientes having given the assurances and guaranties we requested, it is the purpose of the administration to withdraw the troops of the United States from Vera Cruz on Monday, November 23. All the persons there for whose personal safety this Government had made itself responsible have now left the city. The priests and nuns who had taken refuge there and for whose safety fears were entertained are on their way to this country.

Furnish copy of this to Silliman.

W. J. Bryan.

69 Same to Carothers reading first sentence “Convey to General Villa.” Same to Canova reading “Convey to General Gutiérrez.” Same to Embassies at London, Paris, Rome, Berlin, and Madrid, and Ambassadors of these countries here.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13794.

[Document 957]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

Aguascalientes, November 14, 1914, 7 p.m.

President Gutiérrez has just telegraphed Carranza giving him until six to-morrow night as final hour after which, owing to the position of the advancing forces and the expectancy of the country, hostilities would begin, adding that if they did begin it would be chargeable to his obstinacy and the country would hold him alone responsible.

The Convention has appointed a committee of twenty-nine as a Permanent Commission to represent it should sufficient delegates be called to commands, thus breaking quorum.

November 15, 8 p.m.

General Carranza to-day telegraphed President Gutiérrez that he had given General González his definite answer. President Gutiérrez wired González requesting immediate information as to nature of the reply and has just received a telegram in which González states that Carranza has definitely decided to deliver executive power to the Provisional President adding that he, Carranza, and Villa must leave the country immediately. The expatriation feature will likely be unnecessary as the disposition is for complete conciliation by treating Carranza with distinguished consideration upon reaching Mexico.

President Gutiérrez is highly pleased over news contained in the Department’s November 13, 11 p.m.

Canova.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova. File No. 812.00/13774.

[Document 958]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 16, 1914.

Your November 13, 7 p.m. You may say to General Gutiérrez that I have taken pleasure in bringing his telegram of November 13 to the attention of the President, and add that this Government appreciates the sentiments expressed therein and that it hopes that he will do everything in his power to bring about lasting peace in Mexico,

Bryan.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13795.

[Document 959]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Mexico City, November 16, 1914, 10 a.m.

Resulting from conference of General González with the First Chief, the latter has made another proposition. He offers to resign his military command to General González; proposes that Villa resign his to Gutiérrez, and that both himself and Villa retire to Havana by the 25th; the Convention to reassemble in Mexico City and elect a Provisional President for the entire pre-constitutional period; and that Gutiérrez and González shall then deliver to the new President their respective forces.

Silliman.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13802.

[Document 960]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Aguascalientes, November 16, 1914, 8 p.m.

General Carranza through General González today repudiated what the latter telegraphed last night saying he was only willing to deliver the executive power to a person of his entire confidence for instance to General González and that Villa deliver the country he holds to General Gutiérrez and these two representative elements meet in Mexico with the Convention to elect a provisional president for the entire pre-constitutional term. That he and Villa leave the country immediately and both be in Flavana by November 25 and if by then the country was not completely pacified he would return and again assume the executive authority.

It is understood Villa will start for Mexico November 17, 8 a.m. and if he meets opposition he is amply prepared to clear the way of all obstacles.

Canova.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13921.

[Document 961]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

No. 82.] Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, November 16, 1914.

Sir: Referring to the evacuation of Vera Cruz, I have the honor to enclose herewith translations of two notes which I have received on this subject in answer to my note of November 14.70

I have [etc.]

J. M. Cardoso de Oliveira.

[Inclosure 1—Translation.]

Sr. Davalos, temporarily in charge of the Foreign Office, to the Brazilian Minister.

Foreign Office,
Mexico, November 14, 1914.

Mr. Minister: I had the honor to receive your note of even date in which you have transcribed a message from the Secretary of State of the United States of America stating the resolution of the American Government to withdraw the troops now stationed at the port of Vera Cruz, said Government having considered as satisfactory the guaranties which the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army as well as the Military Convention at Aguascalientes have offered.

It is with pleasure that I inform your excellency that I shall immediately bring the above to the knowledge of the First Chief, Mr. Carranza, and no doubt such tidings will be received by him with great pleasure. It gives me real satisfaction to see the able manner in which you have conducted the negotiations started by this Chancellery before the Government of the United States, which have now come to such a successful end.

I avail [etc.]

M. Davalos.

[Inclosure 2–—Translation.]

The Acting Secretary for Foreign Affairs to the Brazilian Minister.

Córdoba, November 15, 1914.

Mr. Minister: It was an honor and a satisfaction for me to receive your kind note under yesterday’s date in which your excellency requests me to convey to the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army in charge of the Executive of this country, that the Secretary of State of the United States of America informs this Government that the port of Vera Cruz will be evacuated by the American forces on the 23d instant. In advising your excellency that Mr. V. Carranza, in charge of the Executive, was duly informed, I have the honor to reiterate to you what I have said in previous notes, that is: that General Candido Aguilar, Governor and Military Commander of the Port of Vera Cruz, has been duly authorized by the Executive to receive the port, and that he has already issued the necessary instructions to that effect. The First Chief, Mr. Carranza, asks me to present to your excellency his sincere appreciation of the friendly participation which you have had in this affair, which is of such interest to the Government and people of Mexico. Please accept my congratulations for the part which you have represented in the solution of this international case.

Sincerely thanking you [etc.]

Isidro Fabela.

70 In pursuance of the Department’s telegram of November 13, 11 p.m.

Mr. Belt to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13836.

[Document 962]

Mr. Belt to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Mexico City, November 19, 1914.

Obregón issued formal declaration of war against Villa tonight. Document given to press tonight late. Obregón expects to leave November 21 for Salina Cruz.

J. W. Belt.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13833.

[Document 963]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Irapttato, November 19, 1914.

General Gutiérrez conferred with General Villa yesterday afternoon and it was decided that General Villa remain at the head of Convention troops. Progress rapid southward.

Carothers.

The Acting Secretary of War to General Funston. File No. 812.00/13975.

[Document 964]

The Acting Secretary of War to General Funston.

[Telegram.]

War Department,
Washington, November 20, 1914.

You will evacuate Vera Cruz on Monday, November 23d. You will bring with you to the United States all funds in your possession from whatever source derived, both United States funds and Mexican customs receipts and taxes. You will also bring with you all the records, accounts, and money papers necessary to establish the integrity and accuracy of your financial and other administration. You will make an inventory of all goods in the customs house keeping the original thereof and leaving a copy with Consul Canada. You may also leave with Consul Canada such copies of accounts or other data as may be required by whomsoever may continue the government of the city. Do not make any arrangements with local Mexicans or with Mexican representatives from outside the city that could make it seem that you are recognizing the right of”Carranza to jurisdiction over the city. It is merely desired that you get out in the best practical fashion, leaving things in as good shape as possible and making no declaration that could be interpreted as committing this Government to the recognition of the authority of any individual or faction.

Breckinridge.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13864.

[Document 965]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Mexico City, November 22, 1914, 10 a.m.

General Blanco assumed charge here last night and says he has sufficient troops to amply protect this capital. He at once completed provisional organization by appointing necessary sub-officials.

At a conference of generals here yesterday afternoon an independent movement was initiated which will probably have approval of all generals here including possibly González and Obregón. The conference determined to protect the city in spite of the order for complete evacuation, and formally decided: (1) To sustain the Aguascalientes Convention up to the point of the repudiation of Carranza and the election of Gutiérrez as Provisional President; (2) to repudiate the appointment of Villa as Commander in Chief, inasmuch as the Convention had previously determined on his retirement; (3) to appoint commissioners to immediately see if the retirement of Villa and Carranza cannot still be honorably effected and suitable commissions abroad given both of them; (4) to arrange for reconvening the Convention here to reconsider or to ratify election of Gutiérrez and to form a provisional government with programme for pre-constitutional period and to name the date of its termination; (5) to appoint provisional governors for those States which appear to need a change of personnel. They pledge themselves to unite with the Division of North in directing the retirement of Carranza if the condition regarding retirement of Villa is complied with. The intimation is that they will resist the Convention and Villa with arms if their proposition is not accepted. If no agreement can be reached, their plan will probably be not to make any serious resistance here but to retire, allow Villa to come in, and then attempt to isolate this city and dominate the remainder of the country.

Silliman.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13858.

[Document 966]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, November 22, 1914, 11 a.m.

218. General Blanco today assumed full command of the situation in the Federal District, appointing provisionally governor, police inspector and minor officials. I was reliably informed that this took place after serious disagreement between him and Obregón who as his senior officer commanded him to abandon the city, which he strongly refused to do.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13872.

[Document 967]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, November 23, 1914, 1 p.m.

Transports have left harbor. No friction between American and Constitutionalist troops.

Canada.

Consul Bonney to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13875.

[Document 968]

Consul Bonney to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
San Luis Potosi, November 23, 1914.

San Luis Potosí is now the temporary capital of Mexico. Convention troops have advanced easterly and southerly.

Bonney.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13897, 13907.

[Document 969]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, November 26, 1914, 1 p.m.

Offices Constitutionalist Government being established in Vera Cruz. General Aguilar called and congratulated me upon the orderly manner in which General Funston evacuated and the clean condition in which he found the city. Generals Carranza, Obregón and Alvarado announced to arrive this afternoon.

Canada.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13928.

[Document 970]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Queretaro, November 27, 1914, 8 p.m.

President Gutiérrez is still here, awaiting developments. Villa is expected to enter Mexico City. General Blanco is reported to have withdrawn his troops from Mexico City.

Canova.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13926.

[Document 971]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, November 29, 1914, 10 a.m.

The following has been received from the Foreign Office here: I have the honor to inform you that, due to war necessities, the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army has issued a decree ordering the Government offices to be transferred to such places as circumstances may dictate, the National Government remaining for the present at this port.

Canada.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13940.

[Document 972]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, November 29, 1914, 2 p.m.

227. Zapata arrived November 27: he refused to come to the National Palace to receive a manifestation of the people and stayed at a very modest hotel in the suburbs. General Angeles arrived yesterday with the advance guard but is waiting for Villa to properly enter the capital. A general order from Villa is published according full guaranties to all, any wrong to be punished by death. General situation surprisingly good.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13980.

[Document 973]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Mexico, December 5, 1914, 11 p.m.

The Permanent Commission71 today decided to call a full meeting of the Convention for January 1st. At that meeting thirty accredited Zapata delegates will participate.

The Commission criticized President Gutiérrez for some of his appointments. Leading members of the Commission for this reason predict the designation of another provisional president during the first week of January.

Canova.

71 See Mr. Canova’s November 14, 7 p.m.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/14048.

[Document 974]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

Mexico, December 8, 1914.

Sir:* * * On December 3 President Gutiérrez, accompanied by General Villa and a number of members of the Convention, came into the city.

On December 4 General Villa and General Zapata had an engagement to meet in the ancient town of Xochimilco. Carothers and I were present at the meeting.* * * These men, who had never seen one another before but who had been working in accord for some months, locked arms and went to the municipal school building, where they were to hold a conference.* * * Villa finally opened the conversation and both of them fell to discussing a character neither liked—Carranza.* * * Villa and Zapata then withdrew to a private room, where they had a conference of about an hour and a half. A dinner was then served, after which speeches were made.* * *

On December 6 the joint entry of the Villa and Zapata forces into the capital was made* * * in all about 30,000 men. These troops were reviewed by the two chiefs, President Gutiérrez, the Convention delegates, the entire Diplomatic Corps, and others.* * *

Everybody now confesses that conditions in the capital have never been better than since the Zapatista forces began doing police duty.* * *

I have [etc.]

L. J. Canova.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Silliman. File No. 812.00/14009a.

[Document 975]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 13, 1914.

We are much disappointed and distressed to learn that executions are taking place. Please bring every possible influence to bear on authorities in behalf of political prisoners. See if you can secure permission for political prisoners to leave the country. Do everything in your power to save Iturbide. He acted for Carbajal and turned the city over to the Constitutionalists, thus saving much loss of life as well as preventing disorder. It would be most unfortunate if he were dealt with harshly.

Impress upon the authorities the importance of cultivating the respect of foreign nations, whose good opinion will be necessary in establishing proper international relations.

Be constant and continuous in your effort to protect from harm or insult the representatives of religious orders. Inform us whether religious exercises are interfered with and report any complaints which have been made to you by the representatives of any church or religious organization.

Bryan.

Mr. Arredondo to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/14031.

[Document 976]

Mr. Arredondo to the Secretary of State.

Confidential Agency of the Constitutionalist Government of Mexico,
Washington, December 16, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: I have the honor to enclose herewith copy in translation of a decree issued on the 12th instant by Mr. Venustiano (Carranza as First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army in charge of the Executive Power of Mexico, with headquarters at Vera Cruz.

In sending you this document I am prompted purely by the desire to acquaint you with the political program of the Constitutionalist Government, which by virtue of this decree has become the supreme rule of action under which all future acts of the Constitutionalist military and civil authorities will be conducted.

No efforts will be spared to accomplish the prime object of the Constitutionalist movement, which is to restore the country to peace and to establish a government based on the law and emanating directly from the will of the people of Mexico. Mr. Carranza, as well as every man under him, proposes to live up to each and every provision contained in the aforesaid decree, inasmuch as the experiences of the past have proved that no government can endure when it fails to keep its promises and diverges from the channel of the law.

I avail [etc.]

E. Arredondo.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

Declaration and Decree issued by General Carranza at Vera Cruz on December 12, 1914

declaration.

I, Venustiano Carranza, First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army and Depository of the Executive Power of the Republic of Mexico, taking into consideration:

That on the arrest of the President and Vice President, on the 19th of February, 1913, by ex-General Victoriano Huerta, and the usurpation of public power by the latter on the 20th of the same month, and immediately thereafter depriving the above-mentioned public officers of their lives, the constitutional order of the Republic was interrupted and thus the country was deprived of a lawful government;

That the undersigned, in his capacity as constitutional Governor of the State of Coahuila, had solemnly taken the oath to observe and cause the General Constitution to be observed, and that, complying with this duty and the above oath, he was inevitably obliged to rise in arms to oppose the usurpation of Huerta, and to restore constitutional order in the Republic of Mexico;

That this duty, furthermore, was imposed upon him in a precise and express manner by a decree of the Legislature of the State of Coahuila, by which he was categorically directed to repudiate the government of the usurper Huerta and to oppose it by force of arms until it would be completely overthrown;

That in view thereof the undersigned called all patriotic Mexicans to arms, and with the first ones who followed him he framed the Plan of Guadalupe, on March 26, 1913, which has served to this day as the banner and bylaw of the Constitutionalist Revolution;72

That of the military groups which were formed to oppose Huerta’s usurpation, the Divisions of the Northwest, Northeast, East, Center and South operated under the leadership of the First Chieftainship, perfect harmony existing and complete coordination of the means of action to accomplish the desired purpose; that the same did not occur with the Northern Division, which, under the command of General Francisco Villa, showed from the beginning private tendencies and finally severed its connections with the Headquarters of the Constitutionalist Revolution, acting according to its own initiative to such extent that the First Chief does not know to this day, in a great measure, the means by which the above-mentioned general has secured funds and sustained the campaign, the amount of such funds and the use he may have made of them;

That upon the arrival at the City of Mexico of the victorious revolutionary army, it endeavored to properly organize the Provisional Government and was getting ready, besides, to meet the demands of public opinion by a satisfactory solution of the imperative social reform needed by the people, when it was confronted with the difficulties preparing in the Northern Division in order to frustrate the triumphs reached by the efforts of the Constitutionalist Army;

That the First Chieftainship, anxious to organize the Provisional Government in accordance with ideas and tendencies of the men who, with arms in hand made the Constitutionalist Revolution, and who, therefore, were intimately cognizant of the ideals which were pursued, called a general convention to be held in the City of Mexico, composed of generals, governors and officers in command of troops, to the end that all of them together should decide on a program of government, indicate in a general way such reforms as seemed indispensable for the accomplishment of the social and political redemption of the nation, and establish the form and time when constitutional order should be restored.

That this purpose had soon to be deferred, because the generals, governors and officers who attended the Military Convention in the City of Mexico considered it advisable that there should be representatives at all the meetings of the elements which had taken part in the fight against the usurpation of Huerta, as some of them had abstained from attending, giving as a pretext a lack of guaranties and because of the rebellion which Francisco Villa had already started against the Chief’s Office; and on this account they expressed their desire to be transferred to Aguascalientes, the place they considered more appropriate and having the conditions of neutrality sought by the Military Convention for the prosecution of their work;

That the members of the Convention adopted this determination after they had reiterated to the undersigned their confirmation of his functions as First Chief of the Constitutionalist Revolution and Depository of the Executive Power of the Republic, which investiture he had then relinquished formally, in order to show that he was not animated by undue sentiments of personal ambition, but that in view of existing difficulties his cherished aim was that revolutionary action should not be divided, and thus frustrate the fruits of the victorious revolution;

That this First Chieftainship made no opposition to the transfer of the Military Convention to the City of Aguascalientes, although it was intimately persuaded that, far from obtaining the conciliation sought, the separation between the commander of the Northern Division and the Constitutionalist Army would become still deeper, because the First Chief did not wish to make the impression that he had the deliberate intention of excluding the Northern Division from the discussion upon matters of the greatest importance; also because he did [not] wish to appear as refusing a last effort toward conciliation, and because he believed that it was imperative, for the good of the revolution, that the true motives of General Villa should be disclosed in an evident manner before the national conscience, relieving from error those who in good faith believed in the sincerity and patriotism of General Villa and the group of men who surrounded him;

That as soon as the labors of the Aguascalientes Convention were initiated, the machinations of the Villista agents were laid bare, they having performed the principal role at the Convention; the system of threats was felt and unbridled pressure was put in practice against those who, on account of their sense of honor and spirit of independence, opposed the impositions of the commander of the Northern Division to direct the works of the Convention to suit his pleasure;

That on the other hand, many of the chiefs who attended the Aguascalientes Convention, did not grasp the importance and true mission of the Convention, and as they were men of little or no experience in political matters their good faith, abused by the malicious agents of Villa, dragged them to second inadvertently the maneuvering of the Northern Division, without regard to the cause of the people or even outlining the general thought of the Revolution and the program of the pre-constitutional government, which was generally desired;

That for the purpose of avoiding a controversy of a purely personal character and the further shedding of blood, the First Chieftanship made every possible effort to reach a conciliation, offering to withdraw from power provided a government capable of carrying into effect the social and political reforms demanded by the country should be established. But having failed to satisfy the thirst for power of the Northern Division, notwithstanding the successive concessions made by the First Chieftainship, and in view of the well-defined attitude of a great number of Constitutionalist leaders who, repudiating the resolutions adopted by the Aguascalientes Convention, ratified their allegiance to the Plan of Guadalupe, this First Chieftainship was constrained to accept the challenge to fight the reaction led at present by General Francisco Villa;

That the groups on which General Villa is banking, the same that prevented Madero from directing his policy, are therefore politically responsible in a radical sense for his downfall. On the other hand, the express declarations made on several occasions by the commander of the Northern Division advocating the establishment of constitutional order before the social and political reforms demanded by the country took place, clearly demonstrate that the insubordination of General Villa is of a strictly reactionary character and contrary to constitutionalist activities, and has for a purpose to frustrate the complete success of the revolution, preventing the esablishment of a pre-constitutional government entrusted with the enactment and enforcement of the reforms which have been the subject of the struggle which has been raging for the past four years;

That therefore, it is a duty in behalf of the Revolution and the fatherland to continue the revolution started in 1913, pursuing the fight against the new enemies of the liberty of the Mexican people;

That it being imperative that the interruption of constitutional order should subsist during this new period of the struggle, the Plan of Guadalupe should therefore continue to be in force until the enemy shall have been overpowered completely;

That it having been impossible to carry into effect the purposes for which the Military Convention of October, 1914, was convened, and the purpose of the new fight being, on the part of the reactionary troops commanded by Gen. Villa, to prevent the realization of revolutionary reforms demanded by the Mexican people, the First Chief of the Revolution is obliged to enforce, at the earliest possible moment, all the laws covering the political and economic reforms which the country requires, enacting the same during the struggle that is to be commenced;

That therefore, it being necessary for the Plan of Guadalupe to remain in force in its essential part, it is imperative that the Mexican people and the Constitutionalist Army should clearly know the military ends pursued in the present fight, which are the annihilation of the reaction creeping up with General Villa at the head, and the establishment of the political and social principles which inspire this First Chieftainship, which are the ideals for which the Mexican people have been fighting during the last four years;

That therefore, in accordance with the general sentiments of the leaders of the Constitutionalist Army, of the Governors of the States and of other collaborators of the Revolution, and interpreting the needs of the Mexican people, I, Venustiano Carranza, have seen fit to decree the following:

decree.

Article 1. The Plan of Guadalupe, dated March 26, 1913, shall subsist until the Revolution obtains complete success; and therefore Venustiano Carranza shall continue as First Chief of the Constitutionalist Revolution and in charge of the Executive Power of the Nation until the enemy is overpowered and peace is restored.

Article 2. The First Chief of the Revolution, in charge of the Executive Power of the Nation, shall issue and cause to be observed all the laws, provisions and measures tending to satisfy the economic, social and political needs of the country, carrying into effect such reforms as public opinion may consider indispensable for the establishment of a régime which shall guarantee: the equality of Mexicans among themselves; the enactment of agrarian laws to encourage the creation of the small land owner, dissolving the latifundia or expanding land holdings and restoring to the townships the lands unjustly taken from them; fiscal laws tending to secure an equitable system of taxation on real estate; legislation to improve the condition of the rural laborer, the artisan, the miner, and in general of the working classes; the establishment of municipal freedom as a constitutional institution; the bases for a new system of organization of the army; the amendment of the election laws in order to insure the efficiency of suffrage; the revision of laws relative to marriage and the civil status of persons; provisions to maintain the strict observance of the Laws of Reform; the revision of the civil, penal and commercial codes; the amendment of judicial procedure with a view to expedite and enhance the efficiency of the administration of justice; the revision of laws relative to the operation of mines, oil fields, water rights, forests, and other natural resources of the country, in order to destroy the monopolies created under the past regime and to avoid the creation of others in the future; political reforms to insure the true application of the Constitution of the Republic; and, in general, the enactment of all other laws which may be considered necessary to safeguard the effectiveness and full enjoyment of the rights of all the inhabitants of the country and their equality before the law.

Article 3. In order to continue the struggle and to carry into effect the work of reform to which the preceding article refers, the First Chief of the Revolution is expressly authorized to convene and organize the Constitutionalist Army, and to direct the operations of the campaign; to appoint the governors and military commanders of the States and to remove the same freely; to decree the expropriations on the ground of public utility which may be necessary for the distribution of the lands; the foundation of townships and other public services; to negotiate loans and issue obligations against the National Treasury, indicating the assets by which they are to be guaranteed; to appoint and remove freely all federal officers of the civil administration of the States, Territories and the Federal District; to organize the departments of state and define the province of action of each one of them; to make, either directly or through the officers he may appoint to that effect, requisitions for lands, buildings, arms, horses, vehicles, provisions and other elements of warfare, as also to institute decorations and to decree rewards for services rendered to the Revolution.

Article 4. Upon the success of the Revolution, the reinstatement of the Supreme Chieftainship in the City of Mexico and after the elections of the municipal councils have taken place in the majority of the States of the Republic, the First Chief of the Revolution, as the person in charge of the Executive Power, shall convene to elections for members of the National Congress, stating in the call the dates and terms in which such elections shall take place.

Article 5. Upon the installation of the National Congress, the First Chief of the Revolution shall render an account before it concerning the use he may have made of the powers with which he is invested by this decree, and he shall especially submit the reforms decreed and put into effect during the struggle, to the end that Congress may ratify, amend or supplement them, and to adopt as constitutional precepts those which shall have been so maintained prior to the re-establishment of constitutional order.

Article 6. The National Congress shall issue the proper calls for the election of President of the Republic, and as soon as this has taken place, the First Chief of the Revolution shall deliver to the President-elect the Executive Power of the Nation.

Article 7. In the case of absolute default of the present First Chief of the Revolution and while the generals and governors proceed to elect the person who should take his place, the Supreme Chieftainship shall devolve transitorily upon the Chief of Army Corps in the place where the seat of the Revolutionary Government may be at the time the default of the First Chief may occur.

Vera Cruz, December 12, 1914.

Venustiano Carranza.

72 For text of this plan, see footnote 58.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/14.052b.

[Document 977]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 16, 1914, 4 p.m.

360. Please convey unofficially to General Gutiérrez, yourself or through the proper channel, the following message:

“On the 23d of last July this Department sent identic messages to General Carranza and General Villa, which are quoted below.

“In view of the fact that the situation remains unchanged, the same representations are made to you in order that you may know the President’s earnest desire in the premises.

“The term ‘Constitutionalists’ was used when the followers of both General Carranza and General Villa called themselves ‘Constitutionalists.’

“In referring to those connected with religious orders you will of course understand that the language includes both sexes, nuns and sisters as well as priests, and also teachers and preachers of other denominations.”

[Here follows a quotation of the identic telegram sent to Mr. Silliman at Tampico and Mr. Carothers at Torreon on July 23. See pp. 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 831, Doc. 832, and Doc. 833] and 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, and Doc. 837], respectively.]

Bryan.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/14053.

[Document 978]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, December 19, 1914, 11 a.m.

241. Had very cordial conference this morning with General Gutiérrez to whom I delivered a translation of yours December 16, 1914, 4 p.m., No. 360. I added adequate remarks impressing upon him the convenience of carrying out your suggestion. He stated that he was in complete accord with them and authorized me to assure you that he and his Cabinet have now for days been treating the question of general amnesty with great hopes of arriving at a satisfactory solution. He also told me that the Government is greatly interested in relieving the financial situation and will try to meet the payments of Dublic debts as far as possible even at the sacrifice of the pay of its own army. He promised to reply in writing to the other points contained in your message.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/14057.

[Document 979]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

Mexico City, December 20, 1914.

The Provisional President told me this afternoon that there was still very much opposition to Villa and that another effort was being made at this time to get him to resign. As Carranza will not resign they expect to eventually drive him out.

He also said an agreement had been reached with all the troops north of San Luis Potosi to support the Convention.

Silliman.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/14076.

[Document 980]

[Untitled]

Mexico City, December 23, 1914.

The Provisional President announces publicly today that he has had a very satisfactory interview with General Villa and that the general will remain in this city indefinitely. He has taken a house here. It is again published that satisfactory arrangements have been made with the troops north of San Luis Potosí.

Silliman.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/14084a.

[Document 981]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 26, 1914.

376. Press despatches announce that the Provisional President has issued an order directing, generals to abstain from summary executions. The President heartily approves the action taken. Please convey this information to General Gutiérrez and if you consider the circumstances favorable urge upon Villa acceptance of this order as best means of strengthening Provisional Government.

Bryan.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/14095, 14104, 14106.

[Document 982]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

Mexico, December 29, 1914.

It appears to have been generally believed that a rupture would occur between’ Provisional President Gutiérrez on one hand and Villa and Zapata on the other. This rupture seems now to have begun. Arrests continue, and fourteen prominent native-born citizens of Pachuca were reported executed recently by the Zapatista commander there. And I am informed that there was a stormy meeting yesterday between Villa and President Gutiérrez in which Villa accused the President of getting ready to abandon the capital; the President partly admitted this and asked why he should stay when there was plainly a combination to refuse to obey his orders. Villa told him he must remain; that they could not afford to be without a President and that he would send a detachment of his own men to be the Presidential Guard instead of the men the Provisional President is now using. If my information is correct, it makes the Provisional President practically a prisoner.

On December 24 the Provisional President issued a circular letter to the generals, in part as follows: When I accepted the honorable and, so far as I am concerned, unmerited, office of Provisional President of the Republic, I thought all my comrades in arms and fellow partisans would cooperate with me to establish a strong, honest and just government which, while using no complaisance toward the enemy, would base all its acts on morality and law, without crookedness or subterfuges of any kind. But it has come to my knowledge that various classes of society in this city are panic-stricken by the continual disappearance of individuals seized by night, either to be held for ransom or assassinated in solitary spots.

If there is no form of trial, however summary, if persons are despoiled or slain without any procedure, to-morrow when we are reproached as brigands, kidnappers and assassins we shall be unable to repel the charge by pointing to written processes in each case. The right to punish belongs only to authority through the tribunals and subject strictly to public procedure prescribed by law, and never to private persons nor to chiefs of armed groups however numerous.

In view of the above I exhort you generals to whom this is addressed to join your patriotism and honesty to that of the Government and prevent your subordinates from continuing the acts referred to in this note; and I admonish you that the Executive is resolved to afford guaranties to all inhabitants of the Republic without distinction of classes, including enemies of the Revolution, who shall have all guaranties granted by law to culprits and delinquents. I will proceed with all energy against those, whatever be their military, pecuniary or social position, who continue perturbing public tranquillity by seizing, kidnapping or assassinating defenseless persons.

Some members of the Convention, said to be more than twenty, including Convention officers who feared for their safety here on account of Zapatistas’ unfriendliness, have left for San Luis Potosi, where, it is said, they will convoke the Convention. The Villista and Zapatista elements will stand together and hold a convention here; they agreed on temporary officers yesterday.

Silliman.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/14108.

[Document 983]

[Untitled]

Mexico, December 30, 1914.

The rupture mentioned in my December 29 was confirmed from Zapatista sources today and details given of the harsh words and drastic action of Villa.

It is said the Convention will meet here on January 1 as publicly announced.

Silliman.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/14115.

[Document 984]

[Untitled]

Mexico, December 31, 1914.

It is certain that if a convention meets here tomorrow it will contain most antagonistic elements. The Zapata element will endeavor to dominate. They expect to have the support of Villa. The friends of the Provisional President expect him to develop more strength than his enemies give him credit for. His enemies are quite confident of his complete downfall. There is an unconfirmed rumor that Villa will proclaim himself dictator. He has personally assumed the censorship of the federal telegraph in this city.

Silliman.

Severance of diplomatic relations between the United States and Mexico; representation of American interests by the Brazilian Legation; withdrawal of consular officers; good offices of British Minister to Mexico and of British and French consular officersSeverance of diplomatic relations between the United States and Mexico; representation of American interests by the Brazilian Legation; withdrawal of consular officers; good offices of British Minister to Mexico and of British and French consular officers

[985] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico, April 22, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 123.Os4/122.

[986] [Untitled]

American Embassy, Mexico, April 22, 1914, midnight.

File No. 123.Os4/121.

[987] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, April 23, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 123.Os4/122a.

[988] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, April 23, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 703.3212/9a.

[989] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, April 24, 1914.

File No. 703.3212/17b.

[990] The Secretary of State to certain American Consuls in Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, April 24, 1914, 9 a.m.

File No. 125.0012/85a.

[991] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, April 25, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 125.0012/85a.

[992] The Brazilian Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Embassy, Washington, April 25, 1914.

File No. 703.3212/2.

[993] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

Vera Cruz, April 26, 1914, noon.

File No. 703.4112/4.

[994] The Secretary of State to certain American Consuls in Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, April 26, 1914.

File No. 125.0012/86a.

[995] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister in charge of American interests in Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, April 28, 1914.

File No. 70.3.3212/10b.

[996] The British Embassy to the Department of State.

British Embassy, Washington , April 28, 1914.

File No. 703.4112/5.

[997] The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, April 30, 1914.

File No. 703.4112/6.

[998] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, April 30, 1914.

File No. 703.3212/5a.

[999] The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, May 1, 1914.

File No. 703.4112/7.

[1000] The Department of State to the British Embassy.

Department of State, Washington, May 6, 1914.

File No. 703.4112/5.

[1001] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, May 9, 1914.

File No. 703.4112/7.

[1002] The President of the American Colony at Mexico City to the Secretary of State.

Mexico, May 23, 1914.

File No. 703.3212/11.

[1003] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, May 25, 1914.

File No. 703.3212/11.

[1004] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Chargé d’Affaires.

Department of State, Washington, May 27, 1914.

File No. 703.3212/11.

[1005] The Brazilian Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Embassy, Washington, May 28, 1914.

File No. 703.3212/13.

[1006] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Monterey, August 15, 1914.

File No. 703.3212/18.

[1007] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, August 18, 1914.

File No. 703.3212/18.

[1008] The Brazilian Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Embassy, Long Branch, September 10, 1914.

File No. 703.3212/22.

[1009] The Brazilian Minister to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, September 29, 1914.

File No. 703.3212/23.

[1010] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister.

Department of State, Washington, October 1, 1914.

File No. 703.3212/23.

[1011] The Secretary of State to certain American Consuls in Mexico.

Department of State, Wasington, November 9, 1914.

File No. 125.0012/102a.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 123.Os4/122.

[Document 985]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Embassy,
Mexico, April 22, 1914, 11 p.m.

I was handed my passports tonight at 7.30 o’clock and I leave for Vera Cruz the 24th on a special train with a large escort.

After mature consideration of the actual circumstances surrounding Americans in Mexico in conversation with Carden, and the fact that Mr. Hohler is remaining here as Secretary, and, further, that the Americans and British are very friendly here, I have entrusted this Embassy to the British Legation.73 The Brazilian Minister is leaving shortly, and they have no defense organization. I am notifying consular officers to withdraw from Mexico.

O’Shaughnessy.

73 See post, his telegram of April 26, noon, transmitting notes to and from the British Legation.

[Untitled] File No. 123.Os4/121.

[Document 986]

[Untitled]

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico, April 22, 1914, midnight.

Having been handed my passports at 7.30 tonight, will leave tomorrow night or Friday morning. What about Counsel General Shanklin and other consular officers? Please instruct immediately.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 123.Os4/122a.

[Document 987]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 23, 1914, 1 p.m.

772. We are arranging for turning over archives at Mexico City to diplomatic representative of another nation but arrangements not yet complete. Hope you can remain until instructions can be given. If, however, your safety requires earlier departure, leave Embassy in charge of clerk until instructions can be sent. Say to Consul Shanklin and other consuls that they may leave whenever in their judgment safety requires. Instructions will be sent consulates direct as soon as arrangements can be made for care of records.

Mexican Chargé has just asked for passports and they are being prepared. Please report on Americans there.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 703.3212/9a.

[Document 988]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, April 23, 1914, 7 p.m.

Before receiving your telegram, arrangements had been made with Brazil for Brazilian Legation at Mexico City to take over records, archives and property of the American Embassy. You will act accordingly. Wherever there is a Brazilian Consul, our Consulate will be turned over to him upon the withdrawal of the American Consul. We are arranging to have the Consul of France take charge where there is no Brazilian Consul. Notice will be sent to consulates direct.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Ambassador. File No. 703.3212/17b.

[Document 989]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, April 24, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: Referring to our conversation over the telephone, in which you reported that your Minister at Mexico City had informed you that the American Embassy had been turned over to the British Minister there, I beg to say that I telegraphed Chargé O’Shaughnessy yesterday, stating that arrangements had been made with your Government for its Minister to act as our diplomatic representative after the withdrawal of our representative.

I explained yesterday to the British Ambassador the action of Chargé O’Shaughnessy and told him that the Department had telegraphed the Chargé instructions in regard to the arrangement made through your Government with your Minister there.

The British Ambassador telegraphed the British Minister at Mexico City explaining that a mistake had been made, and correcting it. I do not know whether my telegram was delivered to Mr. O’Shaughnessy or not. Some former telegrams had not been. It may be well, therefore, for me to send a telegram to your Minister through your Embassy, and I shall be glad if you will send the following: Brazilian Legation,
City of Mexico:

Arrangement has been made through your Government, and with the consent of its Embassy here, for you to take over the archives, records, etc., of the American Embassy in the City of Mexico. However, before we could communicate with Chargé O’Shaughnessy the latter spoke to the British Minister about acting for us. I explained the mistake to the British Ambassador here and wired our Chargé to turn the Embassy over to you. I am not sure that the message was delivered to him, and he may have left before receiving the instructions. The matter has been explained to the British Legation at the City of Mexico by the British Ambassador here, and I send you this message to ask you to call at the British Legation and receive such archives, records, etc., as have been transferred to the Legation; and you will please act for us until further notice. We appreciate very much the willingness of your Government to render us this service and your own acquiescence in the arrangement. You will please keep us informed as to the interests of Americans there and render them such aid as is within your power.

W. J. Bryan

You can decide whether this should be sent in your cipher or plain; possibly it might be better for the present for me to send our messages to you to be put into cipher to insure their delivery. You will, of course, keep an account of the expense incurred either here or in the City of Mexico and render an account for the same at such intervals as you may wish.

Assuring you again of our appreciation of your Government’s courtesy, and of your own, I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to certain American Consuls in Mexico. File No. 125.0012/85a.

[Document 990]

The Secretary of State to certain American Consuls in Mexico.

[Telegram.]74

Department of State,
Washington, April 24, 1914, 9 a.m.

In view of relations existing between this Government and the Huerta Government, you and such members of your staff as are American citizens are directed to leave your post at the earliest opportunity. Place consular offices and archives with coats of arms, flags and seals in custody of the consular officer of France and proceed to the United States or place of safety, bringing code, current accounts and fee stamps with you. Procure vouchers for transportation expenses of your family and instruct members of staff to do likewise.

Bryan.

[Telegram.]75

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, April 24, 1914, 11 a.m.

In view of relations existing [etc. as in above telegram] place of safety, bringing current accounts and fee stamps with you. Procure vouchers for transportation expenses of your family.

Bryan.

[Telegram.]76

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, April 24, 1914, 11 a.m.

In view of relations existing between this Government and the Huerta Government, you are directed [etc. as in next above].

Bryan.

[Telegram.]77

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, April 25, 1914, 2 p.m.

In view of uncertainty in situation in Northern Mexico, you and such members of your staff as are American citizens are authorized to leave your post using your discretion as to time of departure. When you decide to leave, place consular office and archives, with coats of arms, flags and seals in the custody of the French consular officer and take with you the code, current accounts and fee stamps. Procure vouchers for transportation expenses of your family and instruct members of your staff to do likewise. Will keep you advised as far as possible of general situation. Endeavor inform Parral directing Agent to close office and securely store archives, coats of arms, flags and seals.

Bryan.

[Telegram.]78

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, April 24, 1914, 2 p.m.

In view [etc. as in next above] departure. When you decide to leave, close the consular office and transfer archives with coats of arms, flags and seals to safe place in United States, taking with you the code, current accounts and fee stamps. Procure vouchers for transportation expenses of your family and instruct members of your staff to do likewise. Will keep you advised as far as possible of general situation.

Bryan.

[Telegram.]79

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, April 25, 1914, 9 p.m.

In view of relations existing between this Government and the Huerta Government, you and such members of your staff as are American citizens are directed to leave your post at the earliest opportunity. Place consular offices and archives with coats of arms, flags and seals in custody of the consular officer of Great Britain and proceed to the United States or place of safety bringing code, current accounts and fee stamps with you. Procure vouchers for transportation expenses of your family. Naval vessel instructed to afford transportation.

Bryan.

74 Sent to Aguascalientes, Guadalajara, Hermosillo, Tapachula, San Luis Potosi, Tuxpam, Mazatlan, and Guaymas, adding to the last three, “Naval vessel instructed to afford transportation.”

75 Sent to Puerto Mexico and Progreso, adding to the latter the word “code” after “bringing,” and omitting last sentence.

76 Sent to Puebla and Oaxaca; same to Guanajuato, adding “code” after “bringing.”

77 Sent to Chihuahua; some to Saltillo, Monterey and Tampieo, omitting last sentence; same to Durango, substituting Tapia and Torreon for Parral. Same to Hermosillo down to “general situation”; then read: “This telegram supersedes that of April 24, 9 a.m. Agent Guaymas has been appropriately instructed direct.”

78 Sent to Matamoros, Juárez, Díaz and Nuevo Laredo; same to Nogales, adding: “Endeavor to communicate foregoing to Cananea, directing Agent to close office and securely store archives, coats of arms, flags and seals.”

79 Sent to Frontera.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 125.0012/85a.

[Document 991]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 25, 1914, 8 p.m.

Durango and Torreon were instructed by telegraph April 24:

[Quotes text of first above telegram of April 24, 2 p.m.]

Bryan.

The Brazilian Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 703.3212/2.

[Document 992]

The Brazilian Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Embassy,
Washington, April 25, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s note of the 24th instant, and beg to thank you very much for the arrangements which have been made with the British Ambassador to turn over to our Minister in Mexico the archives and records of the American Embassy.

Assuring you that we lost no time in transmitting your telegram to our Minister there, in our cipher, I request your excellency to accept the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.

D. da Gama.

Note.—On April 25, 1 p.m., Mr. O’Shaughnessy telegraphed the note from the Foreign Office breaking off diplomatic relations and his reply thereto. This telegram is printed in its chronological order under Political Affairs, page 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 735].

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 703.4112/4.

[Document 993]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Vera Cruz, April 26, 1914, noon.

For the Department’s information: Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the British Minister to Mexico.

April 23.

Referring to our conversation of last evening, April 22, at His Britannic Majesty’s Legation, I have the honor formally to turn over herewith to your excellency for safekeeping and for such care and action as may be given by one foreign mission to another in analogous circumstances, the Embassy of the United States in Mexico.

I have paid the rent of the Embassy building until June 30 next, after which date it will be paid by the Department of State.

Owing to the possibility of certain matters arising which may require the good offices of your excellency, I am leaving Mr. Louis D’Antin, the law clerk, who will be at your orders and disposition and who will prepare correspondence and search the archives of the Embassy in matters pertaining urgently to the interests of Americans in Mexico.

I have the honor to enclose to you herewith the sum of 2,000 pesos, which I trust will be sufficient for any incidental expenses to which your excellency may be put owing to the probability of Americans being both desirous and forced to leave the confines of the United Mexican States. I have the honor to request as well as to empower your excellency to draw directly upon the Secretary of State of the United States for such funds as your excellency may find to be necessary in order that these people may be enabled to do so.

I am sending a copy of this note to the Secretary of State of the United States at Washington, and I beg your excellency to accept my sincere thanks and appreciation of the kindness which you have always extended to me as Chargé d’Affaires of the United States since you have been in Mexico.

The reply of the British Minister:

British Legation,
Mexico, April 23, 1914.

My Dear Colleague: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of to-day’s date in which, after referring to our conversation of last night, you formally entrust to my safekeeping the Embassy and archives of the United States in this capital and in general the care of American interests in the Republic of Mexico.

It is understood that my acceptance of this charge must depend on my receiving the sanction of my Government to do so, which I have already asked for. But in view of the urgency of the case and the impossibility of obtaining an answer to my telegram before your departure, I agree to undertake the responsibility of accepting it temporarily.

I take due note of the fact that you have paid the rent of the Embassy until June 30 next, after which date it will be paid by the Department of State; and that you are leaving Mr. Louis D’Antin at my disposition to attend to the Embassy’s archives. I also beg to acknowledge herewith the receipt of two thousand dollars Mexican, which you are good enough to enclose for incidental expenses.

I appreciate very highly the friendly sentiments you are good enough to express at the end of your note, which I warmly reciprocate; and I need only add in conclusion that if my Government consents it will afford me the greatest pleasure to lend my best services for the temporary safeguarding of American interests in this Republic.

I remain [etc.]

Lionel Carden.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

Note: In the above telegram the version of Mr. O’Shaughnessy’s letter to the British Minister differs from the letter as sent to the Minister, of which a copy was later furnished to the Department, as follows:

File No. 703.4112/142.

Mexico, April 23, 1914.

My dear Mr. Minister: Referring to our conversation of last evening at His Britannic Majesty’s Legation, I have the honor formally to turn over herewith to your excellency, for safekeeping and for such care and action as may be given to [by] one foreign mission to another in anomalous circumstances, the Embassy of the United States in Mexico. I have paid the rent of the Embassy building until June 30th next, after which date it will be paid by the Department of State. Owing to the probability of certain matters arising which may require the good offices of your excellency, I am leaving in the Embassy Mr. Louis d’Antin, the law clerk, who will be at your excellency’s disposition. I have the honor to enclose herewith the sum of two thousand pesos, which I trust will be sufficient for any incidental expense to which your excellency may be put. Owing to the probability of Americans being forced to leave the confines of the United Mexican States, I have the honor to request as well as to empower your excellency to draw directly upon the Secretary of State of the United States for such funds as your excellency may find to be necessary in order that these people may be enabled to do so. I am sending a copy of this note to the Secretary of State of the United States at Washington, and I beg your excellency to accept my sincere thanks and appreciation of the kindness which you have extended to me as Chargé d’Affaires of the United States since we have been together in Mexico.

I remain [etc.]

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

The Secretary of State to certain American Consuls in Mexico. File No. 125.0012/86a.

[Document 994]

The Secretary of State to certain American Consuls in Mexico. 80

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 26, 1914.

If in your judgment conditions permit, you may return to your post and carry on your consular duties unless there should be objection on the part of the local authorities.

Bryan.

80 Sent to Nogales, Matamoros, Nuevo Laredo, Diaz and Juárez.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister in charge of American interests in Mexico. File No. 70.3.3212/10b.

[Document 995]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister in charge of American interests in Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 28, 1914.

After consultation with Brazilian Ambassador here, it was agreed that this Department would communicate directly with you and that you would reply through your Embassy in this city.

You are authorized to use the 2000 pesos left by the American Chargé and to draw upon this Department for such other funds as you may require.

Your Ambassador here called attention to the fact that the American Embassy having been formally placed in charge of the British Minister could not be delivered over to you without specific instructions. The matter has been brought to the attention of the British Ambassador and he will communicate with the British Minister in Mexico.

Bryan.

The British Embassy to the Department of State. File No. 703.4112/5.

[Document 996]

The British Embassy to the Department of State.

His Majesty’s Embassy has the honour to inform the State Department that in compliance with their request Sir Edward Grey has directed Sir Lionel Garden to instruct the British Consular officers at Frontera, La Paz, Ensenada, Colima, Salina Cruz and Acapulco to take charge of American interests in the absence of French Consular officers in those places.

British Embassy,
Washington , April 28, 1914.

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 703.4112/6.

[Document 997]

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy,
Washington, April 30, 1914.

Dear Mr. Secretary: In answer to your telephone message yesterday afternoon, I beg to state that on the evening of April 23d I sent a telegram to the Foreign Office for transmission to Sir L. Garden stating that the United States Chargé d’Affaires had handed over charge of the United States Embassy to the British Minister but that you had told me that your Government did not think it advisable to have an English speaking representative in the charge of United States interests and had entrusted this duty to the Minister of Brazil at Mexico and to the French Consuls where there were no Brazilian Consuls. I added that you hoped Sir Lionel Garden would give his Brazilian colleague his advice and assistance when requested. On hearing from Sir L. Garden that he had not received any formal intimation that the Brazilian Minister was in charge I repeated the above telegram to him on the 28th of April. On the same day I received a telegram from Sir L. Carden pressing for an answer and I have not yet received his acknowledgment to my telegram. I conclude that there must be some delay in the transmission of telegrams to Mexico and it is possible that my telegram of the 23rd may never have reached him. I have telegraphed again to him and to the Foreign Office simultaneously on the 29th in the sense of your letter of that date.81 I have not yet received an acknowledgment either from Sir E. Grey or Sir L. Garden. I have explained to Sir E. Grey, by letter, why it is desirable, in the opinion of the United States Government, that their interests at the present moment should be confided rather to a South American than a European representative. I hope that by now all the American refugees from the capital have reached the sea in safety and I am very glad that the accident of Sir L. Garden’s taking over charge combined with the presence of British Naval Officers at Vera Cruz has enabled British officers to be of some service in the way of arranging for the care of these unfortunate persons under the present deplorable circumstances. I will not fail to transmit to Sir E. Grey the courteous language in which you have conveyed your thanks for the services rendered by the British Legation to American citizens.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice.

81 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 703.3212/5a.

[Document 998]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 30, 1914.

Your telegram of today81 has been communicated to us by the Brazilian Ambassador, Glad to know that you are now in charge of the records, archives, etc. Please assure the British Legation of our appreciation of their courtesies and the valuable service rendered by them during the time they acted for us.

You are authorized to comply with the request of the Minister for Foreign Affairs that you deliver over the arms remaining in the Embassy to the police authorities.

It might be well for the present for you to send a brief telegram every night before retiring, giving us the general situation there, so that we may be able to answer questions that are asked us each morning.

W. J. Bryan.

81 Not printed.

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 703.4112/7.

[Document 999]

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy,
Washington, May 1, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: With reference to my letter of yesterday on the subject of the chargéship of United States interests in Mexico, I beg to inform you that I have this morning heard from Sir L. Garden that my telegram of the 23rd of April only reached him on the 29th and that he at once notified to the Minister of Foreign Affairs the appointment of the Brazilian Minister, and handed over American interests to the latter.

Sir L. Garden adds that it will always be a great pleasure to him to lend to the Brazilian Minister any assistance in his power.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice.

The Department of State to the British Embassy. File No. 703.4112/5.

[Document 1000]

The Department of State to the British Embassy.

Department of State,
Washington, May 6, 1914.

The Department of State has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the note, dated the 28th ultimo, from His Britannic Majesty’s Embassy, stating that, in compliance with the Department’s request, Sir Edward Grey has directed Sir Lionel Carden to instruct the British consular officers at Frontera, La Paz, Ensenada, Colima, Salina Gruz and Acapulco to take charge of American interests in the absence of French consular officers in those places.

In reply the Department of State has the honor to assure His Britannic Majesty’s Embassy of the appreciation of this Government for this courteous action on the part of His Majesty’s Government.

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador. File No. 703.4112/7.

[Document 1001]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, May 9, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your personal note of the 1st instant, in which, with reference to your note of the 30th ultimo, you advise the Department that, on April 29 last, Sir Lionel Garden had turned over to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City the charge of American interests.

In reply I beg to ask that you will be so good as to convey to Sir Lionel Carden an expression of this Government’s thanks for his services in this matter.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The President of the American Colony at Mexico City to the Secretary of State. File No. 703.3212/11.

[Document 1002]

The President of the American Colony at Mexico City to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Mexico, May 23, 1914.

Meeting American Colony voted grateful thanks to Brazilian Minister for untiring, splendid services rendered Americans and watchful care in their behalf.

C. H. M. y Agramonte.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 703.3212/11.

[Document 1003]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 25, 1914.

81. American Colony, Mexico City, May 23, telegraphed Department grateful thanks to you for your untiring, splendid services rendered Americans and for your watchful care in their behalf.

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Chargé d’Affaires. File No. 703.3212/11.

[Document 1004]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Chargé d’Affaires.

Department of State,
Washington, May 27, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith for the Embassy’s information a copy of a telegram from the President of the American Colony in Mexico City, informing the Department of a vote of thanks tendered to the Brazilian Minister by the members of the American Colony for his services to Americans.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The Brazilian Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State. File No. 703.3212/13.

[Document 1005]

The Brazilian Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Embassy,
Washington, May 28, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the note of the 27th instant from the Counselor for the Department of State, Mr. Robert Lansing, forwarding to this Embassy copy of a telegram from the President of the American Colony in Mexico City, informing the Department of a vote of thanks tendered to the Brazilian Minister by the members of the American Colony for his services to Americans.

It will give me great pleasure to send to my Government this proof of the appreciation for the services which Mr. J. M. Cardoso de Oliveira is rendering to Americans in Mexico during this trying time.

Thanking you [etc.]

E. L. Chermont.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 703.3212/18.

[Document 1006]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate General,
Monterey, August 15, 1914.

Consul Silliman, from Teoloyucan, August 13, asks me to telegraph following: To the Brazilian Minister solely is due the preparation of the document which was signed this afternoon terminating the civil war in Mexico.

Silliman.

It is also proper for the Department to know how great a source of help and strength the Brazilian Minister has been to our Consuls in Mexico.

Hanna.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Ambassador. File No. 703.3212/18.

[Document 1007]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, August 18, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: I beg to enclose herewith, for your information and for transmission to your Government, a copy of a telegram dated August 15 from the American Consul General at Monterey, Mexico, transmitting a telegram dated at Teoloyucan, August 13, from the American Vice Consul at Saltillo, Mr. John R. Silliman,82 in which he states that the sole credit for the preparation of the document which was signed on the 13th instant and which resulted in the termination of the civil war in Mexico is due to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City.

The Consul General adds to this telegram the statement that the Brazilian Minister has been a source of great help to the American Consuls in Mexico.

The Department is greatly pleased to transmit this telegram to you, and to ask that you be good enough to acquaint your Government with the contents thereof; and it requests that you express the sincere thanks of this Government for the excellent work performed by the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City in behalf of Americans and their property during the trying times that American interests in Mexico have been in his efficient hands.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

82 The Department’s special representative at Mexico City.

The Brazilian Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 703.3212/22.

[Document 1008]

The Brazilian Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Brazilian Embassy,
Long Branch, September 10, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: I had the honor to receive your excellency’s very kind letter dated the 18th of August last, enclosing copy of a telegram from Consul General Hanna at Monterey, dated August 15, and transmitting another in which Consul Silliman declares that “to the Brazilian Minister solely is due the preparation of the document which was signed this afternoon terminating the civil war in Mexico.” To this information Consul General Hanna adds his own testimony to the “help and strength the Brazilian Minister has been to our Consuls in Mexico.”

Complying with much pleasure with the desire of your excellency, I hastened to transmit to my Government by telegraph this gratifying appreciation of the manner in which Minister Cardoso de Oliveira has fulfilled his functions as representative of the interests of the United States at such a difficult time and also the thanks of your excellency “for the excellent work performed by the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City in behalf of Americans and their property during the trying times that American interests have been in his efficient hands.”

Glad to see officially recognized by the Government of the United States the zeal and ability with which our Minister in Mexico has complied with so honorable and at the same time so arduous a mission, I take this occasion to repeat [etc.]

D. da Gama.

The Brazilian Minister to the Secretary of State. File No. 703.3212/23.

[Document 1009]

The Brazilian Minister to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, September 29, 1914.

As my friend the Brazilian Ambassador told you yesterday, I am desirous of taking a vacation; but I want to add that I am only willing to do so without embarrassing the Government of the United States and in full and friendly accordance with you in the case that the Department can arrange to intrust American interests to an American and not give them to any other foreign legation here. But on account of the new prospects of an early settlement of things here according to to-day’s news, I suggest that you only study the case for the moment, not taking any steps before hearing from me again.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister. File No. 703.3212/23.

[Document 1010]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 1, 1914.

265. Your September 29. The strain upon you has been so great that we appreciate your need of a vacation and rest, and shall approve of your course in leaving whenever you feel that you should go. We are glad, however, that you think it wise and possible to remain until the present situation clears up. We shall be pleased to follow your wishes in regard to a representative during your absence. Matters might be left with your Chargé, who, as the head of your Legation, could represent us, acting in conjunction with Silliman or some other American as an adviser.

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to certain American Consuls in Mexico. File No. 125.0012/102a.

[Document 1011]

The Secretary of State to certain American Consuls in Mexico. 83

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Wasington, November 9, 1914.

In view of the political disturbances which have occurred in Mexico during the past two years, Department has decided to inform you that, while there may be no cause for alarm at the present moment, yet, if conditions at any time should become such that in your judgment your safety is endangered, you are at liberty to transfer the office to the consulate of a friendly power and proceed to the United States or such place of safety as your judgment may dictate.

Bryan.

83 Sent to San Potosi, Aguascalientes, Guadalajara, Manzanillo, Progreso, Durango, Hermosillo, Monterey and Chihuahua.

Exportation of arms and munitions of war to Mexico, and exceptions theretoExportation of arms and munitions of war to Mexico, and exceptions thereto

Note.—For the proclamation of February 3, 1914, revoking the proclamation of March 14, 1912, see, in this volume, the Secretary’s circular telegram of January 31, 1914, and the immediately following proclamation (pp. 446–448 [Pgs. 446–448 include portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, and Doc. 658]). See also For. Rel. 1913, p. 867; and For. Rel. 1912, p. 745.

Firing across the boundary line by Mexican troops; preventive measures taken by the United StatesFiring across the boundary line by Mexican troops; preventive measures taken by the United States

[1012] The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

Department of State, Washington, December 9, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13984a.

[1013] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico, December 11, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 812.00/13994.

[1014] Mr. Zubaran Capmany to Secretary of State.

Confidential Agency of the Constitutionalist Government of Mexico, Washington, December 12, 1914.

File No. 812.00/14111.

[1015] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Veracruz, Mexico, December 13, 1914.

File No. 812.00/14089.

[1016] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, December 19, 1914, 7 a.m.

File No. 812.00/14044.

[1017] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, December 26, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 812.00/14086a.

[1018] Confidential Agent Llorente to the Secretary of State.

Confidential Agency of the Provisional Government of Mexico, Washington, December 26, 1914

File No. 812.00/14368.

[1019] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister of Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, December 27, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 312.12/127.

[1020] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, December 28, 1914.

File No. 811.0144/40.

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada. File No. 812.00/13984a.

[Document 1012]

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 9, 1914, 1 p.m.

Please call upon General Carranza and say:

“The condition along the border at Naco is becoming very serious. A considerable number of Americans have been wounded by shots fired across the line and several have died from wounds thus received. The commanders of both factions of the Mexicans either cannot or will not control the forces under them.

“You are earnestly urged to send instructions to those who acknowledge allegiance to you, warning them against allowing any further violations of the rights of American citizens. Unless those in authority can prevent the firing of shots across the border it will become the duty of this Government, much to its regret, to take such steps as may be necessary to protect American lives thus menaced, by the employment of such forces as may be required. Such forces to be employed not for aggression but purely for defense and with no intention of invading the territory of Mexico or in any way interfering with its sovereignty or the rights of its people to settle their disputes among themselves.”

Repeat the foregoing to Silliman, substituting Gutiérrez for Carranza.

Bryan.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13994.

[Document 1013]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Mexico, December 11, 1914, 10 a.m.

The following is a textual translation of the telegraphic instruction sent to Convention commander at Naco by General Gutiérrez in response to representations of the Secretary of State in Department’s December 9, 1 p.m., to me.84

President Gutiérrez to Governor Maytorena.

National Palace,
Mexico, December 10, 1914, 5 p.m.

To Governor José María Maytorena,
Kilometer Six, before Naco, Sonora:

Mr. Silliman has just shown me a telegram which was sent him from Washington signed by Mr. Bryan in which he is instructed to call upon me and make me see the gravity of the situation in Naco because of the attacks which have been made there and have resulted in the deaths of a considerable number of Americans by bullets which have passed from the other side of the border.

As this is quite a serious matter and one in which we should make a prompt resolution on account of the results that could develop if this condition is not remedied, will you be good enough to proceed in the most [omission] manner in order that in the future you may prevent bullets from your forces from passing to American territory, and, if it be necessary, even suspend the attack until new orders, in order to prevent difficulties with the United States, a country with which we should be united by friendly ties.

I trust that you will be good enough to attend to these orders and to advise me of the result.

I greet you [etc.]

The Provisional President of the Republic,
General E. Gutiérrez.

Silliman.

84 See last paragraph of Department’s telegram of that date to Mr. Canada.

Mr. Zubaran Capmany to Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/14111.

[Document 1014]

Mr. Zubaran Capmany to Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

Confidential Agency of the Constitutionalist Government of Mexico,
Washington, December 12, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: With profound regret I am constrained to bring to your excellency’s attention the deplorable conditions now prevailing in the frontier towns of Naco, Sonora, and Naco, Arizona, due to the persistent though inefficacious attacks which the troops of Governor Maytorena have been waging on the Constitutionalist garrison commanded by Brigadier General Benjamin G. Hill at Naco, Sonora, during a period of over two months.* * *

The position of the Constitutionalist troops is such as to compel them to engage the enemy in one direction only, that is, from north to south; and as Naco, Arizona, is situated north of the Constitutionalists’ line of fire it is evident that all projectiles which have crossed the boundary and caused the death and bodily injury of residents of the American town have come from the rifles and cannon of Maytorena’s attacking forces. Another item of importance is the fact that the families of all the officers and of a large number of the soldiers commanded by General Hill are residing in Naco, Arizona, under the kindly shelter of the laws of neutrality; and it would be logical to presume that firing in that direction by the Constitutionalists would be avoided by them even if their position did not make it unnecessary for them to fire across the boundary line.

It would be unjust and without precedent to expect General Hill to surrender to an inferior enemy in consideration of the havoc which the latter’s troops are causing in a neutral community by their reckless firing. It would be equally unjust to expect General Hill to follow his only possible line of retreat by seeking refuge for him self and his troops within the territory of the United States. Such action, aside from the burden it would bring upon the Government of the United States, would deprive the Constitutionalist cause of a number of loyal and efficient troops.

In view of the above-stated facts, I trust your excellency will admit that the Constitutionalist commander in Naco, Sonora, is acting within his rights and in accordance with the established rules of warfare in opposing a foe whose incompetency and lack of popular support are undeniable. Maytorena himself must be convinced of these facts inasmuch as his repeated assaults have met with decided reverses and there are no forces in sight ready to go to his assistance. Therefore the purpose of his unproductive siege of Naco can be no other than to provoke a situation fraught with ominous international complications which might solve for him a problem which he has neither the ability nor the valor to solve himself.

I assure your excellency that no one regrets the sufferings of the people of Naco, Arizona, as much as the Constitutionalists and myself and that the most strenuous efforts have been and will continue to be made to prevent them. To this end a large body of Constitutionalist troops have been mobilized from the south and are now in the vicinity of Hermosillo, Sonora, wherefrom they will proceed with all speed to engage the forces of Maytorena if he does not retreat, as is expected, towards the State of Chihuahua to avoid an encounter.* * *

I furthermore beg to inform your excellency of a conference I had with General Scott, Chief of Staff, pursuant to his own invitation, which took place last week. I brought to his attention the substantial facts I have set forth in this communication. General Scott can therefore give your excellency a clear idea of the sincerity of my regret and I have no doubt he will corroborate my statements.

It seems to me that in view of these facts the representations of your excellency’s Government should be directed principally to Governor Maytorena, who is and has been at all times the only one responsible for the sufferings of the residents of Naco, Arizona.

I beg your excellency to look upon this lamentable matter in your well-known spirit of fairness, and to accept the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.

E. Zubáran Capmany.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/14089.

[Document 1015]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate,
Veracruz, Mexico, December 13, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s telegraphic instructions of December 9, 1 p.m., and to state that in compliance with the same I called in person upon General Carranza, giving him in writing an excerpt of that part of the telegram addressed to him. He requested in addition a formal representation in writing and to this replied with the communication of which a copy is enclosed herewith.

We understand that the substance of this reply was given out before the same was sent to this Consulate.

I have [etc.]

Wm. W. Canada.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

General Carranza to Consul Canada.

Foreign Office,
Veracruz, December 12, 1914.

Mr. Consul: I have received the copy of Mr. Bryan’s telegram which you transcribed to me, relative to the accidents said to have occurred on the boundary line at Naco; and I have to advise that, relative to the Constitutionalist forces under the command of General Benjamin Hill, this general can control and in fact has been exercising perfect control over them. Although it is impossible for shots fired by Constitutionalist forces occupying Naco to wound American citizens on the other side of the line, which is positively behind them, I have sent, and am now sending anew, express and special instructions to avoid any accident as the result of shots fired.

I have no advices of any violation of the rights of American citizens having been committed and, though I sincerely deplore that accidents should occur, it would be desirable, in order to place the responsibilities for damages sustained, that the Secretary of State ascertain if those accidents really occurred through the carelessness of the contending forces or by the imprudent curiosity of the American citizens; as I personally remember that in 1911, during the attack of the Maderista forces on Ciudad Juares, most of the accidents were due to the imprudence of the residents of El Paso, who occupied all elevations trying to see the battle just as if it were a festivity.

Mr. Bryan says in his telegram that the employment of force would not be an aggression but a defense; that invasion of the territory of Mexico would not be intended, nor an interference with its sovereignty nor an intervention in our strifes. I hasten to call the attention of the Department of State to the fact that any use whatsoever of force which the Government of the United States might attempt to make on Mexican territory, although with the object of protecting the lives of Americans, would have to be considered by this Government as an act of hostility and as an attack against the sovereignty of Mexico, independently of the pacific or well-disposed intentions that might cover the employment of force.

With the Constitutionalist forces occupying Naco and those of General Villa attacking it, any intervention on the part of American forces to end the struggle would have de facto the nature of a step taken exclusively against the Constitutionalists and in favor of the Villistas, since the employment of force would result in reducing the Constitutionalists to impotence by diverting their attention, leaving the Villista forces free to continue their military operations.

I should like to find words sufficiently courteous and friendly and at the same time sufficiently expressive to state to you that the Department of State does not appreciate to the fullest extent the seriousness which the use of force on Mexican territory by Americans would entail and hence I appeal to the good friendship of the American people toward the Mexican people, earnestly insisting that the Department of State strive that under no circumstances should acts of force be employed against us.

I am pleased to renew [etc.]

V. Carranza.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/14044.

[Document 1016]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, December 19, 1914, 7 a.m.

Yesterday investigated conditions at Naco and held long conference with Maytorena in his camp. He is willing to withdraw five or ten miles away from border but protests against Hill forces enjoying all benefits of an open port which facilitates securing arms ammunition and provisions of all kinds. If the port of Naco were closed he could withdraw with the assurance that Hill could not continue securing munitions and would eventually be compelled to fight his way out or surrender.

After careful consideration I believe the best and most just procedure would be to close the port and Maytorena withdrawing. General Bliss arrived at same conclusion and has outlined it fully to War Department. Maytorena gave strict orders in my presence to his officers not to fire a shot. I believe Scott and Bliss will arrange matter satisfactorily without bloodshed.

G. C. Carothers.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.00/14086a.

[Document 1017]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 26, 1914, 8 p.m.

375. Please call upon President Gutiérrez and General Villa at once and secure from them if possible an instruction to Governor Maytorena to carry out the following agreement: Agreement entered into between General Benjamin G. Hill, ad interim Governor of and Military Commander of the State of Sonora of the Constitutionalist Government, and Señor José María Maytorena, Governor of the State of Sonora of the Conventionist Party:

They agree: First. That the port of Naco, Sonora, will be evacuated by the Constitutionalist forces under the command of General Hill.

Second. Governor Maytorena and General Hill engage not to occupy in any form the port of Naco, Sonora.

Third. By virtue of the foregoing articles the port of Naco, Sonora, will remain neutral and closed to traffic and to commerce as well as its custom house Until it is taken possession of by a government constituted in Mexico and recognized at least by the United States, or until one of the contending factions in the State completely and substantially dominates the other.

Fourth. During the military operations of the contending factions they will respect respectively the ports of Nogales in power of the Conventionist troops under General Maytorena and that of Agua Prieta under General Hill, Chief of the Constitutionalist troops in the State. That is, said places will not be attacked for any cause. In the same manner fighting will be avoided in any frontier settlement which faces an American settlement, with the object of avoiding injury to American territory and thus endangering the amicable relations with the United States.

Fifth. It is agreed that, to conclude and carry into effect the foregoing articles, all the troops under the command of Sr. Maytorena will retire to Cananea or Nogales, Sonora, at his election, and will not molest in any way the troops of General Hill during the evacuation of Naco and march to Agua Prieta. It is likewise agreed that during the aforementioned operations the troops of General Hill will not molest those of Sr. Maytorena.

December 23, 1914.

After full discussion the above agreement was signed by Generals Hill and Calles, also by Robert V. Pesqueira representing Carranza, and has, we are informed, been approved by Carranza. Maytorena declined to sign, on the ground that he did not have the necessary power, but offered to take up the matter with his Government.

General Scott, who secured the agreement, proposed that the matter be submitted to General Villa through this Government. Maytorena agreed to carry it out if he gets the necessary order from General Villa.

The proposed agreement will, if ratified and carried out, stop fighting on the border and relieve the intolerable condition there.

W. J. Bryan.

Confidential Agent Llorente to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/14368.

[Document 1018]

Confidential Agent Llorente to the Secretary of State. 85

Confidential Agency of the Provisional Government of Mexico,
Washington, December 26, 1914

memorandum.

Mr. Enrique C. Llorente, Confidential Agent of the Provisional Government of Mexico, presents his compliments to the Honorable William Jennings Bryan, Secretary of State of the United States, and has the honor to inform Mr. Bryan that General Villa, Commander-in-Chief of the Army, on behalf of the Provisional Government of Mexico, has deemed it desirable to act in harmony with certain suggestions of General Hugh L. Scott, Chief of Staff, United States Army, in declaring the frontier port of Naco neutral, during the present armed conflict between the forces of Carranza and those of the Provisional Government, leaving the town of Agua Prieta in the hands of the former and Nogales in the possession of the latter, hoping that by means of such an arrangement a definite solution of difficulties heretofore existing can be happily reached.

Mr. Llorente desires to add that in accepting General Scott’s suggestions the Provisional Government has availed itself of this opportunity to make a practical demonstration of its sincere desire to maintain the most friendly and cordial relations with its northern neighbor and at the same time to show how keenly interested it is in preventing danger to American life and property resulting from missiles said to have been fired across the frontier into territory of the United States, during the siege of Naco.

85 Appointed by Provisional President Gutiérrez on November 7, 1914, with the consent of the Convention at Aguascalientes.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister of Mexico. File No. 312.12/127.

[Document 1019]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister of Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 27, 1914, 3 p.m.

378. Please tell Villa that this Government greatly appreciates his friendly interest manifested in agreeing to the arrangement proposed by General Scott in regard to cessation of firing along the international border, of which we received notice last night through Confidential Agent Llorente.

Bryan.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 811.0144/40.

[Document 1020]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, December 28, 1914.

257. Department’s 375, December 26, 8 p.m., was duly transcribed to Gutiérrez and Villa. Villa has just answered as follows; I am duly informed of the contents of your letter of yesterday and the cablegram therein enclosed from the State Department at Washington.

In answer I beg to state that I am willing to accept special arrangement as arrived at in the conference held at Naco to put a stop to the danger to which the inhabitants of American territory are now exposed; but later on we must of necessity attack Hill either at Agua Prieta or at some other point designated by him to have the combat. I wish to say that the fighting will be the last in the State of Sonora and will end the present situation in said State.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

Claims of American citizens against Mexico for damages arising from revolutionary disturbancesClaims of American citizens against Mexico for damages arising from revolutionary disturbances86

86 Continued from For. Rel. 1913, pp. 923–956.

[1021] The Brazilian Minister, in chargé of American interests in Mexico, to the Secretary of State

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, October 7, 1914.

File No. 412.00/36.

[1022] The Brazilian Minister to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, November 11, 1914.

File No. 412.00/37.

[1023] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister.

Department of State, Washington, November 12, 1914.

File No. 412.00/37.

The Brazilian Minister, in chargé of American interests in Mexico, to the Secretary of State File No. 412.00/36.

[Document 1021]

The Brazilian Minister, in chargé of American interests in Mexico, to the Secretary of State 87

No. 54.] Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, October 7, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith a translation of the decree issued by Venustiano Carranza, First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army, under date of May 10, 1913, relative to the presentation and settling of claims for damages and losses suffered by Mexicans and foreigners since the beginning of the Civil War on the 21st day of November, 1910, to date.88

It might be well to give this decree some publication in the American press so that interested persons may be able to comply with the requirements of the same.

With assurances [etc.]

J. M. Cardoso de Oliveira.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

[Untitled]

decree pertaining to claims for damages.

V. Carranza, First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army, to the inhabitants of the Republic of Mexico, know ye:

That by virtue of the special authority vested in me I have seen fit to decree: First. The right is hereby acknowledged of all nationals and foreigners to enter claims for damages sustained during the revolution of 1910, that is, the term from November 21, 1910, to May 31, 1911.

Second. The same right is acknowledged of nationals and foreigners to enter claims for such damages as they may have suffered or may suffer during the present struggle, that is, from the 19th of February of this year to such date as the constitutional order may be restored.

Third. The same right is acknowledged to foreigners to make claim for the payment of damages caused to them by revolutionary forces or groups of armed men during the time from May 31, 1911, to February 19 of this year.

Fourth. Upon the assumption of the Executive Power by the First Chief of the Constitutionalist [Army] in accordance with the provisions of the Plan of Guadalupe, a committee shall be appointed composed of Mexican citizens, whose business shall be to receive, consult and settle such claims as may be presented, in accordance with Articles 1st and 2d of this decree.

Fifth. At the same time that the above committee is appointed, the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army will confer with the diplomatic representatives appointed by each foreign government of the nation to which the loser may recognize allegiance, and proceed to appoint a mixed committee formed by an equal number of Mexican members and of foreign members of the country to which the said loser may recognize allegiance, so that the said committee shall be in charge of receiving, consulting and settling for such claims as may be entered in accordance with Articles 1st, 2d and 3d of this decree.

Sixth. The form, terms of payment and the conditions under which such claims will be settled, as well as the organization and regulations of the committees, shall be embodied in a law which shall be issued in due time.

Therefore I command this decree be printed, published, duly circulated and that its provisions be carried out.

Given at General Headquarters in the City of Monclova on the 10th day of May, 1913.

Carranza.

87 Receipt acknowledged Dec. 19, 1914.

88 This decree is printed in For. Rel. 1913, p. 955; but the text differs from the one here printed not only in immaterial variations of translation hut also in two substantial particulars: texts of Article V and Article VI.

The Brazilian Minister to the Secretary of State. File No. 412.00/37.

[Document 1022]

The Brazilian Minister to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, November 11, 1914.

203. Carranza issued regulations through War Office, which have now been communicated to the Diplomatic Corps, to the effect— That for the better investigation of facts relative to claims presented by foreigners it is desirable to require them to prove their nationality as well as their lawful ownership of property claimed.

I am under the impression that such exaction can not be admitted, because such proof can be investigated only by the ministers or consuls. Their statement to that is and should be accepted as conclusive. However, I would like to know Department’s views before answering.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister. File No. 412.00/37.

[Document 1023]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 12, 1914.

320. Your November 11, No. 203. Department of the opinion that, relative to claims presented by its instructions to Mexican Government, its statement that claimants are American citizens should be accepted as prima facie correct, subject to rebutting evidence by Mexican authorities,

W. J. Bryan.

Arrest and imprisonment of American Consular officers:Arrest and imprisonment of American Consular officers:

Contents

Consular Agent Edward A. Powers, at ParralConsular Agent Edward A. Powers, at Parral

[1024] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihuahua, April 2, 1914.

File No. 125.29781/38.

[1025] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, April 7, 1914.

File No. 125.29781/38a.

[1026] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, April 7, 1914.

File No. 125.29781/39.

[1027] [Untitled]

El Paso, April 19, 1914.

File No. 125.29781/43.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 125.29781/38.

[Document 1024]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Chihuahua, April 2, 1914.

Have received a telegram from Acting Consular Agent, Parral, informing me that he was arrested yesterday by the local authorities on a charge of passing counterfeit money but had been paroled for twenty-four hours. I believe the charges ridiculous and the arrest of Consular Agent an outrage. For the sake of the prestige of consular officers in Mexico for the future I trust that the Department will find it expedient to cause it to be made clear that the arrest of such officials for trivial causes will not be tolerated. It is estimated that almost as much counterfeit money circulates in this state at the present moment as does money of legal issue. Two Americans, employees of Alvarado Mining and Milling Company, were imprisoned at Parral for the same thing day before yesterday, although all false money issued was redeemed. There is a probability of malice in those cases because company named buys fiat money for its needs in the open market instead of from the state authorities at fixed rate in gold of one dollar for three pesos, as most other operating American companies have contracted to do.

Letcher.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 125.29781/38a.

[Document 1025]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 7, 1914.

Consul, Chihuahua, reports receipt of a telegram from Consular Agent, Parral, saying he was arrested by Constitutionalist authorities on April 1; charged with passing counterfeit money, but had been paroled for twenty four hours.

The arrest of a consular officer on a criminal charge of passing counterfeit money would appear to be an interference with the performance of the consular duties of the officer, inconsistent with national comity, which it is not believed General Carranza would sanction. You are therefore instructed to bring this matter to his attention at once, and suggest to him the advisability of first submitting to this Government for investigation any infractions of law which may be lodged against its consular officers. You will also say to him that it is the desire of this Government that any further action be suspended in the case of the Consular Agent at Parral until the charges can be investigated.

It is also reported to the Department that two American employees of the Alvarado Mining and Milling Co. were imprisoned at Parral for the same offense on March 31st, although all false money was redeemed. As it is quite likely, under conditions prevailing in Mexico, considerable quantities of counterfeit money will be put in circulation, thus rendering it difficult to distinguish the spurious from the genuine, you are instructed to unofficially request of General Carranza that he describe the fiat money which it is desired shall be accepted, or that which is regarded by the Constitutionalists as spurious, so that our nationals may be fully advised, and further impositions upon Americans based upon similar grounds be avoided. Unless there is evidence of criminal intent in the passing of this counterfeit money, which this Government cannot think possible, you will urge the immediate release and cancellation of the charges against these American citizens.

W. J. Bryan.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 125.29781/39.

[Document 1026]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, April 7, 1914.

Your telegram regarding Consular Agent, Parral. I have just interviewed Carranza and he was very indignant. Promised immediate attention. He concurs with you regarding fiat money. He will have reply from Parral tomorrow.

G. C. Carothers.

[Untitled] File No. 125.29781/43.

[Document 1027]

[Untitled]

El Paso, April 19, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to transcribe herewith the text of the telegraphic report received from Mr. Fabela, regarding the charge against the Consular Agent at Parral, and two other Americans, for passing counterfeit money. The text in translation is as follows: The Officer in charge of the Department of Foreign Relations, Juarez City: At 3:20 p.m. today, when I received your dispatches Nos. 252 and 253 of this date, Messrs. Edward A Powers, F. C. Hopkins, and E. F. Johnson were set at liberty on your sole bailbond, pending investigation of the question of their release, as provided by law, it being understood that proceedings were taken against these gentlemen because they appeared in the inquiry which took place in this court in regard to the counterfeiting of bills issued by the general treasury of the State, which [fact] has been fully proven by means of the juridical and expert examination of approximately $18000, which serve as the material evidence (corpus delicti) of the counterfeiting, and because there are sufficient data at hand to warrant holding the said Powers, Hopkins, and Johnson guilty of having placed them in circulation in this city. This is a crime for which the law prescribes corporal punishment, the proceedings having been entirely in accordance with the legislative provisions recommended in Circular No. 5 of the Department of Foreign Relations under date of August 14, 1886, and of the consular law of November 26, 1889, the first of the persons mentioned being Consul of the United States, he having been arrested but not yet imprisoned because he was granted yesterday at 5 p.m. a period of 24 hours within which to secure the papers of the Consulate and appear before this Court to be detained, only the latter two persons having been interrogated up to the present. All of which I communicate to you for your information, in compliance with the military order which you transcribed to me in the second of your aforementioned dispatches. All of which I bring to the knowledge of your department in pursuance of Circular No. 5 of August 14, 1886.

From what I can discover from this distance, it appears that Mr. Powers, as representative of the Alvarado Mining Co. in Parral, made an agreement with the Constitutionalist authorities to buy their Mexican money from them at a rate of about three for one. That, ignoring this agreement, they came to El Paso and purchased a large sum of Constitutionalist money at a low rate and took it to Parral and put it into circulation, and that it turned out to be counterfeit. It is a fact that large quantities of counterfeit Constitutionalist currency has been discovered here, and there are several indictments have been made in the courts here.

I have [etc.]

G. C. Carothers.

Consul General Philip C. Hanna, at MontereyConsul General Philip C. Hanna, at Monterey

[1028] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Monterey, April 24, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11719.

[1029] The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

Department of State, Washington, April 27, 1914.

File No. 312:52/254a.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11719.

[Document 1028]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Consulate General,
Monterey, April 24, 1914.

On the 21st of April a federal military officer by the name of Captain Alvarez del Castillo, evidently instructed by the federal military commander to tear down all American flags, arrived at this Consulate General with a street mob which he had gathered about four o’clock in the afternoon, and pounded in the door and demanded that the American flag over this Consulate General be immediately lowered or he would shoot it down, and the other federals proceeded to tear down all American flags, standing on them, making speeches throughout the city of Monterey, burning some of them, and tearing them up and leaving them piled in the middle of the streets. It was the most insulting act that I or any of the people of Monterey have ever witnessed. They then placed a police guard in front of this Consulate General, and all the inmates in this building were considered prisoners. The next morning, the 22cl of April, about 10 o’clock, a police lieutenant arrived with a force of men and advised me that he had been instructed to search the building. The insulting search was completed about noon, when your Consul General was taken prisoner through the streets with the mob, and carried first to the penitentiary, and afterwards to the state government palace, which building has been for some time military headquarters and fortified, and was the object of special attack by the then attacking forces. While I was placed under heavy guard in the grand reception room of the state palace I fully realized that I was constantly being considerably insulted and greatly humiliated, not on account “bf my personality but on account of my official position as representative of the United States Government in northern Mexico. At about 8 o’clock in the evening of April 22cl I was taken before the military court and notified that I was charged of being in sympathy with the Constitutionalist chiefs and as being friendly to certain Constitutionalist generals, and especially General Pablo Gonzales and General Antonio Villareal. I was kept a prisoner incommunicado until the evacuation of the city by the federal troops and arrival of the Constitutionalist forces early this morning. I was left entirely alone in the state capitol building for about six hours without being informed by any individual or officer of their departure. The officers of the Constitutionalist army inform me that they heard that I was taken prisoner and the American flag ordered down from over this Consulate General. A Constitutionalist officer by the name of Mayor Fierros with a company of men hurried to the state palace where they had heard I was being held prisoner, and broke into the locked door early this morning, furnishing me with a saddled horse, and accompanied me to the suburbs of the city, where I met General Antonio Villareal, who is to be the governor of the State of Nuevo Leon. In company with General Villareal and some of the foreign consular representatives in Monterey, we proceeded to the state palace, where speeches were made to the people, who assembled in great masses in front of the state house, giving assurances of full protection to all foreign and non-combatants, and the fullest degree of freedom and protection of law-abiding people. Shortly after our arrival at the state house, General Pablo Gonzales arrived, and he also gave strongest assurances of proper protection for all the law-abiding residents of Monterey.

Hanna.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna. File No. 312:52/254a.

[Document 1029]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 27, 1914.

The Department regrets profoundly your arrest by the Federal authorities and the indignities to which you were subjected at their hands; and rejoices that you escaped without physical injury. It sympathizes with you in the humiliation which you feel at the outrage suffered by you as the representative of your Government; question of redress will have due consideration.

Bryan.

Vice Consul John R. Silliman, at SaltilloVice Consul John R. Silliman, at Saltillo

[1030] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City.

Department of State, Washington, May 4, 1914.

File No. 125.8273/38b.

[1031] The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

Department of State, Washington, May 4, 1914.

File No. 125.8273/38a.

[1032] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Monterey, May 4, 1914.

File No. 123B641/18.

[1033] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City.

Department of State, Washington, May 5, 1914.

File No. 125.8273/38d.

[1034] The Brazilian Minister at Mexico City to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, May 5, 1914.

File No. 125.8273/29.

[1035] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Monterey [Brownsville, Texas] May 6, 1914.

File No. 123B641/23.

[1036] The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

Department of State, Washington, May 6, 1914.

File No. 125.8273/38c.

[1037] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, May 8, 1914.

File No. 123B641/21.

[1038] The Brazilian Minister at Mexico City to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, May 10, 1914.

File No. 312.11/4212.

[1039] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, May 11, 1914.

File No. 125.8273/41.

[1040] The Brazilian Minister at Mexico City to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, May 11, 1914.

File No. 125.8273/43.

[1041] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City.

Department of State, Washington, May 15, 1914.

File No. 125.8273/53b.

[1042] The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

Department of State, Washington, May 19, 1914.

File No. 125.8273/62b.

[1043] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

Monterey, May 20, 1914.

File No. 125.8273/57.

[1044] The Brazilian Minister at Mexico City to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, May 22, 1914.

File No. 125.8273/62.

[1045] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City.

Department of State, Washington, May 22, 1914.

File No. 125.8273/72c.

[1046] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

Monterey, May 22, 1914.

File No. 125.8273/65.

[1047] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, May 26, 1914.

File No. 125.8273/68.

[1048] The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

Department of State, Washington, May 26, 1914.

File No. 125.8273/68.

[1049] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City.

Department of State, Washington, June 6, 1914.

File No. 125.8273/84b.

[1050] The Brazilian Minister at Mexico City to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, June 8, 1914.

File No. 312.11/4674.

[1051] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Morgan.

Department of State, Washington, August 1, 1914.

File No. 125.8278/88.

[1052] The Secretary of State to Ambassador W. H. Page.

Department of State, Washington, August 1, 1914.

File No. 125.8273/88.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City. File No. 125.8273/38b.

[Document 1030]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 4, 1914.

Press reports from Vera Cruz state that John B. Silliman, American Consul at San Luis Potosi, has been imprisoned by General Maas for eleven days and is nightly threatened with execution. Mr. Silliman is not Consul at Potosi but is Vice Consul at Saltillo and it is not clear therefore whether the reports refer to Mr. Silliman at Saltillo or to Mr. Bonney, Consul at Potosí. Will you please endeavor to obtain information in regard to the safety of both officers and request the Foreign Office to take prompt steps for their protection and for their release in case the report of imprisonment is true.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna. File No. 125.8273/38a.

[Document 1031]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 4, 1914.

Press despatches from Vera Cruz report Silliman a prisoner of General Maas for eleven days and threatened with execution. Make every effort to communicate with him; learn facts.

Bryan.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 123B641/18.

[Document 1032]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate General,
Monterey, May 4, 1914.

I earnestly recommend the diplomatic representatives at Vera Cruz of friendly nations be requested to take action and prompt measures to bring about the release from prison of Vice Consul Silliman at Saltillo, also Consul Bonney at San Luis Potosi, and take them and their American colonies out of the Federal territory. Both Consuls are understood to still be in prison; also several American citizens.

Hanna.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City. File No. 125.8273/38d.

[Document 1033]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 5, 1914.

The Department is in receipt of a telegram from the American Consul General at Monterey stating that Vice Consul Silliman is in prison at Saltillo, together with several other American citizens. Please bring this to the attention of the appropriate authorities at once and represent in the strongest possible manner the necessity for immediate action. There can be no possible excuse for the imprisonment of this officer except political antipathy on the part of those responsible for his arrest. The Consul General at Monterey was himself imprisoned for several days prior to the occupation of that city and he was only released when the Constitutionalists took possession of the city. Please insist on immediate action.

W. J. Bryan.

The Brazilian Minister at Mexico City to the Secretary of State. File No. 125.8273/29.

[Document 1034]

The Brazilian Minister at Mexico City to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, May 5, 1914.

8. Your wire regarding Consul Silliman. Since the second instant I have been urging Foreign Office to take action concerning release Silliman, Marchani and several other Americans imprisoned by order of General Maas. My informant states that Consulate was sacked, all archives taken, Marchani forced by troops to open safe; troops are said to have carried code with them. I feel greatly concerned about the matter and will continue most vigorous efforts to secure release of prisoners and return of code. Will advise you as soon as I ascertain the facts.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 123B641/23.

[Document 1035]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate General,
Monterey [Brownsville, Texas] May 6, 1914.

Have you received my May 4, in which I earnestly recommended that the diplomatic representatives of various friendly nations be requested to take action and prompt measures to bring about the release from prison of Vice Consul Silliman at Saltillo, also Consul Bonney at San Luis Potosi, and take them and their American colonies out of federal territory. Both Consuls are understood to still be in prison; also several American citizens. There is no possible connection between Monterey and Saltillo nor San Luis Potosi, but the railroad is open south of these cities to Mexico City. Vice Consul Silliman was a classmate in Princeton College with President Wilson, graduating from same class. I feel sure that friendly diplomats can obtain their release. Please promptly telegraph acknowledgement of receipt of this telegram.

Hanna.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna. File No. 125.8273/38c.

[Document 1036]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 6, 1914.

Your May 4. Department is to-day sending appropriate telegraphic instructions to Brazilian Minister at Mexico City. Telegraph all available information regarding imprisonment of Silliman. Bonney and wife reported to-day safe in Mexico City.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 123B641/21.

[Document 1037]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, May 8, 1914.

Your May 6 just received. Consul Bonney and wire were in Mexico City May 5 and Department understands they left next day for Puerto Mexico with a large number of other refugees. Brazilian Minister reports that he is doing everything possible to secure the release of Vice Consul Silliman but owing to the fact that wires have been cut between Mexico City and Saltillo communication difficult.

Bryan.

The Brazilian Minister at Mexico City to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/4212.

[Document 1038]

The Brazilian Minister at Mexico City to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, May 10, 1914.

Silliman is still at Saltillo under arrest. Marchani, his clerk, left this morning for Vera Cruz. Other Americans from Saltillo leave to-morrow morning for Vera Cruz. They all confirm circumstances attending removal of archives, money, valuables, code, from Consulate by Mexican officials. Have made strongest representations concerning release of Silliman and the restoration of code and other property of the United States. Have asked that Silliman be delivered to me and that he should be allowed to leave country under full protection.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 125.8273/41.

[Document 1039]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, May 11, 1914.

Joseph A. Marchani, clerk in American Consulate, Saltillo, arrived here this morning. Reports all Americans reported arrested now released with exception Vice Consul Silliman. Marchani left Saltillo May 8; states was taken from jail to Consulate under heavy guard and compelled under threat of death open safe and deliver all records including Red Code and three hundred pesos and jewelry left at Consulate for safe keeping. Believes copies of Red Code being made for distribution among federal officers. Consulate now held by guard of hundred federals.

Canada.

The Brazilian Minister at Mexico City to the Secretary of State. File No. 125.8273/43.

[Document 1040]

The Brazilian Minister at Mexico City to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, May 11, 1914.

19. I congratulate Department for my being able at last to secure the release of Vice Consul Silliman who will be delivered to me here according my demand. Order for his release has just been telegraphed to proper authorities.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City. File No. 125.8273/53b.

[Document 1041]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 15, 1914.

Have you heard anything more of Silliman? If not, please bring to attention of Foreign Office again and enquire whether promised order had reached Saltillo and whether Silliman is on the way to Mexico City.

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna. File No. 125.8273/62b.

[Document 1042]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 19, 1914.

Department is considering advisability of requesting Huerta to issue orders to his federal commander at Saltillo to the end that Silliman and any Americans with him may be released and escorted by a federal escort, under a flag of truce, toward Monterey until the Constitutionalist lines shall have been reached; and desires to know, if Huerta consents to issuance of such orders, whether Constitutionalist commander in authority at Monterey will send out a guard, under a flag of truce, to receive Silliman and party and convey them safety to Monterey.

If Constitutionalist authority at Monterey is inclined to receive this suggestion favorably, you will kindly telegraph Department with least possible delay, describing accurately the point to which the Constitutionalist authority will be willing to send its guard, so that with this knowledge in its possession Department may make proper representations to General Huerta.

Bryan.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 125.8273/57.

[Document 1043]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Monterey, May 20, 1914.

Departments May 19 received. General Antonio Villareal who is Governor of this State and commander of the Constitutionalist forces assures me that a white flag of truce will be respected by Constitutionalists at any time which comes out of Saltillo bringing Vice Consul Silliman and party of Americans. If Vice Consul Silliman is in party an escort also under flag of truce will start immediately to meet party from Federal lines and Consul Silliman will be escorted by Constitutionalist forces to Monterey with every facility available. General Villareal will also order a military automobile to be in readiness to bring Vice Consul Silliman to Monterey.

Hanna.

The Brazilian Minister at Mexico City to the Secretary of State. File No. 125.8273/62.

[Document 1044]

The Brazilian Minister at Mexico City to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, May 22, 1914.

32. Very happy to advise Department that Vice Consul Silliman reached this city this morning early and is at this moment in the Legation. He made his trip to this city accompanied by a representative of the British Vice Consul at Saltillo and will leave tomorrow for the States via Vera Cruz duly protected.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City. File No. 125.8273/72c.

[Document 1045]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 22, 1914.

74. Your May 22 received. I beg to express the sincere thanks and appreciation of this Government for your untiring efforts in behalf of Vice Consul Silliman at Saltillo. The American people will be highly gratified to learn of his release.

W. J. Bryan.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 125.8273/65.

[Document 1046]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Monterey, May 22, 1914.

I have gotten into telegraphic communication with Mr. McMillan, British Vice Consul at Saltillo, and have just received the following telegram from him which explains matters considerably relative to American Vice Consul Silliman. The British Vice Consul says: On the 12th instant at about midday Consul Silliman was turned over to me on my personal request made to General Maas on 10th, stayed with me until the 14th, an order having been given to both of us on afternoon of 13th that he leave Saltillo for Mexico City on first train. The train left at eleven in the morning. I sent Mr. Degener along as personally representing me, gave them letters of introduction and protection, saw them to the train and at once sent a wire to British Minister advising of their departure. The red book and other office property was taken by Federals who compelled Marchani to open safe. Will take up immediately with commander-in-chief matter of investigation of Mr. Silliman’s whereabouts. All foreigners without exception are well and safe.

Hanna.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 125.8273/68.

[Document 1047]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, May 26, 1914.

Silliman arrived this morning. Is not very well physically. Considers important should go Washington report Department soon as possible. He is without funds. Will Department authorize me draw hundred dollars gold for Silliman and also telegraph any instructions Department deems proper for him.

Canada.

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada. File No. 125.8273/68.

[Document 1048]

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 26, 1914.

Your May 26, 11 a.m. Mr. Silliman himself may draw for necessary funds. Department would be glad to have him come to Washington as soon as he feels physically able to make the trip.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City. File No. 125.8273/84b.

[Document 1049]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 6, 1914.

113. Department would appreciate brief telegraphic statement of charges which were lodged by Huerta Government against Vice Consul Silliman, including information as to whether these charges have now been dismissed. Would Silliman’s return to Saltillo at this time be likely to embarrass you in any way?

As a matter of record, the Department would be glad to have copies by mail of the notes exchanged by you with the Mexican Foreign Office in regard to Silliman, if not objectionable to you.

W. J. Bryan.

The Brazilian Minister at Mexico City to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/4674.

[Document 1050]

The Brazilian Minister at Mexico City to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, June 8, 1914.

52. In regard to Vice Consul Silliman I do not consider it advisable for him to return to Saltillo for the present as I promised to Department here that he would stay away from Mexico as long as the present situation would last. The copies desired by Department are being made and will be forwarded by mail in a day or two. Silliman was charged with espionage although no concrete facts were mentioned as I understand. The case seems to have been dismissed.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Morgan. File No. 125.8278/88.

[Document 1051]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Morgan.

No. 143.] Department of State,
Washington, August 1, 1914.

Sir: I quote from an unnumbered despatch of June 8 from Mr. John R. Silliman, American Vice and Deputy Consul at Saltillo, Mexico,86 regarding his imprisonment by order of General Joaquin Maas, the following passage in reference to the assistance rendered him by Senhor Dom J. M. Cardoso de Oliveira, the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City: I wish to express to the Department my great appreciation of the Brazilian Minister’s continuous, intelligent and finally successful efforts in my interest. I am sure he could not have been more concerned if the case had been that of one of his own countrymen, nor can I think that any American representative could have rendered more zealous or more efficient service. It is my impression that the Department has been peculiarly fortunate in the selection of Senhor Cardoso de Oliveira to attend to American interests.

You are instructed to request the Government of Brazil to convey to Senhor Cardoso de Oliveira an expression of this Government’s appreciation of and thanks for his able and valuable efforts in Mr. Silliman’s behalf.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

86 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador W. H. Page. File No. 125.8273/88.

[Document 1052]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador W. H. Page.

No. 284.] Department of State,
Washington, August 1, 1914.

Sir: I quote from an unnumbered despatch of June 8 from Mr. John R. Silliman, American Vice and Deputy Consul at Saltillo, Mexico, regarding his imprisonment by order of General Joaquin Maas, the following passage in reference to the assistance rendered him by Mr. D. B. McMillan, British Vice Consul at Saltillo, and Mr. H. J. Wheeler, his assistant: I desire to record here, the great, the constant and the intelligent service and effort made in my behalf by Mr. D. B. McMillan, the British Vice Consul, and by Mr. H. J. Wheeler, his capable assistant. These gentlemen did everything that possibly could have been done for me and for the other Americans during our confinement. It was through the personal appeal of Mr. McMillan that General Maas finally consented that I be removed from the penitentiary to the British Vice Consulate. Not only was Mr. McMillan concerned for the prisoners but the Vice Consulate was a place of refuge for all the Americans remaining in Saltillo as well as for the British. The house is a very large one and it was virtually turned into a well managed and well provided hotel. Mr. McMillan assisted by his wife and Mr. Wheeler saw that everyone was comfortable.

You are instructed to request the Government of Great Britain to convey to Messrs. McMillan and Wheeler an expression of this Government’s appreciation of and thanks for their able and valuable aid to Mr. Silliman.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Protection of American citizens and interests. Withdrawal of Americans from Mexico. Assistance to American refugees by Brazilian, British, French and German diplomatic and consular officers and French and German naval vesselsProtection of American citizens and interests. Withdrawal of Americans from Mexico. Assistance to American refugees by Brazilian, British, French and German diplomatic and consular officers and French and German naval vessels

[1053] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, April 7, 1914.

File No. 312.115W31.

[1054] The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

Department of State, Washington, April 9, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 312.115W31.

[1055] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, April 9, 1914.

File No. 332.115W31.

[1056] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, April 9, 1914.

File No. 312.115W31.

[1057] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy.

Department of State, Washington, April 10, 1914.

File No. 312.115W31.

[1058] The Secretary of State to all Consulates in Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, April 20, 1914.

File No. 312.11/3676a.

[1059] Consul Lespinasse to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Froutera, April 20, 1914.

File No. 312.11/3699.

[1060] The Secretary of State to Consul Lespinasse.

Department of State, Washington, April 22, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 312.11/8699.

[1061] The Secretary of State to all American Consuls in Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, April 22, 1914.

File No. 312.11/3726a.

[1062] Consul Garrett to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Nuevo Laredo, April 22, 1914.

File No. 312.11/3722.

[1063] The Secretary of State to Consul Johnson.

Department of State, Washington, April 23, 1914.

File No. 312.11/3722.

[1064] Consular Agent Ulmer to the Secretary of State.

Ciudad, Juarez, April 23, 1914.

File No. 312.11/3745.

[1065] The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

Department of State, Washington, April 23, 1914.

File No. 312.11/3286

[1066] Consul Hamm to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Durango, April 23, 1914.

File No. 312.11/3746.

[1067] The Secretary of State to Consular Agent Ulmer.

Department of State, Washington, April 24, 1914.

File No. 312.11/3745.

[1068] The Secretary of State to Consul Hamm.

Department of State, Washington, April 24, 1914.

File No. 312.11/3746.

[1069] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, April 24, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 312.11/3770.

[1070] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, April 24, 1914.

File No. 312.11/3770.

[1071] The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

Department of State, Washington, April 24, 1914.

File No. 312.11/3770.

[1072] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, April 24, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 312.11/3778.

[1073] The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

Department of State, Washington, April 24, 1914.

File No. 312.11/3778.

[1074] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, April 24, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 812.00/11689.

[1075] The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

Department of State, Washington, April 24, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 312.11/3770.

[1076] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, April 24, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 312.11/3801.

[1077] Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Nogales, April 24, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 312.11/3793.

[1078] The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, April 24, 1914.

File No. 312.11/3822.

[1079] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, April 26, 1914.

File No. 312.11/3949.

[1080] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, April 27, 1914.

File No. 312.11/3886.

[1081] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

Vera Cruz, April 27, 1914.

File No. 312.11/3866.

[1082] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, April 28, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 312.11/3902.

[1083] [Untitled]

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, April 28, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 312.11/3908.

[1084] [Untitled]

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, April 28, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 312.11/3920.

[1085] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, April 28, 1914.

File No. 312.11/3860.

[1086] The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

Department of State, Washington, April 29, 1914.

File No. 312.11/3886.

[1087] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, April 30, 1914.

File No. 312.11/4015.

[1088] The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

Department of State, Washington, April 30, 1914.

File No. 312.11/4004.

[1089] The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

Department of State, Washington, May 1, 1914.

File No. 312.11/4057a.

[1090] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, May 1, 1914.

File No. 312.11/4057b.

[1091] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City.

Department of State, Washington, May 2, 1914.

File No. 312.11/4015.

[1092] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihuahua, May 2, 1914.

File No. 312.11/4058.

[1093] The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

Department of State, Washington, May 4, 1914.

File No. 312.11/4015.

[1094] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, May 4, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 312.11/4058.

[1095] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City.

Department of State, Washington, May 4, 1914.

File No. 312.11/4090.

[1096] Vice Consul Davis to the Secretary of State.

San Diego, California, May 5, 1914.

File No. 312.11/4105.

[1097] The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington May 6, 1914.

File No. 312.11/4048.

[1098] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, May 8, 1914.

File No. 312.11/4178a.

[1099] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City.

Department of State, Washington, May 8, 1914.

File No.312.ll/4189a.

[1100] The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, May 8, 1914.

File No. 312.11/4279c.

[1101] The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, May 9, 1914.

File No. 312.11/4269.

[1102] Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Nogales, May 9, 1914.

File No. 812.48/1375.

[1103] The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, May 11, 1914.

File No. 312.11/4207.

[1104] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich.

Department of State, Washington, May 11, 1914.

File No. 812.48/1375.

[1105] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, May 11, 1914.

File No. 312.11/4229.

[1106] The Brazilian Minister at Mexico City to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, May 15, 1914.

File No. 312.11/4303.

[1107] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, May 17, 1914.

File No. 312.11/4313.

[1108] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, May 18, 1914.

File No. 312.11/4313.

[1109] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, August 31, 1914.

File No. 312.11/5139.

[1110] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan.

Department of State, Washington, September 3, 1914.

File No. 312.11/5139.

[1111] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, September 22, 1914.

File No. 812.48/1857.

[1112] The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

Department of State, Washington, September 25, 1914.

File No. 812.48/1857.

[1113] The Acting Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

Department of State, Washington, September 25, 1914.

File No. 812.48/1877a.

[1114] Consul Garrett to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Nuevo Laredo, September 28, 1914.

File No. 812.48/1865.

[1115] The Secretary of State to Consul Garrett.

Department of State, Washington, September 29, 1914.

File No. 812.48/1865.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115W31.

[Document 1053]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, April 7, 1914.

Waters-Pierce Refinery which has been occupied by attacking forces for last two days and as consequence has been under fire Federal gunboats and land forces with loss of oil tank by bursting of shells, fears loss to all refinery and demands protection.

Warehouses of Agencia Comercial, German, located just below refinery were burned today. Loss one half million dollars. Situation as to foreign property complicated and serious.

Miller.

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller. File No. 312.115W31.

[Document 1054]

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 9, 1914, 10 p.m.

In view of advices that the attacking force (Constitutionalist) has been occupying the Waters-Pierce Refinery, an American industry, and as a result has been drawing fire from Federal gunboats and land forces resulting in the loss of an oil tank and jeopardizing the entire property of this and other foreign holdings, and also endangering additional oil tanks the demolition of which might result in oil flowing into the river, catching fire and thus involving destruction of additional foreign property, including important shipping interests, this Department will request the Secretary of the Navy to instruct the Admiral in command of the Gulf Fleet to confer with you to the end that the leaders of the contending forces may be urged to conduct their military operations in such a manner as to offer the least possible element of danger to foreign interests.

It would seem that instead of either of the contending forces using foreign property as a barracks or means of defense, it would be expedient for those in control of both armies to regard as entirely neutral the sections where foreign properties are located, especially those where oil industries are conducted or oil is stored. Neutralizing these sections should result in surrounding foreign holdings with increased measures of safety and protect them from wanton, useless or revengeful destruction; and this Government cannot believe that such a course will work a detriment or result in disadvantage to either of the contending forces. In addition all leaders should be notified and duly impressed with the fact that any destruction of the properties of these great foreign interests will produce a situation which will be a matter of grave concern to the United States and foreign governments and create a condition raising the question as to what measures this Government should take to secure such protection of the properties described as circumstances may require. Telegraph result of your representations.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 332.115W31.

[Document 1055]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 9, 1914.

Following cable sent to Tampico and to Department’s representative at El Paso with instructions to unofficially present same to Carranza and to say Department hopes he will give those under his control instructions to observe strictly the recommendations herein set forth:

[Here follows telegram sent to Tampico April 9, 1914.]

Present above to proper authorities and endeavor to secure issuance of necessary orders.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.115W31.

[Document 1056]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 9, 1914.

Following cable sent to Tampico:

[Here follows telegram sent to Tampico April 9, 1914.]

Please unofficially present the above to Carranza and say we hope he will give those under his control instructions to observe strictly the recommendations herein set forth.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy. File No. 312.115W31.

[Document 1057]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy.

Department of State,
Washington, April 10, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith a copy of a telegram, dated April 9, which the Department despatched to the American Consul at Tampico, Mexico, in regard to the protection of the extensive foreign oil interests in the vicinity of Tampico. This important telegram is transmitted for your information as it reflects this Department’s attitude.

I have the honor to request that the Secretary of the Navy issue to the Admiral in command of the Gulf Fleet an appropriate instruction in conformity with the telegram which was sent by this Department last night to the American Consul at Tampico.

I have [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to all Consulates in Mexico. File No. 312.11/3676a.

[Document 1058]

The Secretary of State to all Consulates in Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 20, 1914.

General Huerta has refused to salute the American flag as demanded by Admiral Mayo as an apology for insult offered in arrest of American sailors.89 President Wilson will lay matter before Congress today with a view to taking such action as may be necessary to enforce respect for this nation’s rights. Please notify all Americans and other foreigners. Afford every possible protection, reminding Americans of President’s advice to withdraw from Mexico until order is restored. Advise Department immediately of number desiring to leave and give such other information as will enable us to understand and provide for situation.

Bryan.

89 See Political affairs, pp. 472–474 [Pgs. 472–474 include portions of Doc. 700, Doc. 701, Doc. 702, Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705].

Consul Lespinasse to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/3699.

[Document 1059]

Consul Lespinasse to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Froutera, April 20, 1914.

Your April 20, was received this evening. I am now advising Americans in this State and northern Chiapas by telegraph to withdraw. Will report fully to-morrow. Must I provide passage for destitute Americans as on the first occasion? It would be advisable to allow Americans to enter New Orleans and Galveston.

Lespinasse.

The Secretary of State to Consul Lespinasse. File No. 312.11/8699.

[Document 1060]

The Secretary of State to Consul Lespinasse.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 22, 1914, 4 p.m.

Your April 20. Provide all Americans with passage who may require assistance. Use your judgment as to routing them via New Orleans or Galveston.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to all American Consuls in Mexico. File No. 312.11/3726a.

[Document 1061]

The Secretary of State to all American Consuls in Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 22, 1914.

In pursuance of the President’s purpose to enforce amends for indignities offered, the naval commander at Vera Cruz took possession of the customhouse, cable office, post office, and telegraph and railroad terminals which were directly connected with the customs collection. Immediately thereafter an attack upon our marines was begun by unorganized bands of Mexicans, whose fire drew our men into a general contest, and it became necessary in order to establish peace in Vera Cruz to take the whole city. Up to eight o’clock last night four American soldiers were killed and twenty wounded. This Government will advise those in command that this Government does not desire to interfere with civil government at Vera Cruz.

In view of the present critical situation, you are instructed to urge all Americans to leave Mexico as soon as possible.

Bryan.

Consul Garrett to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/3722.

[Document 1062]

Consul Garrett to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Nuevo Laredo, April 22, 1914.

There are about one hundred Americans yet in Tampico District at Columbus, Chamal and Osorio, also a number at Monterey and Saltillo cut off from communication. Can Department devise some means to reach and rescue them? Consul Johnson might reach them through Constitutionalist territory.

Garrett.

The Secretary of State to Consul Johnson. File No. 312.11/3722.

[Document 1063]

The Secretary of State to Consul Johnson.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 23, 1914.

Consul Garrett telegraphs there are about one hundred Americans yet in Tampico District at Columbus, Chamal and Osorio, also a number at Monterey and Saltillo, cut off from communication. Would it be possible for you to reach them through Constitutionalist territory? If possible to do so, you are authorized to employ messengers if necessary. Department desires these Americans to leave Mexico as soon as possible.

Bryan.

Consular Agent Ulmer to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/3745.

[Document 1064]

Consular Agent Ulmer to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Ciudad, Juarez, April 23, 1914.

I beg that you advise me immediately what I shall do in behalf of Americans at Torreon, Velardena, and Durango, eighty-five in number. These citizens depend on me solely and entirely for instructions as to their safety. My telegrams to them on the situation are either refused or delayed. Must I send special messenger? Wire me immediately, care Hotel Sheldon.

I. M. Ulmer.

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada. File No. 312.11/3286

[Document 1065]

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 23, 1914.

On April 22 Department endeavored to despatch three telegrams to Consul at Frontera but informed by telegraph office that telegrams had been stopped by Mexican Government censor at Coatza-coalcos. Endeavor to communicate in some way with Frontera and instruct Consul there to provide all Americans with passage who may require assistance, using his judgment as to routing them via New Orleans or Galveston.

Also endeavor to communicate with Ciudad del Carmen, Campeche, and inform Woodruff and family that relatives urge them to leave Mexico at once. Also inform W. M. Ferris at Carmen, who is manager of Hearst properties in Campeche, that it is the desire of Edward H. Clark that Ferris and other American employees leave Mexico as soon as possible.

If practicable it may be advisable to send light draft boat to places mentioned.

Bryan.

Consul Hamm to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/3746.

[Document 1066]

Consul Hamm to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Durango, April 23, 1914.

Federal authorities refuse to allow me to send messages in code to Secretary of State, acting under orders of military headquarters, Torreon. Have also not received any messages from Washington for several days. Hundred twenty Americans in this Consular District as follows: sixty, Torreon; thirty Durango; and thirty scattering. About one half will leave immediately. Please advise if this message received.

Hamm.

Act of Congress for Relief of Americans in Mexico.

Chap. 68.—An Act Providing an appropriation for the relief and transportation of American citizens in Mexico.

Be in enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That for the relief of American citizens in Mexico, including transportation to their homes in the United States, there is appropriated, out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, the sum of $500,000, to be expended at the discretion of the President.

Approved, April 24, 1914.

The Secretary of State to Consular Agent Ulmer. File No. 312.11/3745.

[Document 1067]

The Secretary of State to Consular Agent Ulmer.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 24, 1914.

Confer with Carothers and take such steps as may be necessary to get Americans out of Mexico.

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Hamm. File No. 312.11/3746.

[Document 1068]

The Secretary of State to Consul Hamm.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 24, 1914.

Your April 23 received. Advise all Americans to leave at once.

Bryan.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/3770.

[Document 1069]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, April 24, 1914, 10 a.m.

Am just reliably informed that eight o’clock Tuesday night soldiers stopped train vicinity Tierra Blanca on Vera Cruz Isthmus Railroad taking following prisoners: W. A. Magum, railroad superintendent; Elliott, engineer; Riley and Hart, conductors; all Americans.

These persons all taken to Cordoba or Orizaba and believed ordered shot. Some eighteen more Americans left in Tierra Blanca including C. D. Herron, Secretary, Isthmus Railroad, with wife and three children; J. O. Cook, chief surgeon; John Snyder, conductor; J. S. Langston and wife; Kerwin, engineer, and Mr. and Mrs. George McCumber. Same soldiers stopped at Hacienda Motzorongo on same railroad taking the prisoners Edward Weunch and son Sidney, A.M. Turner, Secretary of Hacienda Motzorongo, all Americans; also man named Boyd, British subject. All taken to Cordoba or Orizaba. Please inform Herbert A. Parkyn, president Motzorongo Company Chicago of above. It is reliably stated that these prisoners may be executed. Admirals Fletcher and Badger have this information before them.

Canada.

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador. File No. 312.11/3770.

[Document 1070]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

[Extract.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 24, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: I received this afternoon at 1.45 a telegram from the American Consul at Vera Cruz, Mexico, which I paraphrase below, for your information:

[Here follows paraphrase of telegram from Consul Canada of April 24, 1914, 10 a.m.]

These prisoners are all non-combatants and if there is any truth in the report that any or all of them have been executed it is in direct violation of the law of nations.

I bring this to your attention, my dear Mr. Ambassador, because a British subject is included among those arrested. In speaking for your own Government you will, I am sure, impress on General Huerta the importance of protecting all non-combatants.

Thanking you, my clear Mr. Ambassador, for your kindness and interest in this matter, which is one of humanity,

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada. File No. 312.11/3770.

[Document 1071]

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 24, 1914.

Contents your April 24, 10 a.m., were conveyed to the British Ambassador here. He immediately offered to cable the British Minister at Mexico to make representations in behalf of all the foreigners involved, and suggests that if you will give all information involving possible loss of human life direct to the British Admiral at Veracruz, he will instruct the Admiral to take all necessary steps looking to a solution of each case. In this way time will be saved. Copy of what goes to the British Admiral should be forwarded to the British Consul at Veracruz.

Bryan.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/3778.

[Document 1072]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, April 24, 1914, 2 p.m.

Now advised by Admiral Badger plan send war vessel to Frontera and other places not feasible owing possible incitement Mexicans against Americans. The Admiral is prepared when authorized and strongly recommends that such authorization be given to charter a steamer here to be sent immediately for these refugees who will be taken care of here on arrival. Please rush reply. Steamer can probably be secured for three to four hundred dollars gold a day exclusive of provisions and coal.

Canada.

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada. File No. 312.11/3778.

[Document 1073]

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 24, 1914.

Your April 24, 2 p.m. Secure suitable vessel and send to Frontera, Carmen, Campeche and Progreso at once.

Bryan.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11689.

[Document 1074]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, April 24, 1914, 4 p.m.

More authentic details from Mexico City as follows. About 125 women and children removed from train between Irapuato and San Juan del Rio on Mexican Central Railroad by train crew and left. Train has been sent from Mexico City searching for them. American railroad officials unable furnish any information about them as they are not now in Chargé. These people were residents of Guanajuato District. Number people left Pachuca and neighborhood for Mexico City and due there Wednesday afternoon.

Mobs in city entered Porters Hotel insulting guests and breaking windows. All guests moved other hotels, proprietors came Vera Cruz. Windows American Club broken, also those of American Photo Supply Company and Sanborn’s Drugstore. Fiskes Curiosity Shop on Gante Street sacked, loss estimated 50,000 pesos. Conscription by Huerta Government for three days ending 22d very heavy after which men began to volunteer. Two hundred fifty workmen taken from their work Saturday last for army. Last Sunday and Monday approximately 2,000 men forced into army. American colony well organized for defense. All foreign colonies have concentrated zone of defense to facilitate handling. All foreigners well armed. Greatest fear in rush of mobs. Considerable apprehension throughout foreign colony. Practically all business houses closed Tuesday six p.m. Tuesday afternoon stores barred all windows and doors, leaving only side entrances open for transaction of business. More demonstrations on Wednesday. Streets filled with processions of men.

Just informed O’Shaughnessy has informed Admiral Fletcher he and Embassy staff on train due here this afternoon. Ward Liner Mexico sails at five p.m. for Galveston with six hundred refugees. Those left will be placed on board Hancock temporarily and sent to States as soon as possible.

Canada.

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada. File No. 312.11/3770.

[Document 1075]

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 24, 1914, 9 p.m.

Your April 24, 10 a.m. Repeat to Brazilian Minister, Mexico City, and add textually: I am instructed by my Government to address myself to you, my dear Mr. Minister, and to request that the Brazilian Legation in Mexico City investigate this report and if it is found to have any foundation of truth, to protest most energetically to General Huerta and to request him to see that strict orders are issued to his subordinates to protect all noncombatants of any nationality whatsoever, including Americans.

Should this report prove to be well founded, I know that you will appreciate the gravity of the situation, and Your Excellency might even suggest to General Huerta that if outrages of this kind are allowed to continue that the American Government will be forced to adopt such measures of reprisal as may to it seem necessary in the circumstances.

End telegram with customary expression of courtesy.

Bryan.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/3801.

[Document 1076]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, April 24, 1914, 11 p.m.

Department’s April 24, 9 p.m. We have made every possible effort to get this message through to Mexico City but it has been returned to us and we are informed that all wires have been down since 9.30 this morning and that this message cannot be sent; that it is impossible to tell when wires will be repaired. Cable company states it has also informed Department. Since my April 24, 10 a.m. informed from most reliable source large number Americans in addition those mentioned arrested vicinity Tierra Blanca and imprisoned at Cordoba.

Canada.

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/3793.

[Document 1077]

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Nogales, April 24, 1914, 6 p.m.

At 8 o’clock last night committee Mexicans notified Americans in Nacozari they must leave. Train was assembled, Americans were disarmed and placed aboard. All arrived safely at Douglas on border 6 a.m. today. Estimated that hundred and twenty Americans came out. Cananea Consolidated Copper Company closing its mine at Cananea tonight. Second special train being held there to bring out all remaining Americans who will come.

Simpich.

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/3822.

[Document 1078]

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy,
Washington, April 24, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: I beg to acknowledge with my best thanks your letter of to-day’s date which I have just received enclosing a telegram from the American Consul at Vera Cruz relative to the capture of American citizens and British subjects and their detention by the Mexican authorities. I hasten to assure you that I at once brought the matter by telegram to the knowledge of the British Minister at Mexico and the British Admiral and the British Consul at Vera Cruz. At the same time I suggested to the Admiral and the Consul that they should put themselves in direct communication with the American Consul and be ready to receive and act on any communications relating to the life and property of foreigners in Mexico. May I suggest that your Consul in Vera Cruz should be informed. I entirely share your view that such matters should not be treated on an official basis and we should all cooperate on the basis of humanity.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/3949.

[Document 1079]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, April 26, 1914.

Practically all Americans have been brought out of this Consular district. Two thousand have been sent to Galveston. Vast oil properties and interests have been totally abandoned, wells are left running wild, millions of barrels of oil in storage completely at mercy of natives. Other foreign interests safe. Interests abandoned by Americans have valuation of not less than $200,000,000.

Miller.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/3886.

[Document 1080]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, April 27, 1914.

I am just in receipt of the following telegram from the Brazilian Minister. This is the first communication received from him: According to assurances Minister Foreign Affairs no American killed, in danger, or imprisoned except one at Aguascalientes who was delivered to judicial authority, some proofs having been found of his connivance with revolution.

Have been given all assurance of full protection American and foreigners. Departure Americans from here being arranged for to-morrow. With my best compliments.

Brazilian Minister.

Canada.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/3866.

[Document 1081]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Vera Cruz, April 27, 1914.

Garden effected transit of over 40 Americans from Mexico to Vera Cruz. The British cruiser Hermione took 1241 American refugees from Tampico to-day. Americans arriving from Mexico City state that Carden has done utmost for our nationals. I have great fear that several Americans have been injured if not killed in Mexico City.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/3902.

[Document 1082]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, April 28, 1914, 10 a.m.

My April 27. Referring Brazilian Minister’s message, I have again addressed him most urgently that in spite of Foreign Minister’s assurances we are positively informed Americans detained at Cordoba, Aguascalientes and other places and have requested Brazilian Minister again see Foreign Minister reiterating representations in strongest manner, insisting that all Americans be allowed go place of safety under safe conduct. Have also asked Brazilian Legation keep us constantly informed.

We are using all means at our disposal secure information that is reliable.

Canada.

[Untitled] File No. 312.11/3908.

[Document 1083]

[Untitled]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, April 28, 1914, 11 a.m.

One of my messengers has just returned with following message from federal General Maas, now at Soledad: Mr. Consul: I hereby answer your esteemed letter of the 25th instant, advising that in accord with instructions which I have received from my Government the military authorities of the jurisdiction under my command have been ordered to permit foreigners of any nationality whatsoever to leave the Republic at will.

Relative to Mexican citizens who desire to leave the city at Vera Cruz you may permit or prohibit same according to the orders you may have in the premises.

I am [etc]

G. Maas.

This communication is dated Soledad de Doblado, April 27.

Canada.

[Untitled] File No. 312.11/3920.

[Document 1084]

[Untitled]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, April 28, 1914, 11 p.m.

Have just received following from Brazilian Minister: Have taken necessary steps subject your cable this day and those sent through British Legation by Admiral Craddock. Minister Foreign Affairs with full agreement Minister of War has cabled most complete orders for release persons stated by same cables as in prison or persecuted Cordoba, Guanajuato. May add that up to present moment Mexican Government have shown themselves quite willing to comply with my request.

Brazilian Minister

Canada.

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador. File No. 312.11/3860.

[Document 1085]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

No. 331.] Department of State,
Washington, April 28, 1914.

Excellency: In a despatch from Vera Cruz, dated the 25th instant, the Commander-in-Chief of the Atlantic Fleet reports to the Secretary of the Navy that Rear Admiral Craddock and the Commanding Officers of the British ships Hermione at Tampico and Berwick at Puerto Mexico have been untiring in their efforts to collect and forward American citizens to refugee ships, and that continuation of these kindly efforts is still being made.

These services have been of great value and deserve the grateful thanks of this Government. I have, accordingly, instructed the American Ambassador at London to make known to His Majesty’s Government this Government’s gratitude for and appreciation of the generous and friendly conduct of these British officers.

I have [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada. File No. 312.11/3886.

[Document 1086]

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 29, 1914.

Department anxiously awaits the name of the one American delivered to judicial authorities at Aguascalientes mentioned in your April 27. Do everything possible to see that he has a fair trial and that no summary action is taken until Department’s agents can make proper representations in his behalf.

Bryan.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/4015.

[Document 1087]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, April 30, 1914.

I am reliably informed that at present there are some 1,500 Americans still Mexico City, many having just arrived from surrounding country. My informant states that many of these Americans are desirous of leaving for Vera Cruz but understand the train which left night before last was last opportunity. In view of this have telegraphed Brazilian Minister and also communicated with Admiral Craddock requesting that steps be taken and arrangements be made for the transportation of all those who will leave to Vera Cruz as soon as possible. As we understand Department in direct communication Mexico City, respectfully suggest Department also take this matter up.

Canada.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna. File No. 312.11/4004.

[Document 1088]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 30, 1914.

Consul, Matamoros, telegraphs Department that it is impossible to assist Americans at Saltillo. Department authorizes you to send such special messengers as may be necessary in your judgment to extend protection to Americans in Saltillo. Department regrets that it has no accurate information regarding conditions at Saltillo and therefore must entrust to your accurate knowledge of situation as it exists to-day the measure of relief which should be extended.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada. File No. 312.11/4057a.

[Document 1089]

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 1, 1914.

Just informed A. B. Emery, American citizen, will be shot at Zacatecas to-day unless $200,000 ransom is paid. Please communicate at once with Brazilian Legation and urge immediate representations in his behalf. Insist on his release.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.11/4057b.

[Document 1090]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 1, 1914.

Just informed A. B. Emery, American citizen, will be shot at Zacatecas to-day unless $200,000 ransom is paid. Please make immediate representations to General Carranza in his behalf. Insist on his release.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City. File No. 312.11/4015.

[Document 1091]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 2, 1914.

Department is in receipt of a telegram from American Consul at Vera Cruz stating that 1,500 Americans are still in Mexico City, many of whom are desirous of leaving for Vera Cruz, but he understands the train which left Mexico City April 28 was the last opportunity for them to leave. Please investigate and urge upon appropriate authorities the importance of providing facilities for these Americans to leave Mexico City without delay. Kindly telegraph present situation.

W. J. Bryan.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/4058.

[Document 1092]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Chihuahua, May 2, 1914.

Department’s May 1. General Carranza has telegraphed urgent orders to General Natera, Constitutionalist military commander in the State of Zacatecas, regarding liberation of Emery should he be held by any of his forces. Zacatecas is still held by Federals. Constitutionalist authorities here are slow to believe that Emery is held by their forces.

Letcher.

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada. File No. 312.11/4015.

[Document 1093]

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 4, 1914.

Your April 30. Direct telegram undated received by Department May 3 from Brazilian Minister Mexico City states: There are now 1,500 Americans in city wishing to leave. This morning at 3 some 160 Americans came from Guanajuato and expressed their appreciation for the kind manner in which they were treated and protected by Governor Cuellar. I am now awaiting conclusions of registration of Americans wishing to leave country to provide trains for them. The Mexican Government has promised me as many trains as may be needed to take Americans out of Mexico. They are in no way harassed by the Government and the few cases in which arrests of Americans have occurred I have been able to secure their release. Up to the present time no assassinations of Americans have happened. They are in no danger if they behave themselves and follow my instructions to avoid public gatherings and stay in closed quarters until I have secured a sufficient number of them to send out a train or several sections thereof. The American colony is assisting me efficiently and so far a great number of Americans feel so certain of their safety that they refuse to leave the country. I, however, counsel them to go as a matter of precaution. Unless something unexpected should happen the Department may feel at ease with reference to the safety of those who remain here and the facility to get out for those who wish to leave.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.11/4058.

[Document 1094]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 4, 1914, 4 p.m.

Your May 2. Consul Canada telegraphs Department Emery now in Mexico City safe and well.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City. File No. 312.11/4090.

[Document 1095]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 4, 1914.

We are much pleased to learn of your successful efforts to secure train for Americans desiring to leave Mexico; also gratified to know that General Huerta has given assurance of protection so far as his forces are concerned to foreigners returning to Tampico District for the care of the oil wells. General Carranza has also promised protection where he is in control.

W. J. Bryan.

Vice Consul Davis to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/4105.

[Document 1096]

Vice Consul Davis to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

San Diego, California, May 5, 1914.

British Vice Consul, Guadalajara, Percy G. Holmes, to whom I turned over American Consulate there and the care all American interests that district telegraphs British Consul, San Diego, that confiscation properties threatened all cases where rents, taxes or wages employees refugee Americans are unpaid. I assured Mr. Holmes would be reimbursed assistance furnished Americans and he especially promised furnish transportation cases needed to Manzanillo. I had already furnished transportation some who did not get away with us.

Will B. Davis.

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador. File No. 312.11/4048.

[Document 1097]

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador. 90

No. 996.] Department of State,
Washington May 6, 1914.

Excellency: The Secretary of the Navy has made known to me information which he has received from the Commander-in-Chief of our Atlantic Fleet of the assistance rendered by German naval vessels in removing American refugees from Tampico to American men of war off the mouth of the river.

It has given me pleasure to instruct the American Ambassador at Berlin to express to your Government the cordial thanks of the Government of the United States for this friendly service.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

90 Mutatis mutandis to the French and British Embassies.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.11/4178a.

[Document 1098]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. 91

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 8, 1914.

This Department is desirous of learning the names and addresses of all American citizens in Mexico who have not taken its advice to leave that country and remain out until peace is restored therein. The information wanted is for the Department’s guidance in any future action that it may be necessary to take, or information that it may be necessary to give, respecting those citizens.

You will, therefore, make public, through the newspapers within your jurisdiction the following notice: In order that the whereabouts of Americans remaining in Mexico may be known and for the purpose of informing inquiring friends and relatives, the Government of the United States of America has instructed the Consul to ask all American citizens who for any reason do not deem it advisable to leave Mexico at this time, to register their names and addresses personally or by written communication, at this Consulate with the least possible delay.

After this notice shall have been repeatedly published for one week and the registration of Americans shall have been completed, you will send to the Department by mail copies of the publications containing the printed notices inviting the registration and a list of the Americans who may have registered, with their addresses. Whenever in your judgment there is doubt of the notification so published reaching Americans in your district, you will make free use of the telegraphs and mails and even messengers should the exigencies of the case require.

Bryan.

91 Same to Ciudad Juárez, Ciudad Porfirio Díaz, Matamoros, Monterey, Nuevo Laredo, Vera Cruz, Durango, Hermosillo, Nogales and Tampico.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City. File No.312.ll/4189a.

[Document 1099]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 8, 1914.

[Note similar to telegram to Consul Letcher of May 8, 1914.]

American interests in the Consular district of Acapulco, Ensenada, Frontera, Guadalajara, La Paz, and Salina Cruz, are in the care of the British Consular representatives at those places; the French Consular representatives at Aguascalientes, Guaymas, Mazatlan, Guanajuato, Oaxaca, Puebla, Progreso, Puerto Mexico and San Luis Potosi, are looking after American interests at those places; and the care of American interests at Manzanillo is in the hands of the German Consular representative at that place. At Chihuahua, Ciudad Juarez, Ciudad Porfirio Diaz, Durango, Hermosillo, Matamoros, Monterey, Nogales, Nuevo Laredo, Tampico, Tuxpam and Vera Cruz, American consular officers are still at their posts.

The Department will request the British, French and German Ambassadors at this capital to ask the Minister of their Governments in Mexico to instruct the British, French and German Consular officers in Mexico in charge of American interests as above indicated, to publish like notices in their districts and to forward through their Diplomatic representatives in Mexico and the Embassies in Washington, copies of the notices so published and lists of the names and addresses of Americans who may have registered. In order that the information in your possession in regard to Americans in Mexico may be as complete as possible, the Ambassadors will be requested, to ask the Ministers of their Governments in Mexico City to hand you informally copies of the lists which their Consul may have prepared.

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador. File No. 312.11/4279c.

[Document 1100]

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador. 92

Department of State,
Washington, May 8, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: I beg to enclose a copy of a telegram which I have this day despatched to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico concerning the registration of citizens of the United States in Mexico.

As you are aware, by the courtesy of your Government, American interests in the consular districts of Aguascalientes, Guaymas, Mazatlan, Guanajuato, Oaxaca, Puebla, Progreso, Puerto Mexico, San Luis Potosi, and Tuxpam, are in the care of the French consular representatives at those places.

It occurs to me, therefore, that with your customary friendliness and obligingness you will not be averse to requesting the Minister of the French Republic in Mexico by telegraph to instruct the French consular officers in Charge of American interests at the places above mentioned to take, within their respective jurisdictions, action similar to that mentioned in the enclosed telegram, sending to him by mail copies of the publications containing the printed notices, and by telegraph the full names and addresses of Americans who have registered in their offices and the approximate number of those in rural districts who cannot conveniently visit the consular offices for the purpose of registering.

We shall be extremely obliged if, in addition to this, you will further ask the Minister of the French Republic at Mexico City to furnish the information, supplied by the French Consular officers, to you for communication to the Department, and also, should he perceive no objection, informally to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City in order that he may have a complete record of the Americans in Mexico without loss of time. Any expense incurred in this service, the Department will gladly defray.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

92 Mutatis mutandis to the British and German Ambassadors.

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador. File No. 312.11/4269.

[Document 1101]

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, May 9, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: The Department has to-day been informed, through the courtesy of the British Embassy, of the alleged killing of J. V. Kelley, an American, Assistant Manager of the El Favor Mining Camp near Hostotpaquillo, State of Jalisco, Mexico, and two British subjects, C. B. Hoedley and Patrick Baird, employees of the Mining Camp; and of the alleged injury of Walter Neal, a Canadian, Manager of the El Favor Mining Camp, and G. E. Williams, an American, an employee. The British Embassy also states that Mr. Neal has with him at the mines his wife and two children; and that there are seven other employees at the mines, five of them American citizen’s and two British subjects, who are believed to be in prison.

I have also received a telegram from Messrs. McKeever Brothers, of Boston, Massachusetts, relating to this same matter, and in compliance with their request a telegram was immediately despatched to the Brazilian Minister in Mexico City asking him to investigate the report mentioned. The British Vice-Consul at Guadalajara has also been asked to report on conditions at Hostotpaquillo.

I understand that there are a number of German subjects living in that District who might be in a position to furnish information in regard to the reported deaths of these American citizens and British subjects, and it has occurred to me that you might be willing to cause instructions to be sent to the German Consular Officer at Guadalajara to come in touch with the Germans within his District and ascertain, if possible, the facts of the case.

I should insist, of course, that any expenses incurred in our behalf by your representative in connection with the investigation should be borne by this Government, inasmuch as Guadalajara is about forty miles distant from the El Favor Mining Camp and it might be necessary to employ the services of a messenger to obtain the desired information.

Assuring you of my appreciation of any assistance which you may be able to afford in obtaining information on the subject, I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.48/1375.

[Document 1102]

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Nogales, May 9, 1914.

It is respectfully suggested that authority be granted to advise Americans who insist on returning to Mexico against Consul’s advice that should they be obliged soon to leave Mexico again and find themselves destitute at the border that they should not expect Government aid in reaching their homes in the States.

Simpich.

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador. File No. 312.11/4207.

[Document 1103]

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, May 11, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: Referring to the Department’s note of May 9, in regard to the situation at Hostotpaquillo, Jalisco, Mexico, I beg to inform you that the Department was yesterday morning informed by telephone, by the British Ambassador at this capital, that the British Vice Consul at Guadalajara on May 9 had telegraphed him as follows:— C. B. Hoedley, American, G. E. Williams, British, killed; Walter Neal, American, Patrick Baird, British, slightly wounded at El Favor Mining Camp near Hostotpaquillo. S. H. A. Green, British, killed at San Marcos. No employees in jail as reported in press.

A second telegram, dated May 10, has been received by the Ambassador from the British Vice Consul at Guadalajara, which reads as follows:— Yours 10th. Theft silver bars started trouble El Favor. Foreign staff commenced search of native workers and were attacked. Hoedley and Williams surrendered their weapons and were then stabbed to death, being horribly mutilated. Favor foreigners were all jailed but now at liberty. Harrison and Oldfield safe, former at Alcihuatl, latter here. Howard family all safe here. No employees in jail. Still await news Ramsdell. No trouble in Guadalajara.

The father of C. B. Hoedley has appealed to this Department, through United States Senator Frank B. Brandegee, to secure the body of his son, C. B. Hoedley, so that it may be returned to the home of the deceased in Branford, Connecticut.

Notwithstanding the fact that information has now been received with regard to the killing and wounding of Americans at Hostotpaquillo, although lacking in full details, the Department feels the greatest uneasiness regarding those reported wounded, and especially lest Mr. Neal’s wife and two children be in danger. The Department would therefore much appreciate having special messengers sent with the object of learning as much as possible regarding the details of the killing and wounding of each of the persons above mentioned, as well as of learning the place of burial of those that were killed, and, if possible, of recovering their bodies, to the end that the bodies may be delivered to an American shin outside the harbor at, Manznillo.

One of the officials of the Department has suggested that a wealthy German family by the name of Snyder, at Guadalajara, enjoys a very wide acquaintanceship throughout that section of Mexico, and that possibly through that family a messenger might be secured.

Any expenses incurred in connection with this matter will be cheerfully reimbursed by this Government.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich. File No. 812.48/1375.

[Document 1104]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 11, 1914.

Your May 9. You are authorized to advise Americans who have recently been provided with transportation and assistance at the expense of this Government to reach their homes in the United States that should they return to Mexico during the present disturbed conditions in that country and later on be obliged to leave they should not look to this Government for further assistance in the way of transportation.

Bryan.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/4229.

[Document 1105]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, May 11, 1914.

Following advice of Admiral Mayo based on instructions from Navy Department Vice Consul Bevan and myself came aboard Connecticut yesterday. About twenty Americans remained ashore refusing to leave Tampico. German Consul is looking after Americans during my temporary absence from shore.

Miller.

The Brazilian Minister at Mexico City to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/4303.

[Document 1106]

The Brazilian Minister at Mexico City to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, May 15, 1914.

25. I have information from British Minister here that at the suggestion of American Consul at Ensenada, Lower California, some sixty or seventy-five Americans have concentrated at San Quentin and that they are suffering all kinds of hardships due to their lack of means and the difficulty of reaching them to furnish assistance. It seems therefore imperative that a transport be sent there immediately. I have asked the British Minister to instruct his nearest Consul to furnish assistance at our expense, but while he promised to telegraph he fears his Consul may not have the funds to do so, or that available communication may not be at hand.

Cardoso de Oliviera.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/4313.

[Document 1107]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, May 17, 1914.

Have been informed that Constitutionalist authorities at Parral have sent an agent to El Paso to induce Americans to return to Parral and reopen their mines and other industries. As many are now disposed to return to this district and are requesting counsel from me on the subject instructions are hereby requested as to how Americans may be advised in the premises.

Letcher.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.11/4313.

[Document 1108]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 18, 1914.

Your May 17. This Department has advised Americans to withdraw from and remain out of Mexico for the time being, and has felt that American interests employing American workmen in that country would consider the lives of their employees of first concern. But the Department has announced the self-evident fact that it does not attempt to compel any American citizen to leave or to remain out of that country. Those who contemplate remaining in Mexico or returning thereto must know the risk they assume in so doing and the difficulties of securing or affording to them adequate and timely protection by this Government. Individuals must judge for themselves whether the proofs of protection by the authorities are acceptable, and whether the conditions existing will justify them in returning.

Bryan.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/5139.

[Document 1109]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, August 31, 1914.

On account closing down oil companies there are about hundred destitute Americans all having returned since April. Request financial assistance. Have been refused by this office. Suggest that notice be given through press advising Americans not to come to Tampico for work.

Bevan.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan. File No. 312.11/5139.

[Document 1110]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 3, 1914.

Your August 31. Your refusal to extend financial assistance to Americans who have returned to Tampico since April is approved. This information has been given to the press as suggested.

Bryan.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.48/1857.

[Document 1111]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, September 22, 1914.

Shall we repatriate John Keller with family of seven and other destitute Americans soliciting free transportation to United States and who had ample opportunity during time Department maintained chartered ships but refused to go?

Canada.

The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Canada. File No. 812.48/1857.

[Document 1112]

The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 25, 1914.

Your September 22. As the reasons which influenced this Government heretofore to furnish assistance and transportation to American citizens in Mexico appear to exist no longer, you are instructed to decline hereafter all such applications. Repeat substance of this telegram to Consul, Tampico, for his information and guidance.

Lansing.

The Acting Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna. File No. 812.48/1877a.

[Document 1113]

The Acting Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna. 93

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 25, 1914.

As the reasons which influenced this Government heretofore to furnish assistance and transportation to American citizens in Mexico appear to exist no longer, you are instructed to decline hereafter all such applications. So inform all Consuls in your district.

Robert Lansing.

93 Same to Consul Canada at Vera Cruz with instruction to, repeat to Consul at Tampico.

Consul Garrett to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.48/1865.

[Document 1114]

Consul Garrett to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Nuevo Laredo, September 28, 1914.

A few American refugees have been coming from Mexico and applying for transportation during August and September. I sent out six persons from Tampico district Saturday. Is there fund still available for transportation destitute refugees?

Garrett.

The Secretary of State to Consul Garrett. File No. 812.48/1865.

[Document 1115]

The Secretary of State to Consul Garrett.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 29, 1914.

On September 25, Consul General Hanna was instructed to notify all Consuls in Northern Mexico to discontinue furnishing assistance to refugees from Mexico. Similar instructions sent to Veracruz and Tampico.

Bryan.

Protection of American oil interests in Mexico. Agreements by exchange of notes with Great Britain and the Netherlands to preserve the status quoProtection of American oil interests in Mexico. Agreements by exchange of notes with Great Britain and the Netherlands to preserve the status quo

Note.—This subject is closely related to the two next following, and to the preceding one.

[1116] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, April 28, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/29a.

[1117] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick.

Department of State, Washington, April 29, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/29b.

[1118] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, April 29, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/60a.

[1119] The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, April 30, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/46.

[1120] The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

Department of State, Washington, May 1, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/35b.

[1121] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, May 1, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/46.

[1122] The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, May 1, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/47.

[1123] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, May 1, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/32.

[1124] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy.

Department of State, Washington, May 8, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/32.

[1125] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington , May 2, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/32.

[1126] The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, May 2, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/48.

[1127] [Untitled]

British Embassy, Washington, May 3, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/52.

[1128] The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

Department of State, Washington, May 6, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/54a.

[1129] The British Consul at Tampico to Rear Admiral C. Cradoch at Vera Cruz.

Tampico, May 6, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/110.

[1130] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, May 6, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 812.6363/54b.

[1131] Rear Admiral Sir C. Cradock to the British Ambassador at Washington.

Vera Cruz, May 7, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/110.

[1132] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, May 8, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 812.6363/55.

[1133] The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, May 8, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/54.

[1134] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, May 8, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/47.

[1135] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, May 8, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 812.6363/57d.

[1136] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, May 8, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/61a.

[1137] The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, May 9, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/62.

[1138] The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

Department of State, Washington, May 14, 1914, Noon.

File No. 812.6363/55.

[1139] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, May 14, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/64a

[1140] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, May 14, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 812.6363/66.

[1141] The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

Department of State, Washington, May 15, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 812.6363/64.

[1142] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, May 15, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 812.6363/66.

[1143] [Untitled]

American Consulate, Tampico, May 17, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 812.6363/69.

[1144] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

Torreon, May 20, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 812.6363/74.

[1145] The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

Department of State, Washington, May 20, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/70a.

[1146] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, May 20, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/70b.

[1147] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, May 21, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 812.6363/73.

[1148] The British Embassy to the Department of State.

British Embassy, Washington , May 25, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/94.

[1149] The British Ambassador to Counselor Lansing.

British Embassy, Washington, May 26, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/95.

[1150] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihuahua, May 28, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/100.

[1151] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, June 2, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/95.

[1152] The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, June 2, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/88.

[1153] The Netherlands Minister to the Secretary of State.

The Netherlands Legation, Washington, June 2, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/87.

[1154] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, June 15, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 812.6363/111.

[1155] The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

Department of State, Washington, June 18, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 812.6363/111.

[1156] The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

Department of State, Washington, June 19, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 812.6363/111.

[1157] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, June 29, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 812.6363/117.

[1158] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Monterey, June 30, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 812.6363/121.

[1159] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, July 1, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/122a.

[1160] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, August 14, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/130.

[1161] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, August 27, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/132.

[1162] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan.

Department of State, Washington, September 3, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/130.

[1163] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, September 12, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/189.

[1164] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan.

Department of State, Washington, September 30, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/139.

[1165] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, October 20, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/143.

[1166] The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan.

Department of State, Washington, November 8, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 812.6363/143.

[1167] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, November 5, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/144.

[1168] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, December 12, 1914.

File No. 312.115/110.

[1169] The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

Department of State, Washington, December 24, 1914.

File No. 812.512/525.

[1170] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Vera Cruz, December 30, 1914.

File No. 812.512/528.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 812.6363/29a.

[Document 1116]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 28, 1914.

You will please present to those in authority, even if it be necessary for you to go to Chihuahua to do so, the following arguments, and endeavor, after full explanation has been made, to secure in writing the agreement of the Constitutionalist authorities to the neutralization of the great oil producing section or zone between Tampico and the Tuxpam River, and also at Ebano and vicinity to the west of Tampico. Within this zone many Mexican, American, British, and other foreign producers have been conducting operations. One of the principal American interests owns and operates wells at Ebano, thirty-five miles west of Tampico on the railway line connecting that city with San Luis Potosi, and has at Casiano, a place about sixty miles south of Tampico an enormous well capable of producing great quantities of oil which is connected with Tampico by pipe line. The principal British interest controls near the Tuxpam River, at a place called Potrero del Llano, another great well from which the oil is conducted by a pipe line to a loading station situated near Tuxpam. Both 01 these properties have been operated by American and other foreign managers and employes, and since the Tampico and Vera Cruz incidents these foreigners have been driven from the country by force necessitating their leaving these wells and all other oil properties in the foregoing zone in charge of subordinate and inexperienced Mexican employees. The nature of the properties is such that these wells can not be shut in, but need the most constant and careful attention by men of the greatest experience, and as a result of the expulsion of these experienced foreigners the wells are running wild, which means that there is not only great loss of valuable oil but great danger of fires which will devastate the entire region,’ but more important than all is the danger that these oil producing tracts may be exhausted, which will be not only a loss to the owners but a great national calamity to the Republic of Mexico, involving as it does the destruction of one of the great natural resources of the country from which much revenue has been obtained in the past and would be derived in the future. It would also throw out of employment thousands of Mexicans who have been receiving higher wages than those paid in other parts of the Republic, and will expose the natives of this region to great danger of personal injury from fires and the escaping of poisonous gases which formerly have caused many deaths. This Government considers it vitally important, not merely in the interest of the owners but of the Republic of Mexico, and, in fact, the world at large, that measures should immediately be taken to prevent this wholly unnecessary and appalling danger. The only means of accomplishing this result is by mutual agreement of all contending parties in Mexico permitting the employees to return to their posts, operations to be resumed and continued under protection of guards selected from among the employees of the companies. This proposition relates only to the territory in which the wells and pipe-lines are located and is not intended to apply to the cities of Tampico or Tuxpam through which this oil reaches the market. Urgent representations will be made in Mexico City of the same nature as the foregoing, and we desire a written agreement with the Constitutionalist Party to the above neutrality plan, accompanied by immediate instructions to all field commanders. Instant action is imperative if the foregoing dangers are to be avoided.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick. File No. 812.6363/29b.

[Document 1117]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Herrick. 94

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 29, 1914.

Urgent instructions sent yesterday to Department’s representative El Paso, Texas, to endeavor to obtain from Constitutionalist authorities agreement in writing to the neutralization of the great oil producing region between Tampico and the Tuxpam River, and also at Ebano and vicinity to the west of Tampico, in which zone are many Mexican, American, British, and other foreign oil producing operations. The wells cannot be shut in and need most constant and careful attention, and if the oil producing tract becomes exhausted it will be a great national calamity. Urgent representations are being made in Mexico City of a similar nature.

Bryan.

94 Same to the American Embassies at London, Berlin and Madrid, and the American Consul at Tampico, Mr. Bevan.

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador. File No. 812.6363/60a.

[Document 1118]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, April 29, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: In view of our conversation regarding the advisability of making an effort to secure some neutrality arrangement over the Tampico oil district, I took the matter up with the President, who received the idea very favorably.

About ten o’clock last night a telegram was sent to the Department’s representative near El Paso, to be used as a basis of representations which he has been instructed to make the Constitutionalist authorities in an effort to arrive at some understanding which, it is hoped, will secure a neutral zone to include the oil region around Tampico.

Since British operators are as deeply concerned as American ones, it appears to me that the accomplishment of this purpose should be one of mutual interest.

I am, therefore, gratified to learn that you have made similar representations to the authorities in charge at Mexico City along the lines of those which we have already made to the Constitutionalists.

We have not asked that the neutrality be applied to the port cities through which this oil passes, fearing that by including them it might be difficult to secure an agreement. The things which really need the protection are the wells and the territory which surrounds them, including the pipe-lines. It seems to me that these could be neutralized and remain so, regardless of who might be in possession of the cities. I do not see how the authorities on both sides can fail to realize the imperative necessity of protecting this oil production, since without such protection, a disaster might be produced that would be most appalling in case the oil should get on fire.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/46.

[Document 1119]

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy,
Washington, April 30, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: In answer to your letter of yesterday about oil wells I hasten to inform you that as soon as I received your telephonic message of the 28th (about 10 p.m.) I sent off a telegram to Sir Lionel Carden in the same sense as your telegram to Mr. Carothers. At the same time I sent a short telegram to the British Vice Consul at El Paso for communication to General Carranza informing him of what I had done.

In my telegram to Sir Lionel Carden I spoke of “an agreement between all contending parties permitting employes to return and operations to be resumed, and continued under protection of guards selected from employes.” I added that “the arrangement referred only to pipe lines and wells and not to the cities, but those in control of cities would be relied on not to molest oil operations or property.” I understood that the latter clause was to be inserted in your telegram, and it is the more necessary as it has lately occurred that the combatants have seized large quantities of goods belonging to British, French and Spanish owners for sale in the United States, as the archives of your Department will show.

I have also telegraphed to the British Admiral and to the British Consul at Tampico. To none of my telegrams have I received any reply.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice.

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller. File No. 812.6363/35b.

[Document 1120]

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 1, 1914.

April 29th at 8 p.m. the Navy Department transmitted to the flag officer of the Arkansas at Vera Cruz a telegram explaining the efforts being made by this Department before Carranza and by the British Ambassador at Washington before General Huerta to secure a neutralization of the oil wells, pipe lines, and territory surrounding them, which are situated in the Tampico district. Secure text of Navy Department’s “instructions from the appropriate naval officer in command in that section. Consult with him and with the British Consul at Tampico as to the most effective way of inducing those in command of the local contending forces to view with favor the proposed neutralization. If after the conference suggested representations can be made without risk of creating new complications, agree upon a method of communicating the text of the telegram to those in charge of the contending forces at Tampico to the end that they may recommend the adoption of the neutralization plan suggested, in case they should be consulted respecting the matter by their superior officers.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador. File No. 812.6363/46.

[Document 1121]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, May 1, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: Answering your note of yesterday, I beg to say that I did not add the clause which you suggest, to the effect that “those in control of cities would be relied on not to molest oil operations or property.” I think this had better be done in a different note and independent of the oil wells. If we attempt to secure an agreement in regard to the oil wells, I am afraid we shall meet with delay, and delay is especially dangerous to the wells.

We have a reply from Carothers which is hopeful, and as soon as we get the wells neutralized I shall be glad to take up with you the matter of the protection of all the properties in the cities. But I hope you will, upon reflection, agree with me that the producing wells and pipe lines are of far greater importance than the stored oil, although we are as anxious as you are to prevent the destruction of the stored oil.

I will keep you informed as to the progress of negotiations, and I hope we may be able to reach an early agreement between the two sides.

With assurances of high esteem, [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/47.

[Document 1122]

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

British Embassy,
Washington, May 1, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: In thanking you for your note of this day’s date on the subject of the neutralisation of the oil wells, I wish to state that I quite concur in your suggestion to treat the question of the control of the cities independently to that of the oil wells. As you say, it is most important that there should not be delay, for any delay is especially dangerous to the wells. But it is of course of the utmost importance when the time comes that whoever is in control of the towns should clearly understand that proper respect must be paid to the principles of international law and the property of neutrals.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/32.

[Document 1123]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, May 1, 1914.

Have just received following telegram from Mr. Carranza dated the thirtieth, delay in transmission: It gives me pleasure to refer to your telegram of yesterday and with great interest I read the message that his excellency Secretary Bryan, addressed to you. As I understand the employees of foreign companies that left this country were not expelled by Constitutionalist officers and they may return to their labors whenever they esteem it convenient, I have given orders and I shall now repeat them that the work on the oil wells be permitted as referred to by Mr. Bryan thus avoiding in so far as I and my forces are concerned the damages and losses to which the Honorable Secretary of State alludes. Will you please explain to him also that the oil zones comprehended between Tampico and the Tuxpam River are dominated by the Constitutionalist forces and that should a small Huertista force appear in that region they would be dislodged within a very short time. Regarding the neutralization of the zones that the Secretary of State requests please inform him that this is not necessary because the region is now dominated by our forces; moreover in the lamentable event of a Huertista invasion it would not be possible to agree to his request in order to hinder the military operations whose activities I am so zealously expediting and also because should such benefits be established for some foreigners, others would have the right to expect the same privilege causing great damage to the speediness of our triumph.

Mr. Pesqueira and others are leaving for Chihuahua tomorrow morning to confer with Carranza before he leaves for Monterey and I shall probably join them. Will advise later.

G. C. Carothers.

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy. File No. 812.6363/32.

[Document 1124]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy.

Department of State,
Washington, May 8, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith a copy of a telegram dated May 1, from the special representative of the Department of State at El Paso, Texas, quoting a telegram received by him, under date of the 30th ultimo, from General Carranza, in relation to the resumption of work in the Tampico oil district.

I beg to request that the text of this telegram from General Carranza be immediately telegraphed to Admiral Fletcher, for his information.

I have [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador. File No. 812.6363/32.

[Document 1125]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to the Ambassador of Great Britain, and has the honor to enclose herewith, for his information, a copy of a telegram dated May 1 from the special representative of the Department of State at El Paso, quoting a telegram dated April 30th, from General Carranza, in relation to the resumption of work in the Tampico oil district and the suggested neutralization of certain zones for the purpose of carrying on operations in this district.

A copy of this telegram has also been transmitted to the Secretary of the Navy, with the request that the substance thereof be immediately telegraphed to Admiral Fletcher, for his information.

Department of State,
Washington , May 2, 1914.

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/48.

[Document 1126]

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy,
Washington, May 2, 1914.

Dear Mr. Secretary: I have received a telegram from Carden in which he tells me that he is doing all he can to persuade Huerta to give the necessary orders to the federal authorities to enable the employees to go back to the oil fields. The main difficulty was to induce him to enter into an agreement with the Constitutionalists. Carden added, however, that he thought he could obtain the Government’s permission for the foreign companies to resume work at their own risk if the Constitutionalists on their side would engage to respect the oil wells.

I received at the same time a message from General Carranza in which he said that the employees had left on their own motion, and could return, and also that orders would be sent to respect foreign property. So I informed Carden and I presume that as the federal general at Tampico has issued orders to allow the employees to return and the condition asked for by General Huerta has been fulfilled in respect to the promise of the other side to respect foreign life and property, it may be assumed that there is no objection to the return of the employees if the consuls and the naval authorities think there is no objection. But I cannot get into touch with Tampico.

Yours sincerely,

Cecil Spring Rice.

[Untitled] File No. 812.6363/52.

[Document 1127]

[Untitled]

British Embassy,
Washington, May 3, 1914.

Dear Mr. Secretary: I hasten to thank you for your note of yesterday received last night in which you are good enough to communicate to me copy of the telegram of the 30th from General Carranza in relation to the resumption of work in the Tampico oil district. I have this moment received a further telegram from Sir. L. Carden in which he says that General Huerta has promised to issue at once an order to the federal officials permitting the return of employees of all nationalities and the resumption of work. He told Sir L. Carclen that while issuing this order he could not guarantee the safety of anyone returning to work against attacks from any other party but he would do his best to protect life and property in the districts controlled by his men. He promised also to do his best to prevent fighting in the oil district so that it might not become a field for belligerent operations. Sir L. Carden will report as soon as the order is actually issued which he expected to be last night (May 2).95 I hear however from the postal authorities that the line to Tampico from Mexico City is interrupted so that it may be as well to cause the Admiral to inform the Consuls by wireless. Yours, sincerely,

Cecil Spring Rice.

95 Confirmation of issuance of order received and communicated to the Department of State on May 4.

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller. File No. 812.6363/54a.

[Document 1128]

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 6, 1914.

Department desires as accurate information as you can furnish regarding the situation in general in your district since you reopened Consulate. It especially wishes to know what is the sentiment of natives towards Americans; whether Americans in your district are safe; whether American and foreign oil-operators are returning to the oil-wells region and, if they are, what promises of protection have been made to them by those in command of each faction; also as to the numbers and whenever possible the names of foreigners returning to each district, with location of their properties and names of owners.

Department understands that many properties are operated under leases, on royalty basis, and wishes to know if any action prejudicial to American interests has been taken or is being contemplated, on account of lessees failure to comply with terms of leases, due solely to causes growing out of present political conditions in Mexico.

Have any confiscations been attempted on account of inability to obtain legal tender funds to pay laborers? Explain how Americans who desire to do so, can best get Mexican money into Tampico.

Bryan.

The British Consul at Tampico to Rear Admiral C. Cradoch at Vera Cruz. File No. 812.6363/110.

[Document 1129]

The British Consul at Tampico to Rear Admiral C. Cradoch at Vera Cruz. 96

[Telegram—Paraphrase.]

Tampico, May 6, 1914.

The Governor has promised, subject to the approval of the Government in Mexico City, that British ships can enter the port of Tampico in order to load petroleum except in cases where the cargo is destined for American ports. All steamers, except those flying the American flag, will be allowed to clear for ports in the United States on condition that the delivery of petroleum to the Mexican Government at Vera Cruz is permitted by the United States authorities. I learn from a reliable source that the responsible parties are preparing an ultimatum to the effect that unless the United States ships off Tampico are withdrawn within eight days, the American oil and property will be destroyed, while British and other foreign properties will be protected. I would advise strongly against the return of any Americans pending a settlement of this difficulty, as it might precipitate a conflict.

[Unsigned.]

96 Handed to the Department of State by the British Ambassador May 7, 1914.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 812.6363/54b.

[Document 1130]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 6, 1914, 6 p.m.

Represent to Carranza that Department is informed that in the Huasteca district eighty miles south of Tampico, territory said to be controlled by the Constitutionalists, Americans in charge of oil wells were, after returning there, not allowed to remain and have been denied protection, whereas more favorable treatment is accorded to foreigners other than Americans. Please request him to give instructions to his commanders in that section to the end that they will afford protection to all foreigners, including Americans, in that important oil-producing district. Make same representations regarding Los Esteros district, about thirty miles north of Tampico.

Bryan.

Rear Admiral Sir C. Cradock to the British Ambassador at Washington. File No. 812.6363/110.

[Document 1131]

Rear Admiral Sir C. Cradock to the British Ambassador at Washington. 96

[Telegram—Paraphrase.]

Vera Cruz, May 7, 1914.

From the conditions known to me and judging by my own experience I think it would be rash if American citizens relied too implicitly on Mexican assurances and returned now to the oil-fields. Their return might be misunderstood, and a situation might arise which would imperil all foreign interests.

[Unsigned.]

96 Handed to the Department of State by the British Ambassador May 7, 1914.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/55.

[Document 1132]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, May 8, 1914, 8 p.m.

Have found it necessary to pay off laborers of certain companies in order to prevent losses and complications and request liberty to draw on Department for such payments up to sum not exceeding total five thousand dollars. Number of large matters have been able to arrange through other persons taking responsibility that companies will sustain my actions.

May 8, 1914, noon.

Department’s May 6, relative to arrival employees Mexico Petroleum at Tampico and asking reason why they have not landed, I have to advise Department that British naval officers policy is opposed such return of American employees and they claim to be supported in this position by Admiral Mayo. A number of employees of other companies have also arrived outside. Up to present time I have asked and secured passes from General Zaragoza for five responsible oil men to come to Tampico but on account of position herein referred to I have been unable to bring these men to Tampico where their presence would be great help to oil situation. General Zaragoza and other Mexican officials Tampico appear ready to cooperate in work of American companies taking care of interests which were practically abandoned two weeks ago but Consul will be powerless to do anything without support from Government. It appears absolutely unjust to compel American interests to be left abandoned for benefit others under such circumstances.

Miller.

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/54.

[Document 1133]

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy,
Washington, May 8, 1914.

Dear Mr. Secretary: I have sent to Sir Lionel Garden the telegram from our Consul at Tampico, a paraphrase of which I handed to you yesterday; and have added that as the oil wells in that district are close together, and the British companies owning some of them employ United States citizens, it would be quite impossible to draw any distinction of British or American nationality between either wells or employees: and that all sympathy would be alienated both here and elsewhere if these properties were destroyed.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice.

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador. File No. 812.6363/47.

[Document 1134]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, May 8, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your note of May 1, from which I am gratified to learn that you concur in the suggestion in my note of the same day’s date regarding the neutralization of the oil wells of Mexico.

Thanking you [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 812.6363/57d.

[Document 1135]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 8, 1914, 9 p.m.

Recent events have impressed upon the Department the great necessity of establishing and maintaining a reliable means of communication between this Government’s ships outside the bar near Tampico and its consular representative on the mainland, for humanitarian reasons as well as for those of policy. Many representations have been made to the Department during the last few days by those conducting oil operations in and about Tampico that it is absolutely necessary for them to get money into the hands of their representatives, in order that they may pay salaries to employees, and royalties to lessors for the purpose of preventing confiscation of properties owned by them or cancellation of leases resulting from alleged or actual failure to comply with their contracts.

You will represent to General Carranza the necessity of establishing communication between Tampico and the fleet, so that the lives and interests of foreigners, including Americans, may be properly protected; and say that it is desired to station a ship with wireless apparatus installed thereon near Tampico in order to establish the necessary means of communication, and you will request him to give his assent thereto.

You will also request his permission to send small despatch boats between the fleet and Tampico, so that money and messages may be taken from beyond the bar into Tampico and vice versa.

You will say to General Carranza that no offensive measures are contemplated by this Government, in order that he may rest assured that the suggested plan of communication between the fleet and this Government’s representative on the mainland is made for the purposes above stated, and with a desire to assist in preserving the important oil fields in and around Tampico.

Bryan.

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador. File No. 812.6363/61a.

[Document 1136]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, May 8, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: I enclose herewith a copy of a telegram which the Department sent to its representative at El Paso, Texas, on the 8th instant, pointing out the great necessity of establishing and maintaining a reliable means of communication between this Government’s ships outside the bar near Tampico and its consular representative on the mainland, for humanitarian reasons as well as for those of policy, special attention being called to the desire to assist in preserving the important oil fields in and around Tampico.

I should be glad if you would communicate to the British Minister in Mexico City the text of the telegram, and ask him to make such representations to General Huerta as may induce the latter to consent to the establishment of communication between Tampico and the American fleet, on the lines indicated in the telegram.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/62.

[Document 1137]

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy,
Washington, May 9, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: I hasten to thank you for your letter of yesterday’s date in which you enclose copy of a telegram sent by the State Department to its representative at El Paso, Texas, in regard to the establishment of communication between Tampico and the American Fleet; and to inform you in reply that I sent a telegram last night in the sense desired to Sir L. Carden.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice.

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller. File No. 812.6363/55.

[Document 1138]

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 14, 1914, Noon.

Your May 8, 8 p.m. Department can not advance funds to private interests, or assume responsibility for any arrangements you make to protect them, but is in sympathy with your efforts to extend aid to legitimate and responsible oil operators under present conditions. When it becomes necessary for you to pay off laborers to prevent losses and complications to American companies, and advances for such purposes are not secured to your satisfaction, telegraph Department and it will be pleased to assist you in every proper manner by communicating with the home offices of the companies.

Your May 8, 12 noon. Department did not desire to issue specific instructions for you to assist in the landing of oil operators or in securing for them permission to proceed to the scene of their respective operations, but thought you would understand that you were to do whatever you thought proper to facilitate the return of these men and the renewal of oil operations, provided the conditions on the ground did not endanger the lives of foreigners who reentered Mexico for the purpose of operating their oil fields in order to enable them to comply with their contracts and leases with Mexican owners.

Department does not understand next to last sentence in your May 8, 12 noon. What is the character of the support required from Government? Do everything possible to secure justice to American interests which you refer to as abandoned two weeks ago.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 812.6363/64a

[Document 1139]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 14, 1914.

Navy Department confirms report that Constitutionalists have captured Tampico. About eighty-five alien refugees at Galveston desire to be returned at once to Tampico. Owners of Tampico oil wells consider it very important that their American employees be allowed to return at once provided they can be guaranteed adequate protection. Some of the wells are running wild and it is quite likely that storage capacity of tanks will soon be exhausted. It is also quite important that this Government be permitted to station a vessel at Tampico in order to facilitate radio communication.

Please take these matters up at once with General Carranza who is now supposed to be at Durango. If necessary you should go there by first train. These matters are of great importance and you may say to General Carranza that this Government will appreciate prompt action on his part.

Bryan.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/66.

[Document 1140]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, May 14, 1914, 8 p.m.

Constitutionalist force under General Pablo Gonzalez occupied Tampico yesterday about noon. Perfect order being preserved. Guaranties assured to all foreigners to return to their business.

Miller.

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller. File No. 812.6363/64.

[Document 1141]

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller. 97

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 15, 1914, 5 p.m.

State to local authorities that Department is informed that some American citizens who have been forced by recent disturbed conditions to leave vicinity of Tampico own leases on property that vicinity on which rentals are coming due very soon which cannot be paid now because of conditions prevailing and that it is expected that the authorities will perceive the justice of taking no action in forfeiture of leases until owners have had reasonable time to pay rent.

Bryan.

97 Same to the American Consul at Durango except changing words “local authorities “to “Carranza.”

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/66.

[Document 1142]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, May 15, 1914, 10 a.m.

Department’s May 14, 12 noon. Constitutional authorities assure me that all foreigners can safely return to their work and to their homes. Number oil men already on grounds preparing resume operations.

Miller.

[Untitled] File No. 812.6363/69.

[Document 1143]

[Untitled]

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, May 17, 1914, 10 p.m.

Department’s May 15, 5 p.m. Officials Tampico powerless to prevent forfeiture leases as these are matters of private contract, and practically all leases are instate of Vera Cruz. Consulate has succeeded in arranging such leases as were brought to its notice but there is no question but that owners property can enforce forfeiture in cases in which payments are not made promptly.

Department’s May 14, noon, relative to Americans returning to oil fields. Americans are safe in Tampico provided there will be no future international complications but families and men should not return to oil fields until further notice. This Consulate has considered it safe (office reopened April 29th) for responsible oil men to return to Tampico to arrange affairs which have been abandoned. April 22 secured passes for number such men who had arrived off Tampico but having no boats with which bring them to Tampico from outside had to depend upon British naval officers who instead of assisting exerted every possible influence against such action. British Consul and British naval officers have exerted every possible influence to get all Americans out and to keep them out and have influenced large British oil company to discharge all American employees and officials; therefore Consulate requested to solicit British effort to obtain absolute control. Oil industry has been temporarily checked by capture Tampico by revolutionists but present situation is complicated as federal force which evacuated Tampico is now in Panuco District and it is generally believed prepared to destroy all oil wells if attempt is made to drive them out.

Miller.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/74.

[Document 1144]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. 98

[Telegram—Extract.]

Torreon, May 20, 1914, 7 p.m.

Carranza has no objection to the establishing of the wireless communication as requested by you May 8, 9 p.m. He has telegraphed General Gonzalez at Tampico to see if there is any local reason against same. Expects reply today. He has further telegraphed Gonzalez to furnish full and adequate protection to foreigners and has informed him that many American employees will return to take care of oil wells.

Carothers.

98 Communicated to the Secretary of the Navy and the British Ambassador May 23, 1914.

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada. File No. 812.6363/70a.

[Document 1145]

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 20, 1914.

We are conferring with British and Netherlands authorities with a view to securing an agreement which will prevent any person or corporation, Mexican or foreign, from taking advantage of the exceptional conditions in the oil districts in the matter of leases, royalties, and rentals, or other business enterprises during the disturbed period. We have no doubt that any injustice which has been done or may be done in these matters can be remedied through diplomatic negotiations. The British and Netherlands Governments are working in harmony with ours to preserve the status quo which existed at the time when the operators were compelled to abandon their wells. You may show this telegram to the British and Netherlands Consuls, who will receive similar instructions.

Repeat to Tampico.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 812.6363/70b.

[Document 1146]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, May 20, 1914.

Repeat to Vice Consul of the Netherlands, Tampico, following telegram from the Netherlands Minister at Washington: Conform yourself following telegram sent today by Secretary of State to American Consul saying: [Quotes telegram to Consul Canada, May 20, 1914.]

Rappard.

Bryan.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/73.

[Document 1147]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, May 21, 1914, 8 p.m.

Constitutionalist forces have troops in Panuco and American companies are sending their American employees to work in fields; suggest oil workers be warned not to return until assured of employment, especially as Aguila Company and Corona Company, account instructions from London, do not wish to employ Americans in oil fields under present conditions and further state do not need them as field work will be shut down to large extent for Aguila Company especially.

Miller.

The British Embassy to the Department of State. File No. 812.6363/94.

[Document 1148]

The British Embassy to the Department of State.

memorandum.

On April 21 many of the oil employees had to leave the oil fields in consequence of imminent disorder. As a result many of the wells were left without any one to look after the interests of the owners. On some of these oil properties royalties were due and could not be paid. The non-payment of these royalties was due entirely to the fact that there was no one on the spot to pay them.

The British Government received representations on this subject and a communication was made to the State Department on the 16th May, which was favourably received. On the 20th the Secretary of State proposed that a telegram should be sent by the United States Government and the Representatives of Great Britain and the Netherlands at Washington to their respective Consuls at Tampico and Vera Cruz stating that the three governments were in negotiation on the subject. The British Government to which the text of this telegram was communicated by the British Embassy entirely concurred in the general principle laid down, namely that the status quo should be preserved which existed at the time that operations were abandoned and that persons or corporations, Mexican and foreign should be prevented from taking advantage of the disturbed condition which prevailed in the oil fields after April 21st.

British Embassy,
Washington , May 25, 1914.

The British Ambassador to Counselor Lansing. File No. 812.6363/95.

[Document 1149]

The British Ambassador to Counselor Lansing.

British Embassy,
Washington, May 26, 1914.

Dear Mr. Lansing: With reference to the status quo convention I have just received a telegram from Sir E. Grey authorizing me to conclude an agreement in the form of an exchange of notes to the effect that diplomatic support shall not be given to claims to property put forward, after normal conditions have returned, by companies or individuals who have induced Mexican owners to transfer to them properties actually leased to other parties on the ground that the latter have not paid rent due, when in reality inability to pay rent is the result of the disorders which may be said to have begun April 21st. My Government also entirely concurs with the terms of the telegrams sent out to the consuls at Vera Cruz and Tampico on the 20th. They would also be glad to see the same principle applied to unfair requisitions of mining properties throughout Mexico. Of course it is understood that no restriction is placed on legitimate operations by bona fide methods and not by taking advantage of the disorders.

Yours sincerely,

Cecil Spring Rice.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/100.

[Document 1150]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

No. 488.] American Consulate,
Chihuahua, May 28, 1914.

Sir: Referring to the Department’s telegram of 6 p.m., May 6, 1914, relative to the reported unfavorable treatment of Americans by Constitutionalist authorities in the vicinity of the Huasteca and Los Esteros oil districts near Tampico, I have the honor to report that I am in receipt of a second telegram from Sr. Fabela, this dated May 25, in which he states that General Pablo Gonzalez has telegraphed General Carranza that the American Consul at Tampico declares that the reported unfavorable treatment of Americans was unjustified, and that the Constitutionalist forces everywhere throughout the vicinity of Tampico had uniformly treated Americans with the greatest consideration. Sr. Fabela observes that the report in reference was undoubtedly propagated by some enemy of the Constitutionalist cause, and requests that the Secretary of State be assured that his Government will greatly appreciate a more careful investigation of future reports of this character precedent to making complaints based upon them. In view of the seemingly undiplomatic tone of Mr. Fabela’s reply, and in order that the Department may have for its consideration the exact text of such reply, I have the honor to forward herewith a copy in its original form.

I have [etc.]

Marion Letcher.

[Inclosure—Telegram—Translation.]

Sr. Fabela to Consul Letcher.

Dubango, May 12, 1914.

Mr Letcher, American Consul: By direction of the Commander in Chief I have the honor to state to you that, with regard to the information received by the State Department of your Government about a lack of protection to American citizens in the district of Huasteca, south of Tampico, he believes it to be incorrect for the reason that Mr. Carranza has given positive orders to Division General Gonzalez and to General Caballero, commander of the forces at Tampico, to give protection to all foreigners, several times reiterating the order respecting the Americans, in regard to whom they have made repeated representations, and Generals Gonzalez and Caballero have answered that they do and will respect the lives and property of foreigners throughout the territory controlled by their forces. The Constitutionalist Government is all the more surprised at this information because Rear Admiral Mayo recently had a conference with General Caballero in which Mayo was thoroughly satisfied of the treatment accorded Americans in the vicinity of Tampico. Please communicate this to the State Department, Mr. Consul, and at the same time let this information be rectified, which must evidently be given by some person not friendly to our cause. Nevertheless the general orders for protection to American citizens are being repeated, as are also those relating to Los Esteros oil property.

With most affectionate greetings.

Fabela.

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador. File No. 812.6363/95.

[Document 1151]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador. 99

Department of State,
Washington, June 2, 1914.

Excellency: As you are aware from the conversations which we have had upon the subject, many nationals of the United States, Great Britain and the Netherlands, interested in the oil properties in the vicinity of Tampico and Tuxpam, Mexico, are seriously concerned over the possible cancellation or confiscation of their rights because of their failure to meet their contractual obligations or to conform to the requirements of the Mexican authorities, which failure has resulted from the military operations and disturbed political situation in that region.

This Government considers that the loss by bona fide owners of interests in oil properties in Mexico as a result solely of conditions over which they have no control, would be most unjust and inequitable, and that the Governments, whose nationals are affected, should take such steps as they are able to prevent this wrong from being done.

As a means to this end I have the honor to propose to your excellency that this Government and the British Government agree that they will withhold all diplomatic support from their respective citizens or subjects, who claim directly or indirectly any right, title or interest in oil properties in Mexico, which they have acquired since April 20, 1914, or may hereafter acquire, directly or indirectly, by reason of the cancellation of contracts, leases or other forms of conveyance or by reason of the confiscation or taking by de facto authorities of properties, in which American citizens or British subjects are interested, on the ground of default in contractual obligations or non-compliance with legal requirements, provided such default or non-compliance was unavoidable because of military operations or political disturbances in Mexico.

It should, however, be distinctly understood that this agreement will not apply to any case, in which the failure of the American or British owner of an interest in oil properties in Mexico to perform his contractual obligations or to comply with a legal requirement was not the direct result of the political unrest prevailing in Mexico at the time of default, or to any case of bona fide transfer.

If the proposed agreement is acceptable to your Government, a note stating their acceptance will be considered by this Government as putting the agreement into effect.

I have the honor to further inform your excellency that I have addressed a note to the Netherlands Minister in Washington proposing an agreement between the Governments of the United States and the Netherlands in terms identical with the one here proposed.

I have [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

99 Mutatis mutandis to the Netherlands Minister.

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/88.

[Document 1152]

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy,
Washington, June 2, 1914.

Sir: I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your note dated to-day in which you state: [Quotes note of June 2, 1914, printed on the preceding page.]

I have the honour to inform you in reply that I am authorised by my Government to accept in their name the agreement as described above, which they will therefore regard as coming into effect from this day’s date.

I have [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice.

The Netherlands Minister to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/87.

[Document 1153]

The Netherlands Minister to the Secretary of State.

The Netherlands Legation,
Washington, June 2, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your note of to-day, in which is stated: [Quotes note of June 2, 1914, printed on the preceding page.]

I have the honor to inform you in reply that I am authorized by my Government to accept in their name the agreement as described above, which they will therefore regard as coming into effect from this day’s date.

Accept [etc.]

W. L. F. C. de Rappard.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/111.

[Document 1154]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, June 15, 1914, 8 p.m.

Since withdrawal of troops of General Caballero from Panuco-Topila section, conditions have not been so well. Much uneasiness is felt by Americans. A. W. Stevenson, who has place near Topila, reports that two men hung his Chinese cook up by feet until he disclosed where his money was hid. Penrose of National Oil Company reports two anti-American demonstrations having taken place at his oil camp near Panuco since departure of Caballero troops. Tampico officials can do nothing as Pamico-Topila district under jurisdiction of General Candido Aguilar with whom this official can not communicate at present. Respectfully request that representations be made that will cause General Candido Aguilar to place good and sufficient protection in Panuco-Topila district, otherwise all work may have to be shut down. Now many unemployed men in city and a few will have to be sent back to States at Government expense, they are destitute. Request instructions cover such cases.

Miller.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna. File No. 812.6363/111.

[Document 1155]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 18, 1914, 6 p.m.

Consul, Tampico, reports that since General Candido Aguilar has taken control of Panuco-Topila section, American citizens have reported lack of sufficient protection.

Inform Carranza, stating that unless such protection is provided, it is likely all work will have to cease.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller. File No. 812.6363/111.

[Document 1156]

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 19, 1914, 5 p.m.

Department understands from your telegram of June 15, 8 p.m., that since control of Panuco and Topila districts has passed from General Caballeros to General Aguilar, foreigners in these districts have not been receiving ample protection. It is very essential that ample protection should be given to the lives of foreigners and to every foreign property and enterprise in your district and if it be necessary to insure such protection that troops properly commanded should be immediately distributed through these districts. Navy report made by Lieutenant Shafroth of the Jenkins under date of June 5th indicates that Aguilar will give protection to foreign interests. If ample protection is not being given at this time to foreign oil properties and operators consult Navy officials then telegraph all obtainable details so Department may make energetic protest to Carranza.

Bryan.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/117.

[Document 1157]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, June 29, 1914, 8 p.m.

General Cándido Aguilar informed this office today that he had given orders for proper protection Panuco-Topila district and that all Americans who have requested permission to carry revolvers have been granted same. Also that he will severely punish any disorders or molestation of workingmen. Admiral Mayo called on Acting Governor Lara this morning and Governor Lara promised to send some troops to Panuco pending arrival troops of General Aguilar. Authorities manifest disposition to give necessary protection.

Miller.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/121.

[Document 1158]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate General,
Monterey, June 30, 1914, 2 p.m.

Department’s June 18, 6 p.m. Foreign Secretary Fabela replies that First Chief of the Constitutionalists has directed General Aguilar that he should report to him about the matter and recommended with much interest that he should impart protection to the property referred to belonging to Americans in the Panueo-Topila region.

Hanna.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 812.6363/122a.

[Document 1159]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 1, 1914.

Upon withdrawal of troops of General Caballero from Panuco district it was understood that troops of General Aguilar would immediately replace them. Consul Tampico telegraphs that although three weeks have elapsed no troops yet arrived in that district. Americans in Panuco district very much alarmed. Secret anti-American meeting fostered by prominent citizens Panuco being held. Americans and other foreigners ordered to give up all arms within next forty-eight hours under penalty of being treated as spies. Situation serious. In isolated sections highly important that Americans and foreigners be permitted to keep their arms for protection against marauding bands.

Take up with Carranza at once and insist that order be issued to General Aguilar for sufficient military force in Panuco district and for the cancelation of order for foreigners to surrender arms. You should also say to General Carranza that this Government is deeply concerned over the alarming reports from the Panuco district and hopes that immediate steps will be taken by him to remedy the situation.

Bryan.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/130.

[Document 1160]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

No. 1182.] American Consulate,
Tampico, August 14, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose a copy of a decree issued by Governor Cándido Aguilar of the State of Veracruz, relative to leasing oil lands in the State of Veracruz.

I have [etc.]

Thomas H. Bevan.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

Decree of General Candido Aguilar.

Cándido Aguilar, Governor and Military Commandant of the State of Veracruz, to its inhabitants makes known:

That considering first, that the greater part of the petroleum bearing lands pertaining to the territory of this state have been sold or given in lease in form detrimental to the owners, and carrying enormous profits alone to the lessees, lawyers, engineers, and notaries who have taken part in these contracts many of them absolutely unfair and one sided.

Considering second; that in almost their totality these lands are exploited by foreign companies who do not resign themselves to suffer in their interests when throughout Mexico hard times prevail without taking into consideration that since our wonderful soil enables the speculators to quickly make fabulous fortunes, it is just that when the country passes through critical periods, the foreigners ought to bear the same losses as the natives.

Considering third, that our present struggle has shown the menace which threatens the nation from the predominance of foreign capital in a determined section, even to the extent of its possessors soliciting the aid of foreign armed forces, it is stated, to come to defend interests which in more than one instance even if they do represent large sums in the hands of their present owners, the amount that the Mexican sellers received therefor is relatively insignificant.

Considering fourth, that paramount to the liberty of commerce so malevolently interpreted by exploiters without conscience are the autonomy and tranquility of the country, and,

Considering lastly that all national progress ought to have the unrenounceable condition of being beneficial to the natives of the country and never dangerous to our integrity, I have thought it well, so long as circumstances do not permit the enactment of proper laws for safeguarding the interests of the country to decree that which follows: Article 1. For all contracts of lease, alienation, cession, mortgage, or any other encumbrance whatever, upon lands in the Cantons of Ozuluama, Tuxpam, Tantoyuca, Chicontepec, Misantla and Minatitlan, the contracting parties will kindly obtain from this superior governor the respective authorization.

Article 2. Without the authorization to which the preceding article refers no act which may effect the said lands shall be valid nor shall the contracts relative thereto be able to be registered.

Article 3. Those who making light of the present decree may make any clandestine contract shall be punished with the confiscation of the lands which they attempt to bind.

Given in the Palace of Tuxpam, Veracruz, on the third day of the month of August, 1914.

The Governor and Military Commandant of the State of Veracruz.

Cándido Aguilar.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/132.

[Document 1161]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

No. 1190.] American Consulate,
Tampico, August 27, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith a copy of a decree issued by Candido Aguilar, Governor of the State of Veracruz, Mexico, and its English translation. This decree declares null and without legal value all the leases, concessions, and contracts celebrated during the administration of General V. Huerta.

During this period large sums of money were invested in this district by the oil companies, and if this decree were enforced, it would mean not only the financial loss, but the loss of the valuable holdings, and the time spent in obtaining same. Several of the interested companies are sending their legal representatives to confer with General Aguilar as to how he will interpret this decree, thinking possibly that it might not be retroactive. As soon as they return I will report to the Department the results of their interview.

I have [etc.]

Thomas H. Bevan.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

Decree of General Candido Aguilar.

Cándido Aguilar, General in Chief of the First Division of the East, Governor and Military Commandant of the Free and Sovereign State of Veracruz, to all its inhabitants, Know ye:

That in conformity with the Plan of Guadalupe of the 26th of March, 1913, and in accordance with the decree issued by the First Chief of the Constitutional Army of the 14th of May of the said year, and in the use of powers, with which I am invested, I decree:

Article 1. Recognition is denied to the erroneously called Legislative, Judicial, and Executive authorities of the State of Veracruz, emanating from the treason and crime which usurped the legitimate government of the people.

Article 2. In consequence, there are declared null and void, and without any legal value, all decrees, orders, circulars, decisions of courts, acts, etc., issued or executed by the so called authorities, including among such acts the contracts celebrated by such illegitimate government with associations, companies or private individuals, and including concessions, leases and any other agreements whatever which encumber, compromise, or prejudice in any form whatever the property or interests of the State.

Article 3. The Provisional Government arising from the Constitutionalist revolution will proceed, as soon as may be attained the total pacification of the State, and the elimination of all kinds of usurping elements, to the reorganization, in the form most beneficial and proper for the people, of all public service, making all reforms which may be of true public utility, calling elections at the proper time, to the end of endowing said State with legitimate authorities.

Wherefore, I order that the present be printed, published and circulated for its observance, and in order that it may give rise to its due effects.

Given in the Palace of Government and Military Commandancia of the State of Veracruz, in the City of Tuxpam, on the first day of July, 1914.

General C. Aguilar.

H. Jara,
Secretary-General of Government.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan. File No. 812.6363/130.

[Document 1162]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan.

No. 634.] Department of State,
Washington, September 3, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your despatch No. 1182 of August 14, 1914, enclosing a copy of a decree issued by Governor Candido Aguilar of the State of Vera Cruz, Mexico, relative to leasing oil lands in the State of Vera Cruz. The Department presumes that the decree in question is intended to relate to future transactions only. Inasmuch, however, as it does not appear entirely clear from the language of the decree that such is the case, you are directed to make an investigation and report on this point.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/189.

[Document 1163]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

No. 1210.] American Consulate,
Tampico, September 12, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of the Department’s instruction No. 634, of September 3rd, relative to the interpretation of the decree affecting oil lands recently issued by Governor Candido Aguilar of the State of Veracruz, Mexico.

There seems to be considerable doubt as to whether or not this decree is be construed retroactively. Colonel Benignos, the Jefe de las Armas at Panuco, says that leases and contracts made previous to the date of the decree, will not be effected; Colonel Romero, the Chief of staff of Governor Aguilar is quoted to have stated that all contracts and leases made since February 1913 would have to be presented to the Governor for approval. For this reason I have deemed it necessary to address the enclosed letter to the Governor to settle for once and all the questions in doubt. The Department will be advised as soon as these questions are answered by the Governor.

I have [etc.]

Thomas H. Bevan.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

Vice Consul Bevan to Governor Candido Aguilar.

American Consulate,
Tampico, September 11, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to advise you that I have received instructions from the Department of State in Washington to request some information relative to your recent decree regarding contracts and leases of oil lands.

In order to protect the interests of American citizens, I would be greatly obliged if your excellency would do me the favor of advising me relative to the following details: First. Must contracts be presented to your excellency for approval, or are there other authorities in the respective cantons to whom we can present same?

Second. Will the oil companies be able to execute minutas with land owners, and, after obtaining the necessary approval, elevate the minutas to public instruments when the notary offices are opened, or is even taking minutas prohibited until such authorization is obtained? I suppose that there is no objection to taking minutas and obtaining subsequently authorization for the leases, since as your excellency well knows, a minuta not executed before a notary is nothing more than the original draft of the agreement and must be elevated to a public instrument before it will give rise to its legal effects, and, therefore, it would appear to be the most satisfactory means of presenting for approval all the details of the proposed contract. But I desire to know definitely about this.

Third. Once the public instruments are executed before the notaries, will it be necessary to present them for approval?

Fourth. The Jefe de las Armas at Panuco told a representative of one of the oil companies that the decree solely applies to contracts, etc., executed after the date of the same and without doubt such is the meaning of the decree on its face. Furthermore, in view of the provisions of article 14 of the Federal Constitution and of article 5 of the civil code of the State of Vera Cruz, I believe that Col. Benignos (Jefe de las Armas) at Panuco is right and that your excellency did not intend to give the decree retroactive effect. However, there are some persons who contend that all contracts of every kind whatever executed since February 1913 must be presented for approval: and for the purpose of putting an end to all doubt, I request that you kindly advise me about the matter.

I ask that you pardon me for bothering you at a time when undoubtedly your excellency is very busy with very important matters of state and I express to you in advance my sincere thanks for the hoped for answer.

Assuring your excellency of my distinguished consideration,

I have [etc.]

Thomas H. Bevan.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan. File No. 812.6363/139.

[Document 1164]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan.

Department of State,
Washington, September 30, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your despatch No. 1210 of September 12, 1914, relative to the interpretation of the decree affecting oil lands recently issued by Governor Candido Aguilar of the State of Vera Cruz, Mexico, and saying that you have addressed a letter upon the subject to the Governor.

The Department awaits the receipt of the Governor’s reply to the inquiry addressed to him.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/143.

[Document 1165]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

No. 1248.] American Consulate,
Tampico, October 20, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the Department’s instruction advising that the Department is awaiting the receipt of the Governor’s reply to the inquiry addressed to him by this office relative to his interpretation of his decree relative to leases on oil bearing lands in the State of Veracruz.

In am enclosing herewith copies and translations of his reply to the same.

Aguilar strongly implies his decree is retroactive, using the argument of a preceding decree which disowned and declared null all acts of the Huerta administration. By taking advantage of this old decree which was issued at the beginning of the Huerta administration, he states that neither Article 14 of the Federal Constitution, nor Article 5 of the Civil Code of the State of Veracruz, which prohibit the passing of retroactive laws, have been violated, as these articles could not be justly interpreted as applicable to acts already previously declared null and illegal by a preceding decree.

Referring to the fourth paragraph of my letter stating that Colonel Benignos, Jefe de Armas at Panuco, Vera Cruz, advised several representatives of oil companies, that in his opinion Governor Cándido Aguilar did not intend to give the decree a retroactive effect, the Governor replied that his subordinate officers were not vested with authority to interpret his decrees, and that their opinions are unacceptable because unauthorized.

Notwithstanding the foregoing the Governor does not openly state in plain unmistakable language that the decree is retroactive. He skillfully avoids committing himself in writing to this extent, but there is no doubt that he intends it to be so construed by this office.

I have [etc.]

Thomas H. Bevan.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

Governor Candido Aguilar to Vice Consul Bevan.

Jalapa, October 13, 1914.

Esteemed Sir: It is highly pleasing to me to reply to your letter of the 11th of September last past in which you request some information with respect to the decree which I issued under date of the 3rd of August of the current year relative to contracts upon petroleum bearing lands in this State, and desire me to inform you in regard to some details which you believe necessary for protecting American interests which at present are found in your care.

Although the decree referred to, which must be understood applicable for consonance with another just preceding by which were disowned and declared null all acts of the overthrown government of the usurper, it is inspired by the most sane and honest spirit of morality and of justice and does not prejudice in the least the interests entrusted to your active and able protection, considering that it only is to establish a previous formality protective of the fiscal interests and above all those of the helpless people who do not know generally the consequences of the contracts which they celebrate upon productive and very valuable petroleum bearing lands, I have not the least objection to advising you, as I do by the present of the details which you request for the purpose which you kindly indicated to me.

Wherefore, I now permit myself to state to you in response to your questions included in your said letter: that yes it is indispensable in conformity with the decree mentioned that all contracts which may be celebrated upon petroleum bearing lands in the Cantons of Ozuluama, Tuxpam, Tantoyuca, Chicontepec, Misantla and Minatitlan be presented for the approval of the superior government of the state, not in minutas, as you believe can be done, but in the original escrituras, before being signed by the contracting parties and before being authorized by the respective notary; or in terms most clear and precise the Government under my charge prohibits absolutely the taking of minutas of contracts upon lands situated in the Cantons referred to on account of same not having any validity even though they may be authorized by some notary.

The decree upon petroleum bearing lands in the clear and precise terms in which it is drawn must be punctually obeyed by all those who may have the necessity of celebrating contracts of the nature to which same refers; and there are no serious obstacles to this in Article 14 of the Federal Constitution, nor article 5 of the civil code of the state which never can be rightly interpreted as applicable to acts already previously declared null and illegal by a foregoing decree on account of having been executed by venal functionaries and betrayers who were in the unconditional service of a government spurious and immoral emanating from treason and from crime and therefore out of the reach of constitutional precepts among which are enumerated those which you invoke.

Also I permit myself to make known to you for your information that the superior government of the state has not conceded authority to any of the Jefes de armas to interpret at his free will the terms of the decree so many times mentioned, since this is the exclusive faculty of the said government, wherefore any opinion given in that connection by said jefes is unacceptable because unauthorized.

Hoping that you are satisfied with the explanation (construction or interpretation) with which I have the pleasure of furnishing you, to me it is very pleasing to extend to you at the same time assurances of my attentive consideration.

C. Aguilar.

The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan. File No. 812.6363/143.

[Document 1166]

The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 8, 1914, 2 p.m.

Your No. 1248. State to appropriate authorities the view of this Government that provisions of decree of General Aguilar of July 1, 1914, should not be applied to American citizens who acquired title or interest in lands in State of Vera Cruz or instituted or carried on proceedings looking to such acquirement during the Huerta regime in strict conformity with and under regularly established and applicable previously existing proceedings or acquirements and that American citizens having interests so incepted or acquired should have reasonable opportunity to make proof that in acquiring such interests they conformed to such laws.

This statement however is not to be understood as applying to persons who claim directly or indirectly title or interest in oil lands which they have acquired since April 20, 1914, by reason of cancellation of contracts, leases or other forms of conveyance or by reason of confiscation or taking by de facto authorities of interests in oil lands in which American citizens or other foreigners are interested on ground of default in contractual obligations or noncompliance with legal requirements provided such default or noncompliance was unavoidable because of military operations or political disturbances in Mexico.

Lansing.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/144.

[Document 1167]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

No. 1277.] American Consulate,
Tampico, November 5, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of the Department’s telegram Nov. 3, 2 p.m., and to enclose herewith a copy of a letter, and its English translation, addressed by this office to Governor Candido Aguilar, relative to oil-bearing lands in the State of Veracruz, Mexico.

The general opinion of the leading lawyers, representing oil interests in Tampico, Mexico, is that it would be unwise to press General Aguilar, at the present time, into deciding the question, as his decision would doubtless be unfavorable. Up to the present time he has completely ignored all inquiries from the oil companies on this subject, and the only public statement he has made relative to his decree, was that contained in his reply to the letter addressed him by this office. In this communication he implies that his decree is retroactive, but does not openly say so. A great deal of pressure is being brought upon him by the oil companies to try and convince him the decree is unconstitutional and violates both Article 14 of the Federal Constitution and Article 5 of the Civil Code of the State of Veracruz, which prohibit the passing of retroactive laws.

The contention of the oil companies is that private contracts entered into prior to the date of the decree (August 3rd, 1914) between private individuals or companies or between companies and private individuals, in good faith, and in compliance with the laws then existing, before notaries or other officials acting in compliance with law, and constituting a lease, transfer thereof, sale or other incumbrance, or transfer of the lands in the State of Veracruz, are entitled to be recognized as valid and existing without the necessity of presenting the same to the Governor, or to one of his subordinates for his approval.

It is to be hoped that the Governor will not construe his decree so as to declare illegal all contracts made during the Huerta administration, as an adverse ruling on this point would cause the American oil interests in the State of Vera Cruz to suffer enormous losses through no fault of their own.

I have [etc.]

Thomas H. Bevan.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

Vice Consul Bevan to Governor Cándido Aguilar.

American Consulate,
Tampico, November 4, 1914.

My Dear Sir: I have the honor to advise you that I transmitted to the Department of State in Washington a copy of your letter of October 13, relative to oil bearing lands in the State of Veracruz.

In reply to my despatch transmitting same, I have received instructions to advise your excellency that in the opinion of the Government of the United States, the provisions of your July decree relative to oil bearing lands in the State of Veracruz, should not be applied to American citizens, who acquired title to lands, or who instituted or carried on proceedings looking to such acquirement, during the Huerta administration, in strict conformity with, and under regularly established and previously existing legal proceedings, and that said American citizens having interests so accepted or acquired, should have reasonable opportunity to make proof that in acquiring such interests, they conformed to said laws.

I have [etc.]

Thomas H. Bevan.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/110.

[Document 1168]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

[Extract]

No. 1316.] American Consulate,
Tampico, December 12, 1914.

Two companies were advised that the taxes imposed by the Carrancista Government would have to be paid at Tamapache to the Villa authorities. General Pelaez has so far been unable to show any credentials from General Villa, or give any guaranties that if the taxes were paid in Tamapache, they would not have to be paid again in Mexico City. At the present time demands have been made in three different places for the payment of the oil taxes, namely, in Mexico City, in Vera Cruz and in Tamapache.

On December the 8th, an official notice was issued by the customhouse in Tampico to all the oil companies notifying them that the Federal taxes would have to be paid to the regularly appointed Constitutionalist authorities, or to the head office in the city of Vera Cruz, and that such payments as may be made to other authorities alien to the Constitutionalist Government would be considered null and void.

This condition of affairs leaves the oil companies in a serious predicament. If they make any payments to the Villa agents, they will necessarily incur the disfavor of the Constitutionalists, whereas on the other hand, if they refuse to pay the taxes to the forces that are in control of the oil fields, they will have to suffer for the consequences. The companies have all decided to temporize, and if necessary to compromise on the best terms they can for the time being, and await future developments.

In regard to these companies having to pay double taxes, I respectfully suggest that the Department endeavor to have General Carranza send a force large enough to protect the oil fields, or make some arrangement that would not force the companies to pay double.

I have [etc.]

Thos. H. Bevan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada. File No. 812.512/525.

[Document 1169]

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 24, 1914.

Bevan reports authorities Temapache requiring foreign oil companies vicinity Tampico make second payment taxes.

Request Carranza send force sufficient protect companies from this imposition.

Bryan.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/528.

[Document 1170]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Vera Cruz, December 30, 1914.

Department’s December 24. Foreign Office promises protection requested against Temapache authorities by foreign oil companies if latter charges prove true. Consul Tampico advised.

Canada.

Protection of American mining interests. Agreement by exchange of notes with Great Britain and Spain to preserve the status quoProtection of American mining interests. Agreement by exchange of notes with Great Britain and Spain to preserve the status quo

Note.—This subject is closely related to the next preceding and the next following.

[1171] The Secretary of State to the British charge d’Affaires.

Department of State, Washington, June 24, 1914.

File No. 812.63/7a.

[1172] The British charge d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, June 24, 1914.

File No. 812.63/8.

[1173] The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, July 2, 1914.

File No. 812.63/12a.

[1174] The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy, Washington, July 6, 1914.

File No. 812.63/11.

[1175] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihuahua, August 4, 1914.

File No. 812.63/13.

[1176] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, August 18, 1914.

File No. 812.63/13.

[1177] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, September 28, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 812.63/15.

[1178] [Untitled]

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, September 29, 1914.

File No. 812.63/22.

[1179] The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, October 16, 1914.

File No. 812.63/15.

[1180] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, October 19, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 812.63/22.

[1181] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, October 28, 1914.

File No. 812.63/30.

[1182] [Untitled]

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, October 28, 1914.

File No. 812.63/33.

[1183] [Untitled]

Brazilian Legation, Mexico, October 30, 1914.

File No. 812.63/34.

[1184] The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, November 4, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 812.63/30.

[1185] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, November 18, 1914.

File No. 812.63/33.

[1186] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, November 21, 1914.

File No. 812.63/22.

[1187] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihuahua, November 21, 1914.

File No. 812.63/36.

[1188] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, December 14, 1914.

File No. 812.63/36.

[1189] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, December 23, 1914.

File No. 812.63/38.

[1190] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, December 30, 1914.

File No. 812.63/38.

The Secretary of State to the British charge d’Affaires. File No. 812.63/7a.

[Document 1171]

The Secretary of State to the British charge d’Affaires.

Department of State,
Washington, June 24, 1914.

Sir: The policy adopted by the Governments of the United States and Great Britain in the agreement proposed in my note of June 1 [2], 1914,100 and in the note of acceptance by your Government, which had as its purpose the preservation of the interests of American citizens and British subjects in the Mexican oil-fields, may, in the view of this Government, be appropriately extended so as to cover the loss of title to mines and mining rights owned by American citizens and British subjects.

It appears from the informal conversations which I had at the Department with Ambassador Spring Rice, that such an extension of the policy would meet with the approval of your Government.

I have the honor, therefore, to propose that, this Government and the British Government agree that they will withhold all diplomatic support from their respective citizens or subjects, who claim directly or indirectly title or interest in mines or mining rights in Mexico, which they have acquired since January 1, 1913, or may hereafter acquire, directly or indirectly, by reason of the cancellation of contracts, leases or other forms of conveyance or by reason of the confiscation or taking by de facto authorities of mines or mining rights, in which American citizens or British subjects are interested, on the ground of default in contractual obligations or non-compliance with legal requirements, provided such default or non-compliance was unavoidable because of military operations or political disturbances in Mexico.

It should however, be distinctly understood that this agreement will not apply to any case in which the failure of the American or British owner of an interest in mines or mining rights in Mexico to perform his contractual obligations or to comply with a legal requirement was not the direct result of the political unrest prevailing in Mexico at the time of default, or to any case of bona fide transfer.

If the proposed agreement relative to mines and mining rights in Mexico is acceptable to your Government, a note stating their acceptance will be considered by this Government as putting the agreement into effect.

I have [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

100 printed under Protection of American oil interests, p. 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 1151].

The British charge d’Affaires to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.63/8.

[Document 1172]

The British charge d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

No. 207] British Embassy,
Washington, June 24, 1914.

Sir: I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your note dated today in which you state: [Quotes third, fourth and fifth paragraphs of note to the British charge d’Affaires, dated June 24, 1914.]

I have the honour to inform you in reply that I am authorised by my Government to accept in their name the agreement as described above, which they will therefore regard as coming into effect from this day’s date.

I have [etc.]

Colville Barclay.

The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador. File No. 812.63/12a.

[Document 1173]

The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, July 2, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to propose that this Government and the Spanish Government agree that they will withhold all diplomatic support from their respective citizens or subjects, who claim directly or indirectly, title or interest in mines or mining rights in Mexico, which they have acquired since January 1, 1913, or may hereafter acquire, directly or indirectly, by reason of the cancellation of contracts, leases or other forms of conveyance or by reason of the confiscation or taking by de facto authorities of mines or mining rights, in which American citizens or Spanish subjects are interested, on the ground of default in contractual obligations or noncompliance with legal requirements, provided such default or noncompliance was unavoidable because of military operations or political disturbances in Mexico.

It should however, be distinctly understood that this agreement will not apply to any case in which the failure of the American or Spanish owner of an interest in mines or mining rights in Mexico to perform his contractual obligations or to comply with a legal requirement was not the direct result of the political unrest prevailing in Mexico at the time of default, or to any case of bona fide transfer.

If the proposed agreement relative to mines and mining rights in Mexico is acceptable to your Government, a note stating its acceptance will be considered by this Government as putting the agreement into effect.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.63/11.

[Document 1174]

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, July 6, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your excellency’s note of July 2, 1914, in which you state: [Quotes Spanish translation of note to the Spanish Ambassador of July 2, 1914.]

I have the honor, in reply to this note, to inform you that I am authorized by my Government to accept the agreement proposed by your excellency, and I do accept it, at the same time assuring you of my highest consideration.

Juan Riaño.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.63/13.

[Document 1175]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 523.] American Consulate,
Chihuahua, August 4, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to forward herewith a copy of a decree which was issued by the Governor of this State on July 27, 1914, requiring the renewal within one month of all industrial and mining operations in the State of Chihuahua which have been suspended because of revolutionary conditions that have prevailed for the past few years. Especial attention is called to this decree because of its far-reaching effect upon the interests of foreigners, principally Americans, in this State, many of whose enterprises have remained closed continuously since the first warning to Americans to leave Mexico was issued by Mr. Taft in March, 1912.

While a number of American mining companies have recently resumed operations, practically none has done so in the feeling that the expectation of permanent peace really justified them in doing so at the present time. Many see in this decree the beginning of a policy on the part of the Constitutionalists, and particularly the radical wing of this party represented by Villa, to drive Americans and other foreigners out of Mexico through discriminatory legislative acts and executive decrees. This discrimination is already being felt in various minor ways.

Attention may be called in this connection to the order issued by the executive of the State on the first instant to the effect that all mining and industrial companies must henceforth buy Constitutionalist fiat money needed by such enterprises in their operations at the fixed rate of thirty-five cents, American gold, for one Constitutionalist peso. The current market rate of the peso at the present time is about twenty-seven cents. Villa has now contracted for the issuance of ten million pesos for his exclusive use independently of the Carranza wing of the Constitutionalist party, the issuance of which will undoubtedly reduce the price of the peso very considerably. The order referred to is to be binding for six months from August 1.

Particularly noteworthy in connection with the decree relative to the renewal of mining and industrial operations is the reference made in the preamble of the decree, and repeated in the decree itself, to the obligation of mine owners arising out of concessions granted to them by the government. It is necessary to call attention to the utter falsity of this claim, since no extraordinary concessions exist in these cases. It may be remarked that the reference mentioned is typical of the mass of misinformation and exaggeration that has recently been made current regarding the valuable character of concessions held by foreigners.

While on the subject of concessions in Mexico, it may be well to note that the word concession itself as applying to industrial or mining permits or charters in Mexico is entirely misleading. In the first place, the organization and conduct of all classes of business in Mexico is more subject to government control and regulation than with us, and every kind of enterprise must be covered by a permit or license which sets forth the powers and duties of the individual or company in the case. These permits may be either state or national, in which latter case the supervision and regulation of the enterprise corresponding thereto is under the Department of Fomento. In order to attract foreign capital many of these charters granted freedom of taxation for some short period after establishment of the enterprise covered thereby, at the expiration of which period the enterprise falls under the general law in all respects. These special exemptions have been uncommon in the mining industry, having only been granted in cases where mills or smelters requiring exceptional investments have been erected. I venture the assertion that in very few instances in Mexico have the privileges, exemptions, or special rights granted to foreign investors equalled those commonly offered by communities in the United States to attract industrial enterprises into their midst.

I have [etc.]

Marion Letcher.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

Decree Ordering Renewal of Work.

Assured as are peace and guarantees necessary for all men of good will that they devote themselves to the development of industrial enterprises in the territory dominated by the Constitutionalist army, giving employment to the laborers that aid in the development of the industries which constitute the public wealth; it is made known to proprietors or managers of all classes of enterprises that have not undertaken a renewal of work that there is given a period of one month which is not subject to further extension, dating from the date of this decree, in which must be reinstituted work interrupted because of the abnormal situation through which we have passed, and after the conclusion of the period named there will be imposed upon those who have failed to comply with the foregoing requirement as a first step a fine equal to an increase of 50% in the taxes which are ordinarily paid into the treasury, without prejudicing the taking of other steps which may be made necessary if they still persist in the continued close of their respective industries, which while not benefiting the proprietors, does great harm to the villages which have been formed under the shadow of concessions granted by the government and which the concessionaires have not known how to appreciate, such concessionaires now showing themselves timid without any reason which can justify the proceeding which it is designed to correct.

In view of the foregoing and in virtue of the extraordinary powers with which I find myself clothed, I find it proper to decree the following:

There is given one month, counted from this date, for renewing mining, industrial and other operations which have been closed because of the war, and upon the owners or agents who do not renew operations within the period named there will be forthwith imposed an increase of 50% in the taxes ordinarily paid. However, this payment will not be considered as releasing the parties not resuming work of responsibility for hardships that might be resented by the residents of those villages, which, formed under the shadow or the respective enterprises, especially those engaged in the operation of mines, are dependent upon such enterprises.

Ordered printed, published and circulated in order that due observance may be given.

Done at Chihuahua, July 27, 1914.

General Fidel Avila,
Governor General of the State.

Silvestre Terrazas,
Secretary of State.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 812.63/13.

[Document 1176]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 18, 1914.

After consulting Letcher about his 523, fourth instant, endeavor to persuade Villa order reversal or modification decree Governor Chihuahua requiring renewal industrial and mining operations. Remind Villa that this Government for good reasons warned its citizens to leave certain sections of Mexico, state that United States will cooperate to secure return Americans so soon after ordinary commercial facilities make it possible to transact business as Constitutionalists give convincing evidences of security and protection and that in meantime this Government expects that its citizens will not be subjected to burdensome or oppressive measures.

W. J. Bryan.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.63/15.

[Document 1177]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, September 28, 1914, 11 a.m.

165. Government has issued a decree dated August 29 cancelling all mining titles and declaring null all proceedings relative to the acquirement of mining claims started during Huerta’s administration, in equity sixty days to make application to mining agents to renew all previous procedure. Also that all usual payments required by mining law in connection therewith be made again to the present Government. Persons who have not complied with the above rulings before the end of the sixty days will lose all their rights, the mining land being considered thereafter as open to denouncement. As this term will expire November third and considerable trouble will probably arise and severe loss ensue to many foreigners please instruct me as to the course I should follow with regard to American interests. As many Americans mine owners having large interests here are now in the United States it might be well to give the above report wide publication.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

[Untitled] File No. 812.63/22.

[Document 1178]

[Untitled]

No. 43. Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, September 29, 1914.

Sir: Confirming my September 28, I have the honor to enclose herewith a translation of the decree of August 29 ultimo, relative to the mining titles and other proceedings which were started during the past administration, but all of which are now declared null and void by the past [present] Government. I have also enclosed in the above mentioned translation, the rulings which the Department of Fomento has issued to mining agents, throughout the country, and by which they should be guided in order to revalidate the applications so presented. These rulings give all the information necessary as to the mode of procedure now necessary to obtain the titles of such mining lands as were applied for during the past administration.

We await the instructions of the Department in regard to the course we should follow with regard to American interests as the decree will create great trouble and will be the source of heavy expense to interested persons.

With assurances [etc.]

J. M. Cardoso de Oliveira.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

Circular No. 1.

Department of Fomento.

In order to carry out the dispositions of the decree issued by the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army, in charge of the Executive, by which decree are declared null and void all the acts of officers, powers, or institutions that took place during the time that such authorities exercised usurped an unconstitutional power (that is from the 19th of February 1913 to the 15th of August last) all denouncements, rectifications, reductions, titles issued, and, in fact, all acts executed within the mining branch, by the mining agencies of this Republic, or by this Department, are hereby declared null and void.

As a matter of equity all interested persons are hereby granted sixty days from date, during which term they may make application to the mining agents to revalidate proceedings or for issuance of new titles, under caution that on the expiration of said term, without having taken such steps, the land will be considered as free and denounceable by any interested person. Before said term expires mining agents shall accept no other applications for the same land, but those of the interested persons.

In the applications made before mining agents relative to revalidating proceedings of denouncements of mining claims, the same provisions and rulings required by the mining law now in effect shall be observed; interested parties shall furnish the mining agencies with accurate reference to the number given to the proceedings (expediente) starting at the time when they made such applications for the mining lands. Interested persons are also entitled to ask that such plans of the ground as may have been presented before, be accepted, for the new denouncement.

In all new applications made to replace those now declared null and void, interested persons shall be required to make a new deposit at the rate of ($5.00 per hectare) to cover the stamp tax for the new title.

Mining agents will deliver to interested parties within three days from the date on which the new application is presented, an abstract of same, so that the applicant, for his own account and risk may cause such abstract to be published, within the following 30 days, and to appear once, in the official paper of the respective state or territory.

Mining agents are entitled to receive fees for these new applications for revalidation of proceedings, at the rates followed by the mining law.

The acts and resolutions of mining agents and other authorities appointed by the Constitutionalist Government, shall remain legal and in full force.

Mexico, September 3, 1914.

Pastor Rouaix.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.63/15.

[Document 1179]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 16, 1914.

297. Your September 28, 11 a.m.

Please state to appropriate authorities the view of this Government that its citizens who acquired title or interest in mines or mining rights in Mexico, or instituted or carried on proceedings looking to such acquirement during the Huerta régime in strict conformity with and under regularly established and applicable previously existing mining laws of Mexico, should not be bound by decree annulling such proceedings or acquirements or requiring them to make repayment of amounts required by Mexican laws during such period, and that American citizens holding titles so incepted or acquired should have reasonable opportunity to make proof that their titles are in conformity with such laws.

This statement, however, is not to be understood as applying to persons who claim directly or indirectly title or interest in mines or mining rights which they have acquired since January first, nineteen thirteen, by reason of cancellation of contracts, leases, or other forms of conveyance, or by reason of confiscation or taking, by de facto authorities, of mines or mining rights in which American citizens or other foreigners are interested on ground of default in contractual obligations or non-compliance with legal requirements, provided such default or non-compliance was unavoidable because of military operations or political disturbances in Mexico.

Robert Lansing.

[Untitled] File No. 812.63/22.

[Document 1180]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, October 19, 1914, 6 p.m.

301. Your 43, September 29, cancellation mining titles, encloses only translation of Circular No. 1 of September 3, by Department of Fomento. Department desires decree of August 29.

Robert Lansing.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.63/30.

[Document 1181]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, October 28, 1914.

192. Department’s 297. Government advised today that regulations as contained in circular of September 3 shall apply. Said circular was mailed you September 29. Am mailing full translation of note.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

[Untitled] File No. 812.63/33.

[Document 1182]

[Untitled]

No. 65.] Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, October 28, 1914.

Sir: Referring to the Department’s telegram No. 297 of October 16th, 6 p.m., relative to validity of mining titles as acquired during the Huerta regime which telegram was transcribed in full to the Foreign Office, I have just received the following note from said office: Referring to your note No. 360 of the 17th instant, I have the honor to advise you, for the information of the State Department in Washington, that although it is true that titles were issued and that applications were made in accordance with pre-existing laws, yet, all decisions were passed at the caprice of the dictator and, for this reason, such decisions have no legal value. However, the Constitutionalist Government, in equity, and so as to avoid losses to interested persons, issued the rulings covered by Circular No. 1, copy of which is hereto attached.

Assuring you [etc.]

Fabela.

The circular above referred to was translated and sent to you under date of September 29th, covered by my despatch No. 43, which, I trust is now in your possession.

Assuring you [etc.]

J. M. Cardoso de Oliveira.

[Untitled] File No. 812.63/34.

[Document 1183]

[Untitled]

No. 68.] Brazilian Legation,
Mexico, October 30, 1914.

Sir: Referring to your cablegram of October 19, 6 p.m., No. 301, I have the honor to enclose herewith a translation of the decree of August 29, 1914, relative to the declaration of nullity of all decisions rendered and matters transacted during the Huerta administration, and trust that this contains the information the Department desires.

You will note that I have supplemented the translation with a nota bene explaining the actual standing of the Government in regard to the revalidation of such concessions.

Assuring you [etc.,]

J. M. Cardoso de Oliveira.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

By order of the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army in charge of the Executive, all matters transacted or decisions rendered since 19th of February 1913 by the Department of Fomento and later by the so-called Department of Agricultura y Colonizacion since its creation, are hereby declared null and void. Interested parties are at liberty to make application to the Department of Fomento asking for a reconsiderttion of their affairs, so that new documents (titles) be issued if the case is regarded just.

The Chief Clerk, in charge,
Pastor Rouaix.

Mexico City, August 29th, 1914.

Nota bene.—Above decree includes mining concessions, water rights, patents of invention, trademarks, etc. After same was published the mining office issued circular No. 1 of September 3 and the patent office issued a circular dated September 12, both of which give in detail the form of procedure now required to obtain the revalidation of such documents or titles as were issued during the Huerta régime.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.63/30.

[Document 1184]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 4, 1914, 4 p.m.

313. Your 192. Please inform appropriate authorities that United States Government can not submit to such an application of the provisions of the decree of August 29 cancelling mining titles and declaring null all proceedings relating to the acquirement of mining claims started during Huerta’s administration, as will result in the loss to American citizens of rights or interests acquired in good faith and in conformity with laws of Mexico.

Robert Lansing.

[Untitled] File No. 812.63/33.

[Document 1185]

[Untitled]

No. 1602.] Department of State,
Washington, November 18, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 65, of October 28, in which you quote the reply of the Foreign Office to your note of October 17 communicating to it the full text of the Department’s telegram No. 297, of October 16, in regard to the decree of August 29 purporting to annul mining titles acquired during the Huerta regime.

In reply I beg to refer to the Department’s telegram No. 313, of November 4, 4 p.m., requesting you to inform the appropriate authorities that the United States Government can not submit to such an application of the decree mentioned as will result in the loss to American citizens of rights or interests acquired legally and in good faith.

With high appreciation of the able and vigorous attention you have given this matter, I avail [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

[Untitled] File No. 812.63/22.

[Document 1186]

[Untitled]

No. 1605.] Department of State,
Washington, November 21, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 43, of September 29, enclosing a translation of the decree of August 29, 1914, which purports to annul mining titles granted and all acts executed within the mining branch of the Huerta administration during the period from February 19, 1913, to August 15, 1914. You request advices from the Department, as to the course it desires your Legation to follow in this matter.

In reply I beg to refer you to the Department’s telegram No. 313, of November 4, 4 p.m., already adverted to in the Department’s No. 1602, of November 18.

Thanking you for your prompt action in the matter,

I avail [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.63/36.

[Document 1187]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

No. 557.] American Consulate,
Chihuahua, November 21, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to ask an instruction as to how Americans should be advised in the matter of the second payment of mining fees and taxes which were paid the Huerta de facto government during its continuance, as demanded under the decree of General Carranza of August 29, 1914, when advice upon the question may be asked of this office. I may state that I now have a concrete case before me through a letter from Mr. Louis Lane, who was formerly a resident of Chihuahua but who is now residing in Havana, Cuba. Mr. Lane writes under date October 29 that he filed claims to twelve pertenencias of mineral land before the proper office in the city of Chihuahua on August 26, 1913; that he has now seen a copy of General Carranza’s decree, under the terms of which all acts of the Huerta government were declared null and void but in the excepted case of mining claims interested parties would be allowed sixty days from the date of the decree to revalidate such claims by a repayment of fees and taxes paid the Huerta government; and that he wishes to know in the present chaotic circumstances surrounding the payment of fees and taxes corresponding to his own mining properties how best to proceed to give protection to his titles.

It is pertinent to say that in the hope that the local authorities might under present conditions give Mr. Lane a useful suggestion in the matter described, I addressed a note to Mr. F. Gonzalez Garza, then acting governor of the state of Chihuahua, describing Mr. Lane’s case and asking what steps should be pursued by Mr. Lane to protect his interests. Mr. Gonzalez Garza replied that he would counsel Mr. Lane to comply with the Carranza decree, paying the taxes and fees in the present case to the state government, in return for which the state government would issue a receipt which would serve to protect him against the enforcement of the penalties of the Carranza decree in the future.

Inasmuch as the mining interests of the Republic of Mexico are exclusively under the central Government, and inasmuch, further, as no relations at present are maintained between the state of Chihuahua and the said central Government of Mexico, it appears to me that the advice of Mr. Gonzalez Garza, if followed, would imperfectly protect Mr. Lane’s rights, and that repaying taxes once paid to a superior de facto authority to an inferior and not coordinate authority, might come to constitute the first in a series of repayments to a line of succeeding governments which would amount to an intolerable hardship upon him.

I have merely remitted to Mr. Lane a copy of Mr. Gonzalez Garza’s letter. I trust, however, that the Department may not find it inexpedient to instruct me how the many Americans in this locality who are in a situation similar to Mr. Lane’s may be advised in the premises.

I have [etc.]

Marion Letcher.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 812.63/36.

[Document 1188]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

No. 323.] Department of State,
Washington, December 14, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your despatch No. 557 of November 21, 1914, requesting instructions as to how Americans applying to your Consulate should be advised as to their action with relation to the decree of General Carranza of August 29, 1914, requiring the re-payment of mining fees and taxes which were paid to the Huerta administration during its continuance.

When the Department was first informed of the provisions of the decree of General Carranza of August 29, 1914, to which, you refer, it requested the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City to state to the appropriate authorities the views of this Government that American citizens who have acquired rights or interests in good faith and in conformity with the laws of Mexico should not be bound by the provisions of that decree. It was added, however, that this statement must not be understood as applying to persons who claim, directly or indirectly, titles or interests in mines, or mining rights which they have acquired since January 1, 1913, by reason of the cancellation of contracts, leases, or other forms of conveyance, or by reason of the confiscation or taking by de facto authorities of mines or mining rights in which American citizens or other foreigners are interested on the ground of default of contractual obligations or noncompliance with legal requirements, provided such default or noncompliance was unavoidable because of military operations or political disturbances in Mexico.

The Brazilian Minister, in reply to the representations which he made pursuant to such request of the Department, was informed, as the Department understands, that, notwithstanding such representations, the provisions of the decree in question would remain in force. Upon receiving this information, the Department on November 4, 1914, asked the Minister to inform the appropriate authorities that this Government could not submit to such an application of the provisions of said decree as would result in the loss to American citizens of rights or interests acquired in good faith and in conformity with the laws of Mexico.

So far as concerns the individual cases, of American citizens affected by this decree, it would seem that the Department could offer them no further advice than to inform them of the above action which it has taken, and to say to them that, if they consider it advisable to attempt to comply with the provisions of the decree, under generally accepted principles of international law, they are entitled to pay taxes to persons in de facto authority.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.63/38.

[Document 1189]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, December 23, 1914.

251. My despatch 43 and your 1605 of November 21. The provisional government has issued decree extending time for revalidation of mining titles to March 31 next but leaving standing the regulations and penalties in circular with my number 43 of September 29. I consider it necessary to make the Government realize the trouble, difficulty and expense which such procedure will cause to the entire mining community and have already taken this up with president Guiterrez.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.63/38.

[Document 1190]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

No. 1615.] Department of State,
Washington, December 30, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your telegram, No. 251, of December 23, 4 p.m., stating that the time for revalidating mining titles has been extended to March 31, 1915, by a decree of the administration at Mexico City, but that the regulations and penalties previously imposed have not been revoked, and that you have taken up the matter with Señor Gutierrez, with a view to their modification or abolition.

The Department cordially approves your course in taking up the matter with Señor Gutierrez, and thanks you for your action in the premises.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

Confiscatory taxation of American citizensConfiscatory taxation of American citizens

Note.—This subject is closely related to the two next preceding.

Note: On March 13, 1913, “Decree No. 1” was issued by the acting governor of the State of Sonora, in rebellion against the Huerta government, article 20 of which provided that all mining taxes for the period beginning July 1 must be paid to the treasurer of the State of Sonora, and if not so paid the mining properties concerned would be forfeited. Notice of this provision was given by the prefect of each district to owners of mining claims therein. In general, the decree provided that all taxes previously paid to the federal authorities should be paid to the State officials of Sonora. Similar decrees were issued by other states in rebellion. At the same time the federal authorities continued to exact payment of these taxes, with the result that the taxpayer was confronted with demands from two factions at war with each other. Numerous American citizens applied to the local representatives of this Government or to the Department of State for advice, which was given in the form shown in the following correspondence during April, 1913, and was repeated in numerous instances in 1914.

[1191] Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Nogales, April 5, 1913.

File No. 812.512/17.

[1192] Vice Consul Bowman to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate. Nogales, April 12, 1913.

File No. 812.512/19.

[1193] The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich.

Department of State, Washington, April 26, 1913,

File No. 812.512/17.

[1194] The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Wilson.

Department of State, Washington, April 26, 1913.

File No. 812.512/17.

[1195] Ambassador Wilson to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico, April 29, 1913.

File No. 812.512/29.

[1196] The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bowman.

Department of State, Washington, April 30, 1913.

File No. 812.512/19.

[1197] Vice Consul Stadden to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Manzanillo, February 21, 1914.

File No. 812.512/189.

[1198] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Stadden.

Department of State, Washington, February 24, 1914.

File No. 812.512/189.

[1199] Vice Consul Stadden to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Manzanillo, February 26, 1914.

File No. 812.512/191.

[1200] Consul Alger to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Mazatlan, March 9, 1914.

File No. 812.512/205.

[1201] The Secretary of State to Consul Alger.

Department of State, Washington, March 11, 1914.

File No. 812.512/205.

[1202] Consul Alger to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Mazatlan, March 12, 1914.

File No. 812.512/208.

[1203] The Secretary of State to Consul Alger.

Department of State, Washington, March 13, 1914.

File No. 812.512/208.

[1204] Consul Alger to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Mazatlan, March 14, 1914.

File No. 812.512/211.

[1205] The Secretary of State to Consul Hostetter.

Department of Stater, Washington, March 16, 1914.

File No. 812.512/211.

[1206] Consul Hostetter to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate. Hermosillo, March 17, 1914.

File No. 812.512/223.

[1207] Vice Consul Stadden to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Mazanillo, March 19, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11224.

[1208] The Secretary of State to Vice-Consul Stadden.

Department of State, Washington, March 23, 1914.

File No. 812.512/219.

[1209] Consul Hamm to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Durango, March 24, 1914.

File No. 812.512/238.

[1210] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, April 23, 1914.

File No. 812.512/238.

[1211] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihuahua, May 14, 1914

File No. 812.512/258.

[1212] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihuahua, May 29, 1914.

File No. 812.512/268.

[1213] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, June 3, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 812.512/266.

[1214] [Untitled]

Tampico, June 3, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 812.6363/91.

[1215] [Untitled]

Tampico, June 3, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 812.6363/92.

[1216] The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

Department of State, Washington, June 15, 1914.

File No. 812.6363/91.

[1217] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, June 17, 1914.

File No. 812.512/284.

[1218] [Untitled]

Tampico, June 20, 1914.

File No. 812.512/286.

[1219] [Untitled]

Tampico, June 25, 1914.

File No. 812.512/295.

[1220] [Untitled]

Tampico, June 26, 1914.

File No. 812.512/299.

[1221] The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

Department of State, Washington, June 26, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 812,512/295.

[1222] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, June 27, 1914.

File No. 812.512/302.

[1223] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, June 29, 1914.

File No. 812.512/302.

[1224] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, June 29, 1914.

File No. 812.512/307.

[1225] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Saltillo, July 4, 1914.

File No. 812.512/318.

[1226] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Monterey, July 5, 1914.

File No. 812.512/317.

[1227] The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

Department of State, Washington, July 6, 1914.

File No. 812512/318.

[1228] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, July 8, 1914.

File No. 812.512/327.

[1229] The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

Department of State, Washington, July 10, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 812.512/327.

[1230] The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

Department of State, Washington, July 10, 1914.

File No. 812.512/327.

[1231] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova.

Department of State, Washington, July 10, 1914.

File No. 812.512/327.

[1232] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Satillo, July 11, 1914.

File No. 812.512/331.

[1233] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, July 12, 1914.

File No. 812.512/335.

[1234] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Monterey, July 13, 1914.

File No. 812.512/333.

[1235] The British Embassy to the Department of State.

British Embassy, Washington , July 13, 1914.

File No. 812.512/340.

[1236] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, July 14, 1914.

File No. 812.512/344.

[1237] The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

Department of State, Washington, July 15, 1912.

File No. 812.512/333.

[1238] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, July 15, 1914.

File No. 812.512/348a.

[1239] The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

Department of State, Washington, July 16, 1914.

File No. 812.512/335.

[1240] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Monterey, July 16, 1914.

File No. 812.512/349.

[1241] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, July 17, 1914.

File No. 812.512/350.

[1242] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Saltillo, July 18, 1914.

File No. 812.512/351.

[1243] The Department of State to the British Embassy.

Department of State, Washington , July 22, 1914.

File No. 812.512/340.

[1244] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, July 27, 1914.

File No. 812.512/372.

[1245] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, July 30, 1914.

File No. 812.512/380.

[1246] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan.

Department of State, Washington, August 1, 1914.

File No. 812.512/380.

[1247] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, August 1, 1914.

File No. 812.512/381.

[1248] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan.

Department of State, Washington, August 4, 1914.

File No. 812.512/381.

[1249] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, August 6, 1914.

File No. 812.512/387.

[1250] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, August 8, 1914.

File No. 812.512/387.

[1251] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Teoloyucan, August 12, 1914.

File No. 812.512/394.

[1252] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, August 13, 1914.

File No. 812.512/392.

[1253] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, August 15, 1914.

File No. 812.512/392.

[1254] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, August 15, 1914.

File No. 812.512/396.

[1255] [Untitled]

Tampico, August 17, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 812.512/400.

[1256] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico City, August 19, 1914

File No. 812.512/403.

[1257] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, August 22, 1914

File No. 812.512/403.

[1258] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, August 27, 1914.

File No. 812.512/412.

[1259] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico City, August 29, 1914.

File No. 812.512/415.

[1260] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, September 2, 1914.

File No. 812.512/415.

[1261] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico City, September 18, 1914.

File No. 812.512/437.

[1262] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, October 6, 1914.

File No. 812.512/468.

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/17.

[Document 1191]

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate,
Nogales, April 5, 1913.

Sir: I have the honor to report that the Constitutionalist party, now in power in northern Sonora, is demanding and collecting taxes payable on mines and other property in this consular district. Since Americans doing business in northern Sonora, largely organized as various Mexican corporations, have no other recourse, they are complying with the demand of the Constitutionalists and are paying their taxes to the State officials now in power. In consequence much speculation occurs as to whether or not such taxes may have to be paid again, to the Federal authorities, should the present Constitutionalist government in Sonora fail. I am informed that in a previous revolution certain mining taxes which were duly paid, under circumstances similar to the present, were later collected a second time, and paid into the Federal Treasury.

An official circular, demanding payment of certain taxes to State of Sonora officials, is enclosed herewith, in the form of a free translation.

I have [etc.]

Frederick Simpich.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

Circular demanding payment of certain taxes to State officials of Sonora.

The Acting Secretary of State, in a telegram dated March 29, 1913, instructs this Prefecture as follows: Hermosillo, March 29, 1918.

Prefect of the District,
Cananea, Sonora:

By order of the Governor I recommend to you that you make known in an efficacious manner to all mine owners, of that district that they must call at the office of the Tax Collector, Municipal Treasurer, and Fiscal Agencies, respectively, to pay the taxes corresponding to the third four months of the fiscal year, that is, March, April, May and June, for which a term of eight days grace is allowed; warning them that if they do not comply herewith they shall suffer the consequent penalties. Until they receive their provisional receipt equivalent to the revenue stamps, they may receive payment (receipts for taxes paid) by means of certificates of deposit which shall be issued by said offices, and which shall, at the opportune time, be attached to the formal receipts.

You are especially recommended to promptly comply with this order.

The Acting Secretary [of State],
F. Rosado.

Which I for my part promulgate for the guidance of those interested.

Cananea, April 1, 1913.

Carlos N. Durazo,
The Acting Prefect.

Vice Consul Bowman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/19.

[Document 1192]

Vice Consul Bowman to the Secretary of State.

No. 230.] American Consulate.
Nogales, April 12, 1913.

Sir: I have the honor to report that this office has been appealed to for advice by a number of American mine owners in this district with regard to the payment of their taxes, now overdue. The status of this problem is as follows.

The taxes on Mexican mining property are payable in triannual periods, called tercios. The last tercio ended March 31 and taxes not paid previous to that date are now overdue. The law provides a fine for delinquency in payment, with the ultimate penalty of forfeiture of title. These taxes were formerly collected by federal stamp agents located throughout the state. The federal government now has no officers in the district, outside of the town of Naco. The stamp agent of Nogales, Sonora, is now living in Nogales, Arizona, and cannot receive taxes. This official has advised American mine owners to withhold the payment of taxes during the period in which the state authorities control the state, assuring them that there will be no penalty attached for delinquency in this instance.

However, the state government has issued a demand for the payment of these mining taxes, and extended the time of payment eight days from March 31, and has also decreed that the owners of the properties shall forfeit their titles under the existing federal laws if they do not pay these taxes.

This leaves many Americans in doubt as to what should be done. As the tax is a federal tax it would seem that Americans should be governed by the instructions of the federal officers. On the other hand I have consulted with some of the state officials of influence and they reply that the provisional government at Mexico City is not the constitutional federal government, and until there is a constitutional federal government the state may assume to enforce federal laws. The state hold itself responsible for these taxes to the federal government, and up to the present is adhering strictly to the provisions of the established federal laws.

I have advised Americans whose claims are undeveloped to withhold the payment of their taxes temporarily. But those who have properties with developments subject to seizure, or who are still endeavoring to operate I have advised to pay the state agents under protest to prevent the possible confiscation of their property, or any hard feeling with the de facto authorities. I think it quite certain that the state agents will yet accept the taxes already overdue without assessing any fine for delinquency if paid soon.

Without anticipating the results of the present revolution in this state, it seems that if the American mine owners refuse to pay their taxes to the state agents, and the ultimate victor in the revolution should be the state, the mine owners might experience difficulty in recovering their titles without considerable expense.

This office would appreciate instructions from the Department for future guidance in advising Americans in this matter.

A copy of this despatch is being forwarded to the Embassy at Mexico City.

I have [etc.]

Thos. D. Bowman.

The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich. File No. 812.512/17.

[Document 1193]

The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 26, 1913,

Your despatch April 5 regarding exaction by insurrectionary authorities of taxes on mines and other property owned by American citizens. Such taxes should be paid under protest, which protest should so far as possible be made a matter of record in each case. Properly authenticated receipts should be secured for all taxes paid. Americans are entitled however to pay taxes to persons in de facto authority. For principle involved see Moore’s Digest, Volume 1, pages 183, 184; Volume 4, page 12. Department is instructing Embassy to lay matter before appropriate authorities calling attention to the exaction of taxes by insurrectionary forces and stating that this Government will regard payment of such taxes to such persons exercising de facto authority as completely relieving American citizens from further obligation with reference to taxes so paid.

Moore.

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Wilson. File No. 812.512/17.

[Document 1194]

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Wilson.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 26, 1913.

201. Department has received from American Consul, Nogales, notice that insurrectionary forces are collecting taxes on mines and other property. Department is advising Consulate as follows: [Quotes telegram to Consul Simpich.]

You will bring this matter immediately to the attention of the appropriate authorities in the sense indicated in the instruction to the Consul.

Moore.

Ambassador Wilson to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/29.

[Document 1195]

Ambassador Wilson to the Secretary of State.

No. 1935.] American Embassy,
Mexico, April 29, 1913.

Sir: For the information of the Department I have the honor to transmit herewith a copy of the note which I yesterday addressed to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Provisional Government of Mexico in compliance with the Department’s telegraphic instruction No. 201 of April 26

I have [etc.]

Henry Lane Wilson.

[Inclosure.]

Ambassador Wilson to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

American Embassy,
Mexico, April 28, 1913.

Mr. Minister: Acting under the instructions of my Government, I have the honor of calling your excellency’s attention to the fact that the revolutionists forces in control of certain portions of those States which have revolted against the Federal Government are levying taxes on mines and other properties owned by citizens of the United States and that my Government regards the payment of such taxes by its citizens to such persons exercising de facto authority as completely relieving its nationals from further obligation with reference to taxes so paid.

My Government has further instructed its Consuls resident within the districts where the above-mentioned insurrectionary forces are in control that such taxes should be paid under protest and should, in so far as possible, be made a matter of record in each case.

I avail [etc.]

Henry Lane Wilson.

The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bowman. File No. 812.512/19.

[Document 1196]

The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bowman.

Department of State,
Washington, April 30, 1913.

Sir: The Department has received your despatch No. 230 of April 12, 1913, with regard to the payment of taxes on mining claims in Sonora owned by Americans.

In this connection your attention is referred to the Department’s telegram of April 26, 1913, [to Vice Consul Simpich] upon the subject.

I am [etc.]

Wilbur J. Carr.

Vice Consul Stadden to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/189.

[Document 1197]

Vice Consul Stadden to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Manzanillo, February 21, 1914.

A new law imposing a war tax of six per cent on assessed value of property has been enacted by the Colima legislature. Please instruct if protest should be made as your January 21101 instructs on forced loans.

Stadden.

101 Printed under Forced Loans, p. 770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 1300, Doc. 1301, Doc. 1302, and Doc. 1303].

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Stadden. File No. 812.512/189.

[Document 1198]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Stadden.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 24, 1914.

Your February 21. If attempt is made to impose war tax on American citizens, you will make formal protest.

Bryan.

Vice Consul Stadden to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/191.

[Document 1199]

Vice Consul Stadden to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Manzanillo, February 26, 1914.

Complying with your telegraphic instructions February 24, I telegraphed Governor of Colima as follows: In compliance with instructions from Government, formal protest is hereby made against imposition of war tax on American citizens.

The Governor replied as follows: Replying to your telegram. This Government does not recognize the right of foreigners to protest against laws of the country that as in this case are not contrary to international rules, therefore please abstain from making unjustifiable protest.

Governor.

The law requires payment of war tax by March tenth.

Stadden.

Consul Alger to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/205.

[Document 1200]

Consul Alger to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Mazatlan, March 9, 1914.

Constitutionalists continue collection mining taxes from Americans although same have been paid to Federals.

Alger.

The Secretary of State to Consul Alger. File No. 812.512/205.

[Document 1201]

The Secretary of State to Consul Alger.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 11, 1914.

Your March 9. Report names of Americans from whom Constitutionalists have collected or attempted to collect mining taxes mentioned.

Bryan.

Consul Alger to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/208.

[Document 1202]

Consul Alger to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Mazatlan, March 12, 1914.

Your March 11. Have no communication outside city. Understand all mining companies in Sinaloa called on to pay and are paying or have paid. W. Felton, E. H. Hoag and Chas. Thomas, residents Mazatlan, inform they have paid.

Alger.

The Secretary of State to Consul Alger. File No. 812.512/208.

[Document 1203]

The Secretary of State to Consul Alger.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 13, 1914.

Your March 12. Report whether any American owners of mining property desire representations made against imposition of tax.

Bryan.

Consul Alger to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/211.

[Document 1204]

Consul Alger to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Mazatlan, March 14, 1914.

Your March 13. All Americans with whom been able to communicate desire representations against imposition tax Constitutionalists when already paid Federals.

Alger.

The Secretary of State to Consul Hostetter. File No. 812.512/211.

[Document 1205]

The Secretary of State to Consul Hostetter.

[Telegram.]

Department of Stater,
Washington, March 16, 1914.

Consul, Mazatlan, reports that Constitutionalist authorities are collecting from American mining companies back taxes which have already been paid to central administration.

Bring to attention of appropriate authorities with protest against collection these taxes a second time, and state that under principles of international law these companies should be relieved of all further obligation with regard to taxes already paid by them to central administration.

Bryan.

Consul Hostetter to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/223.

[Document 1206]

Consul Hostetter to the Secretary of State.

No. 637.] American Consulate.
Hermosillo, March 17, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s telegram March 16, regarding the collection of mining taxes by the Constitutionalists after having once been paid to the Federals. I had same complaint upon the return of General Carranza from Sinaloa and he, at the time, promised to look into the matter, although he held he had a right to demand the payment of the same. I told him according and agreeable to international law, it was not right to demand this payment, as a government in power had a right to collect these same taxes. It is possible, that on account of his constant moving, he forgot to look into the matter. I have wired to Juarez in regard to the matter.

I have [etc.]

Louis Hostetter.

Vice Consul Stadden to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11224.

[Document 1207]

Vice Consul Stadden to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Consulate,
Mazanillo, March 19, 1914.

Referring to my telegram of February 26. Government persists in collecting war tax. Americans request advice.

Stadden.

The Secretary of State to Vice-Consul Stadden. File No. 812.512/219.

[Document 1208]

The Secretary of State to Vice-Consul Stadden.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 23, 1914.

Your March 19th. Advise American citizens to pay tax under protest, making protest a matter of record if possible, and to take receipts.

Bryan.

Consul Hamm to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/238.

[Document 1209]

Consul Hamm to the Secretary of State.

No. 333.] American Consulate,
Durango, March 24, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to report that there has recently been opened in this city a tax and revenue office of the so-called Constitutionalist Federal Government, which office is exercising all the functions and collecting all the taxes formerly payable to the Federal Government in Mexico City. In connection with the reopening of this office, an interesting case has arisen concerning which I would respectfully ask instructions from the Department of State for my future guidance.

The taxes levied upon mining holdings or pertenencias are exclusively federal and have heretofore been collected in advance in three annual installments during the months of July, November and March of each fiscal year. The American Smelting & Refining Co. which owns extensive mines in the Velardena district of this State, paid taxes thereon directly to the Federal Government in Mexico City on July 10, 1913, to cover the first four months period, and on November 7, 1913, to cover the second four months period of the current fiscal year. Both of these payments were effected prior to the opening of the local Constitutionalist revenue office. As soon as the American Smelting & Refining Company were apprised of the establishment in Durango of such an office under the auspices of the Carranza Government, the necessary documents were forwarded to this Consulate in order that I might effect payment in their behalf for the third and last four months period of the fiscal year 1913–14.

In accordance with instructions received I personally tendered payment to the director of the local revenue office, Senor L. Aillaud, by whom it was refused on the grounds that the taxes covering the first two four-months periods have been paid to the Federal Government in Mexico City and therefore would not be recognized by the Carranza Government, hence the American Smelting & Refining Company would have to pay for the entire fiscal year. I pointed out to him that the former payments had been made prior to the opening of the tax office of the Carrancista Government and that the Company had demonstrated its good faith by desiring to pay the taxes here as soon as they had knowledge of the establishment of the local office. At my request he submitted the question by telegraph to his superior officer, Señor E. Perusquía, general director of taxes of the Carranza Government with offices at Ciudad Juarez, by whom the decision of the local director of taxes was fully sustained on practically the same grounds. There the matter rests at present.

Under the circumstances above outlined it neither seems fair nor just that the American company in question should be compelled to pay these taxes twice. As I have reason to believe that many American property owners in this district have effected payment of their taxes in Mexico City, either because the local revenue office was closed or as a matter of convenience, may I suggest that this phase of the tax question be taken up directly through the appropriate American consul with General Venustiano Carranza or his Secretary of the Treasury, in order that American property interests may be duly protected and American property owners may know exactly where they stand.

I have [etc.]

T. C. Hamm.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 812.512/238.

[Document 1210]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

No. 268.] Department of State,
Washington, April 23, 1914.

Sir: The Department encloses a copy of a despatch from the Consul at Durango, Mexico, relative to the opening of a local revenue and tax office of the Constitutionalist Central Government and the complications arising therefrom.

You are instructed to bring the matters contained in the Consul’s despatch to the attention of General Carranza and to say that the Department does not doubt that upon having these matters called to his attention he will at once issue orders to the appropriate authorities to desist from attempting to collect from American citizens in the State of Durango taxes, which, under the laws of Mexico being due to the Federal Government, such American citizens, prior to the establishment in Durango of tax offices of the Constitutionalist authorities, paid to the central administration at Mexico City. As General Carranza will understand, under the rules and principles of international law those citizens who made such payments should be regarded as completely relieved from any further obligation with respect to the taxes so paid.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/258.

[Document 1211]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

No. 467.] American Consulate,
Chihuahua, May 14, 1914

Sir: Having reference to the Department’s instruction No. 268 of April 23, 1914, which has just been received at this Consulate, I have the honor to report that I am making appropriate representations to General Carranza regarding the attempted second collection of mining taxes already paid the de facto Huerta Government through means of a note bearing even date with despatch. General Carranza is now reported at Durango, in the course of a visitation to the various state capitals in territory dominated by the Constitutionalists.

In the interest of American citizens generally who would be affected by the acceptance of the principle involved in the demand on the part of the Constitutionalist authorities for a repayment of taxes paid after the manner required by law to the Huerta Government, I have to express the hope that the Department will cause the Carranza Government to recede from its position in the case in hand and thus establish a precedent for the future protection of American citizens in the manner indicated. I may observe that the “pertenencia” tax on mining properties is in itself of small importance, being at the rate of six pesos per annum, payable in quadrimestral installments of two pesos each. The pertenencia is the unit of mining grants under the Mexican law and consists of a horizontal square measuring 10,000 square meters, or one hectare (2.471 acres). All mining taxes are collectible by the Federal Government, and these include, in addition to the fixed tax upon the superficies of a mining claim, a per centum of the value of the metal contents of ore extracted and another charge for the exportation of the smelted metal. The various taxes upon a mine and its products average, according to an estimate made by the undersigned, approximately 16% of the value of the total output. If it is permissible to collect the insignificant pertenencia tax, it must also, ad eundem, be permissible to collect the extraction and the exportation tax, which have been uniformly paid to the Huerta Government continuously to the present time in regions dominated by the present Federal authorities, the payment of which to the Constitutionalist authorities would constitute a hardship of great magnitude.

I may note, further, that many mining companies make it a habit to pay their pertenencia taxes, as well as the extraction tax, to the Federal Government a year in advance, the latter being possible under an arrangement known as an “iguala.” It is within the authority of the Treasury Department to receive such taxes, as well as the regular quadrimestral pertenencia taxes, at the National Treasury, rather than at the principal or branch mining agencies in each state.

I have [etc.]

Marion Letcher.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/268.

[Document 1212]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

No. 492.] American Consulate,
Chihuahua, May 29, 1914.

Sir: Having further reference to the Department’s instruction No. 268, of April 23, 1914, and to my reply thereto, despatch No. 467, of May 14, 1914, I have the honor to report that I am in receipt of a telegraphic reply to my representations to General Carranza on the subject of the demanded duplicate payment of mining taxes, of which reply the following is a translation: Referring to your unofficial note of the 14th instant directed to Señor Carranza on the subject of taxes upon mining pertenencias in Durango, I beg to inform you, in accordance with instructions of the First Chief, that orders have now been issued to the tax authorities to receive payments from the American Smelting and Refining Company, not to collect double quotas from foreign companies, and, in cases where a double payment has been collected from companies or persons, to return the amount of such second payments to the parties from whom they have been exacted. I communicate this with satisfaction for the information of His Excellency the Secretary of State.

Accept my distinguished consideration.

Fabela.

In view of the important bearing of this case upon the interests of American mining companies owning property in this country, copies of my note to General Carranza, which paraphrases the Department’s instruction No. 268 of April 23, 1914, and of General Carranza’s telegraphic reply of May 24, are forwarded herewith.

I have [etc.]

Marion Letcher.

[Inclosure 1.]

Consul Letcher to General Carranza.

American Consulate,
Chihuahua, May 14, 1914.

Sir: The Department of State of my Government has instructed me to bring to your attention certain conditions that have arisen in connection with the collection of pertenencia taxes by the mining agency at Durango, with the request that American citizens who are affected by the conditions complained of be relieved of the hardships described. The case that has been brought to the particular attention of the Department is as follows:

The American Smelting and Refining Company, which owns extensive mining properties at Velardeña, Durango, paid its pertenencia taxes due for the July period of the year 1913 directly to the Federal Government at Mexico City on July 10, 1913, and those due for the November period of the same year on November 7, 1913, to the same office. It appears that at the time the Constitutionalist authorities had opened no mining tax offices In the State of Durango and that such offices were established by your Government subsequently to the month of November. The mining tax office now having been established, the American Smelting and Refining Company made a tender of its quota of taxes for the March tercio through the American Consul at Durango, but this payment was refused by Señor L. Aillaud, Director of the Durango office, on the ground that taxes for the two preceding tercios which were paid to the Federal Government at Mexico City were illegally paid to the said Federal Government and must be duplicated to the Constitutionalist authorities before payment for the March, 1914, tercio could be receipted for. At the request of the American Consul at Durango the matter was referred in this stage to Senor E. Perusquia, general director of taxes for your Government, who thereupon sustained the subordinate office in its demand for a repayment of taxes paid to the Federal Government.

My Government instructs me to say that it trusts that you will understand, that under the rules and principles of international law payments of taxes made in the manner prescribed by law to a de facto government fully extinguish an individual’s obligations and that he becomes perforce exempt from further exactions, and that, in this sense, it does not doubt that you will issue orders to the appropriate authorities of Durango to desist from attempting to collect from American citizens throughout territory dominated by the Constitutionalists taxes already legally paid, to the de facto Huerta Government.

I am [etc.]

Marion Letcher.

[Inclosure 2.]

[Copy of Spanish original of reply to Inclosure 1, translation of which is contained in the covering despatch.]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/266.

[Document 1213]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, June 3, 1914, 2 p.m.

Official notices have been issued that all custom Charges for taxes, exportation Charges, oil production taxes and similar Charges must be paid in government offices in Mexican £old: that in lieu of Mexican gold American gold will be accepted for such charges at the rate of two for one.

Miller.

[Untitled] File No. 812.6363/91.

[Document 1214]

[Untitled]

Tampico, June 3, 1914, 8 p.m.

New rate of collecting oil production tax is great benefit to oil companies. The new decree is based on law of June 3, 1912, placing tax at 20 cents per ton, in Mexican gold, allowing exception of paying same in American gold which means New York exchange at rate of two for one. This is big reduction from rate of 75 cents, Mexican, charged by Federal Government. Respectfully request instructions relative advising American companies to pay same without protest. In connection with decree for payment oil and customs Charges and taxes, it said that bank currency issued prior to February 19th, 1913, recognized by Constitutionalists as valid but will not be accepted in payment of such Charges.

Up to present time no demands for loans or war taxes have been made upon American citizens oil companies.

Miller.

[Untitled] File No. 812.6363/92.

[Document 1215]

[Untitled]

Tampico, June 3, 1914, 8 p.m.

Since sending my June 3, 2 p.m., re new decree collection customs Charges, I have conferred with Sr. F. Villareal, Secretary Communications of Constitutionalists and he informs me that decree applies only to export Charges, bar Charges, and oil production taxes, and will not be applied to import duties. Rule is based on theory that all exports are sold abroad on gold basis.

Miller.

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller. File No. 812.6363/91.

[Document 1216]

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 15, 1914.

Your June 3, 8 p.m. In order to safeguard their possible future interests, American citizens should be advised to pay oil production taxes under protest.

Bryan.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/284.

[Document 1217]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, June 17, 1914.

Relative demands local Constitutional authorities based on instructions of Minister Hacienda F. Villareal that bar-taxes be paid in Mexican gold or United States gold at two for one which is practically demand for payment in United States gold as there is no Mexican gold available. One or two oil companies rely upon decree number twenty-one dated at Nogales, February 28, 1914, and signed by Venustiano Carranza, making it obligatory upon officials as well as the public to accept Constitutionalist bills. Have tendered such bills in payment of bar-taxes. Local officials have taken matter up with General Carranza.

Miller.

[Untitled] File No. 812.512/286.

[Document 1218]

[Untitled]

Tampico, June 20, 1914.

Referring to telegram June 17 relative to oil companies tendering payment of bar taxes to local authorities in Constitutionalist currency, basing such action upon decree No. 21, dated Nogales, February 28, 1914, now advise Department local authorities only accepted first payment tendered subject to instructions to be requested of Carranza, and now refuse to accept others and are demanding such payments to be made in gold.

Miller.

[Untitled] File No. 812.512/295.

[Document 1219]

[Untitled]

Tampico, June 25, 1914.

Referring previous correspondence, oil companies feel that demands local customs authorities that bar taxes be paid Mexican gold or American gold at two for one when rate of exchange is three for one is entirely unjust especially as decrees of April, 1913, and February, 1914, make Carrancista currency bills legal tender. This ruling increases bar tax fifty per cent. This bar tax legally does not belong to Government but to railroad company for repair of the bar. Local officials in effort to collect this tax in American currency at two for one rate may have to stop shipments from this port. Refuse to dispatch American vessel Northwestern today but finally agreed to dispatch vessel pending return head of customhouse. Respectfully suggest that question of arbitrarily forcing rate of exchange two for one and refusal to accept Carrancista currency be taken up with the leading authorities. Really amounts to confiscation of property.

Miller.

[Untitled] File No. 812.512/299.

[Document 1220]

[Untitled]

Tampico, June 26, 1914.

Referring my telegram June 25 relative demands local customs authorities that bar dues be paid in Mexican gold or in United States gold at two for one. Have to advise the Department that the bar dues is not a Government tax but a railway rate payable in Mexican currency established in 1910 while Pablo Macedo was simultaneously president of Aguila Company and National Railways, thus discriminating against then prospective but how actual shippers from Tampico, practically all of whom are American companies, favor of Aguila Company, British, which was then preparing to and now ships through submarine lines at Tuxpam free of all dues and Charges, Aguila Company thus now has advantage gained by that action of sixteen per cent, on gross price received from oil at well in market of world. It was also arranged for collection this railway bar due by Tampico customhouse; authorities believed to have no right to raise rate bar due even indirect manner as proceeds do not belong to Government but to National Railways for reimbursement cost of harbor work and upkeep of harbor under contract and all railway rates are by law fixed by railway management and approved by railway commission. Authorities will probably refuse to dispatch more ships unless bar dues have been paid in manner demanded.

Miller.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna. File No. 812,512/295.

[Document 1221]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 26, 1914, 5 p.m.

Consul, Tampico, reports that customs authorities are forcing oil companies to pay taxes Mexican gold, or American gold at two for one when exchange is three for one, and that they refuse to accept Carrancista currency bills although these made legal tender by decrees April 1913 and February 1914.

Bring to attention of Carranza and request that orders be given for relief from this manifestly unjust action.

Bryan.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/302.

[Document 1222]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, June 27, 1914.

Local authorities have been ordered to strictly enforce decree for collection oil production tax Mexican gold or in United States currency at rate of two for one. Most companies have paid, but some have not as they regard it unjust to arbitrarily enforce rate of exchange of two for one when prevailing rate about three for one. Orders have been received not to allow ships to be dispatched if production tax is not paid and same rules probably will be applied in cases of bar dues. Companies do not complain of amount of production tax which is rate provided by law under Madero administration instead of seventy-five cents rate by decree of General Huerta. They feel that it is unjust for authorities not to accept Constitutionalist currency or at least accept New York exchange at prevailing rate. Total of bar dues and production tax under present administration is seventy cents Mexico or thirty-five cents American currency. Under preceding administration was one dollar and twenty-five cents or about forty-two cents American currency but present procedure of fixing exchange rate is regarded as arbitrary and illegal and companies believe instead of ships being detained on account of non-payment of such Charges pending decision legality of same that some method should be adopted which will permit shipments to continue and at same time protect interests of both Government and shippers.

Miller.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 812.512/302.

[Document 1223]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 29, 1914.

Call on Consul General Hanna and ask to be shown Department’s June 26th, 5 p.m. regarding la barra taxes.

Represent to General Carranza in the strongest possible manner the injustice of these demands in refusing to accept Constitutionalist currency or at least accept New York exchange at prevailing rates.

Companies believe instead of ships being detained on account of non-payment such Charges pending decision, that some plan should be adopted which will permit shipments to continue, and at same time protect Government and shippers.

Bryan.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/307.

[Document 1224]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, June 29, 1914.

One large American oil company has contract made with Mexican Government in 1908 which provides, for certain considerations, that company will not have to pay any due or tax on exportation of its production. In 1910 bar due was provided for maintaining bar at mouth Panuco River. Company has always protested against payment this due and has had case pending in courts in Mexico City. Company protests also that it is exempt under its contract of 1908 from payment production tax. Company representative states that present authorities state they do not recognize contract with Government and litigation pending in regard to same and insist on payment these taxes and are refusing to allow company’s ship to load until same are paid. Several ships are now being held up for other companies account refused to pay bar tax, American gold. Companies are awaiting advice from Department.

Miller.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/318.

[Document 1225]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Saltillo, July 4, 1914.

In regard to the Department’s June 26, 5 p.m., referred to me, Villareal, Secretary of the Treasury, has directed port authorities Tampico to accept New York exchange at the prevailing gold rates and to facilitate movement of shipping in every manner.

Canova.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/317.

[Document 1226]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate General,
Monterey, July 5, 1914.

Very favorable answers have been received from the Secretary of Hacienda relative to my representations made to General Carranza in behalf of the Huasteca Oil Company, the matter of exchange, kind of money to be accepted, clearance of oil ships and American oil interests. I have telegraphed Consul Miller at Tampico.

Hanna.

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller. File No. 812512/318.

[Document 1227]

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 6, 1914.

Department’s representative at Saltillo telegraphs July 4 that Villareal, Secretary of Treasury, has directed port authorities Tampico accept New York exchange at prevailing gold rates and facilitate shipping in every possible manner.

In this connection Department refers you to Consul General Hanna’s telegram of July 5 to you, reporting favorable results of his representations relative to exchange, kind of money to be accepted, clearance of oil ships, and American oil interests.

Are Tampico banks now open? If not, how can shippers buy exchange, or what other arrangement can be made in settling with port authorities on the basis above stated?

Are port authorities observing Villareal’s direction and will their observance of it be a practical solution of the manner in which taxes or bar dues on oil may be paid, resulting in no discrimination in favor of oils delivered through Tuxpam as against oil delivered through Tampico?

Bryan.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/327.

[Document 1228]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, July 8, 1914.

Department’s July 6. Local authorities have not yet received order to accept New York exchange at prevailing rate. Same order should be sent to Tuxpam authorities as production tax in Panuco Topila fields must be paid in Tuxpam July 15th. As banks are not open will probably be difficult to determine prevailing rate of exchange. While this rule, if enforced, will not end all discrimination in favor of Tuxpam as against Tampico, it will reduce the amount of that discrimination as much as the difference between the prevailing rate of exchange and the arbitrary rate of two for one. There will be no further complaint if this ruling is fairly put into effect.

Miller.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna. File No. 812.512/327.

[Document 1229]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 10, 1914, 4 p.m.

Your July 5. On July 4 Canova telegraphed from Saltillo that Secretary of Hacienda had directed port authorities Tampico accept New York exchange at prevailing gold rate and to facilitate movement of shipping.

Consul Tampico telegraphs July 8 that local port authorities had not received orders said to have been issued by Secretary of Hacienda. He says the orders should also be issued to Tuxpam authorities, as production tax in Panuco-Topila fields must be paid in Tuxpam July 15. As banks are not open will probably be difficult to determine prevailing rate of exchange.

Point out to General Carranza the injustice of authorities declining to accept Constitutionalist currency, in view of decree number 21, dated February 28, 1914, and signed by Venustiano Carranza, making it obligatory upon officials as well as the public to accept Constitutionalist currency. Department understands this decree has never been repealed. Earnestly endeavor to arrange with Carranza for the acceptance of this currency in payment of the bar and other taxes. If banks at Tampico were open New York exchange could be conveniently arranged. As they are closed it is practically impossible.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller. File No. 812.512/327.

[Document 1230]

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 10, 1914.

Your July 8. Consul General Monterey has been instructed to take the matter up with General Carranza at once and urgently insist that immediate orders be sent to Tampico and Tuxpam authorities.

Is there not some responsible firm in Tampico carrying New York account through which exchange arrangements could be perfected to meet local requirements? In the absence of responsible commercial firm, could not some of the larger oil interests be induced to establish such an arrangement. In that event could not exchange rates be obtained from Mexico City or New York as necessity required?

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova. File No. 812.512/327.

[Document 1231]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 10, 1914.

Your July 4. Consul, Tampico, reports that local authorities have not yet received orders to accept New York exchange at prevailing rate. Confer with Hanna and request that such order be repeated at once and that it also be sent Tuxpam authorities since Consul states that production taxes in Panuco Topila fields must be paid in Tuxpam July 15.

Bryan.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/331.

[Document 1232]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Satillo, July 11, 1914.

Your July 10 referred to Hanna, Villareal being in Monterey. Office here assures me orders were sent to accept New York exchange at prevailing gold rates and it has telegraphed Villareal substance your message.

Canova.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/335.

[Document 1233]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, July 12, 1914.

Companies will have no difficulty to secure New York exchange, in fact all remittances to Tampico offices are by New York exchange but the difficulty may be to arrive at agreement with authorities as to what prevailing rate really is in local transactions. Rate of July 11 ranged from 325 to 352 but local rate may be governed somewhat by local conditions, production taxes must be paid by July 15. Probably would be fair to take the New York rate of July 13 on Carrancista currency, and have arrangements made to have said rate wired to local custom house and consulate said date and at stated intervals thereafter.

Miller.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/333.

[Document 1234]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate General,
Monterey, July 13, 1914.

Department’s July 10, my July 5. Have taken matter up with Secretary Finance Villareal, who informs me he has repeated his instructions to customs authorities at Tampico, Tuxpam, and other gulf ports, to accept New York exchange in lieu of Mexican gold at current rate of exchange, one for two. Informed me decree issued in March made export duties, bar, and other port dues payable in Mexican gold. I have informed Consul Miller, Tampico.

Secretary Finance Villareal expects continuing his headquarters in Monterey. General Carranza expected here soon.

Hanna.

The British Embassy to the Department of State. File No. 812.512/340.

[Document 1235]

The British Embassy to the Department of State.

memorandum.

With reference to the attempts of the port authorities at Tampico to enforce the payment of bar dues and production tax on oil in American gold, His Britannic Majesty’s Embassy has received a despatch dated June 28 from the British Consul at Tampico. He states that the oil companies and steamship agents have been refusing to pay the bar dues in American gold but have invariably tendered payment of same in Carrancista currency which the custom house authorities have refused to accept evidently with the intention of calling upon the bondsmen of the different steamship companies to pay the bar dues, etc., in American gold at the rate of two for one and, if the bondsmen refuse, their property would be confiscated. The demand for payment at the rate of two pesos for one can only be considered in the light of a forced contribution.

The custom house authorities are now refusing to clear all steamers from Tampico until the steamship agents pay these bar dues in American gold.

If the action of the port authorities is recognised by the foreign companies as being legal it will mean that not only bar dues but all other port Charges, State and Federal taxes will probably be collected in the same manner.

It appears that at the present time the only export from Tampico is that of crude oil and the sudden increase in Charges connected with the exportation of oil will seriously cripple this important industry in which American as well as British interests are extensively engaged.

The financial difficulties under which all foreign companies are operating in the district of Tampico, combined with the uncertainty of never knowing from day to day what further taxes may be imposed on the exportation of oil, render it almost impossible for any contracts to be made ahead.

In the opinion of His Majesty’s Embassy the state of affairs described above urgently calls for redress. The port authorities are insisting on bar dues being paid in American gold instead of in Mexican or Constitutionalist currency although the latter has been forced into circulation and persons refusing to accept it are punished by fines and imprisonment. Apart from the injury to foreign commerce these methods can not fail seriously to impair the credit of the Constitutionalists and His Majesty’s Government hope that the United States Government will do all they can to induce the Constitutionalists to withdraw the demand for payment in American gold and treat the foreign trading interests fairly and properly.

British Embassy,
Washington , July 13, 1914.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/344.

[Document 1236]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, July 14, 1914.

Department’s July 6, relative collection bar and production taxes in gold, following telegram has this day been received from Consul General Hanna, Monterey: Relative port Charges exchange and points in your telegrams to Department, have taken matter up again and Secretary Hacienda Villareal says he has repeated his instructions to custom authorities at Tampico and other gulf ports to accept New York exchange in lieu of Mexican gold at current rate, two for one, informed me decree issued in March made export duties bar and other port duties payable in Mexican gold.

Also following telegram from Hanna: Your telegram this date, production taxes according to statement finance Secretary Villareal are payable Mexican gold, Conformity with decree issued in March, Mexican gold is worth two for one and to facilitate payment of these taxes Secretary has instructed that same may be gain [paid?] in New York exchange at same time, that is, two for one. The Secretary called attention to fact that neither constitutionalist currency nor bank bills are acceptable for export duties, bar dues, production taxes etc. This is the best that can be done now.

From above telegram it is apparent that authorities have not issued instructions referred to in Department’s telegram to accept New York exchange at prevailing rates for currency instead of the arbitrary rate of two for one which is the real point in controversy. Taxes must be paid July 15.

Miller.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna. File No. 812.512/333.

[Document 1237]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 15, 1912.

Your July 13. You say instructions have been sent to Gulf port authorities to accept New York exchange in lieu of Mexican gold at current rate of exchange, one for two.

Department does not understand what you mean by one for two, as current rate of exchange is more like one for three. Please explain.

Will not General Carranza arrange that bar and other taxes may be paid in Constitutionalist currency?

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 812.512/348a.

[Document 1238]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 15, 1914.

Department granted Consul Tampico leave beginning July 13. Ascertain if he has left his post. If so you are instructed to accompany General Carranza to Tampico. On arrival there inform yourself fully from consulate files regarding bar, production and export taxes, and endeavor to agree upon some practical basis for payment of these charges. Authorities first demanded gold on basis of two for one, but later agreed to accept New York exchange at current rate. The difficulty is in determining rate of exchange, as banks in Tampico all closed.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller. File No. 812.512/335.

[Document 1239]

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 16, 1914.

Your July 12. Exchange quotes in New York July 11, 3225, July 13, 32, July 14th, 3150. Department can obtain exchange rate from New York and telegraph it at regular intervals. How often would you suggest? Will port authorities accept rate thus quoted?

Bryan.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/349.

[Document 1240]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate General,
Monterey, July 16, 1914.

Department’s July 15. The Secretary of Finance informs me again that production taxes, etc., are payable in Mexican gold coin, according to decree of March; that neither bank bills nor silver are acceptable for such export duties and production taxes and that status of the so-called ordinary peso is not being considered in this connection. What I mean by one for two is that Mexican gold coin is required and that the Mexican gold peso is quoted in the United States as being worth forty-nine cents and a fraction as compared with the American dollar, which is practically one for two or one American dollar New York exchange for two Mexican gold pesos, but the Secretary says in lieu of Mexican gold New York exchange will be accepted at the Mexican gold rate if such is more convenient to producers. It seems he is within his rights in this matter and by referring to back of our national bank notes we are reminded that the United States does not accept all kinds of money for similar duties and taxes.

I also understand that the Constitutionalists have foreign obligations which have to be met in gold or its equivalent.

Hanna.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/350.

[Document 1241]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, July 17, 1914.

Department’s July 16. Authorities absolutely refuse accept any rate except two for one which they claim is prevailing rate for Mexican gold. Absolutely no concessions have been made in response to action of Department of State in matter.

Miller.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/351.

[Document 1242]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Saltillo, July 18, 1914.

Your July 15. Consul Miller is still at his post. After conference with Secretary of Finance this afternoon and with reference to Consul General Hanna’s July 16, matter of payment of export duties at Tampico appears to reduce to this: The basis of charge is the Mexican gold peso. Constitutionalist claim that it is only fair that products sold for gold should pay their taxes in gold, further they claim that they are justified in limiting the extent to which their money shall be used as legal tender, if Mexican gold is not available New York exchange which is thought to be easily obtainable in Tampico will be accepted as a convenience. Those who need it must make their own arrangements for it. If they buy it with Constitutionalist or other money they must pay what the sellers demand.

Silliman.

The Department of State to the British Embassy. File No. 812.512/340.

[Document 1243]

The Department of State to the British Embassy.

memorandum.

Referring to the memorandum, dated July 13, 1914, from His Britannic Majesty’s Embassy, in regard to the attempt of the port authorities at Tampico to enforce payment of bar dues and production tax on oil in American gold, the Department of State has the honor to inform His Britannic Majesty’s Embassy of the receipt of a telegram from the American Consul General at Monterey, in response to the Department’s telegram on the subject of July 15.

The Consul General reports that he is informed by the Secretary of Finance that production taxes, etc., are payable in Mexican gold coin, according to the decree of March; that neither bank bills nor silver are acceptable for such export duties and production taxes; and that the status of the so-called ordinary peso is not being considered in this connection. The Consul General points out that the Mexican gold peso is quoted in the United States as being worth forty-nine cents and a fraction as compared with the American dollar, which is practically one for two or one American dollar, New York exchange, for two Mexican gold pesos; but the Secretary of Finance says that in lieu of Mexican gold New York exchange will be accepted at the Mexican gold rate, if such is more convenient to producers.

The Consul General adds that he also understands that the Constitutionalists have foreign obligations which have to be met in gold or its equivalent.

Department of State,
Washington , July 22, 1914.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/372.

[Document 1244]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, July 27, 1914.

Decrees No. 30 and 31 dated Monterey July 20 have just been published in Tampico. These decrees provide for increase in oil production tax from twenty cents Mexican gold per ton to sixty cents Mexican gold per ton, or payable in New York exchange at rate of two for one. Referring all recent correspondence and telegrams re oil industry, this is a serious increase in taxation especially taking into consideration low price crude oil in States.

Miller.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/380.

[Document 1245]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, July 30, 1914.

Colonel Nafarrate, chief military official in Tampico, called on this office this evening and advised that all the business houses in Tampico would be forced to pay a war tax regardless of nationality. He laid stress on the fact that it was the business that was being taxed and not the owners of the business. I requested that he give the list of American and Spanish firms and the amounts assessed before trying to collect same which he agreed to do. He also agreed to allow me seventy-two hours in which to place the matter before the Department for instructions before he would force the payment. Most of the firms have expressed their willingness to abide by the advice of this office regard to payment, will advise Department fully as soon as lists are received.

Bevan.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan. File No. 812.512/380.

[Document 1246]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 1, 1914.

Advise the Department fully of the amount and character of war tax as soon as lists are received, and to what extent American interests are affected, and advise against any tax which is unreasonable or excessive. Department will advise you upon receipt of necessary information.

Bryan.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/381.

[Document 1247]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, August 1, 1914.

List referred to in my July 30 was received today. Nine American companies were assessed for 26,500 pesos and 32 Spanish companies for 73,000 pesos. This office referred Colonel Nafarrate to Governor Caballero’s communication102 and requested written statement from him advising of Government change of policy regarding forced loans from foreigners since receipt of said letter. There are over 100 American companies in this district, only nine appear on list, none of them big oil companies. If precedent is established and Americans are compelled to pay forced loans remaining ninety per cent will surely be assessed later on, which will result in the closing down of the large majority of American companies operating here. Will advise Department promptly result of my last communication to Nafarrate.

Bevan.

102 See telegram of June 5, 1914, from Consul Miller, printed under Forced Loans, p. 776 [Pg. 776 includes portions of Doc. 1317, Doc. 1318, and Doc. 1319].

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan. File No. 812.512/381.

[Document 1248]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 4, 1914.

Your August 1. Inform Department at once of the source of authority for levy of war tax, the per cent of the tax assessed, giving the basis of the levy and the total amount of the property of American companies on which levy is made, what reasons, if any, there are for selecting the particular nine companies, and the probable effect upon them. This Government cannot consent to the levy of a war tax which is discriminatory or which cannot be upheld as reasonable. Advise Nafarrate that Department will communicate with General Carranza upon this subject and point out to Nafarrate the personal responsibility which he will assume if he attempts to enforce the tax until the matters involved have been adjusted.

Bryan.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/387.

[Document 1249]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, August 6, 1914.

Your August 4. Instruction complied with. Following reply from Nafarrate this afternoon: Our intentions have been and shall be to give a government character to every one of our operations, therefore you will see that in this case it has never been our intention to solicit any forced loan but as a fact it is treated as a war tax upon the general commerce of this port and not as a demand for loans from nationals or foreigners etc.

This office requested to know why arbitrary list discriminating against other companies have been selected. He advised that several companies had made voluntary contributions and were omitted for this reason. This office then advised him that the measure was unjust and discriminatory and requested an extension of time before attempting to collect from companies which was granted. Companies named on list have advised this office that they will be forced to close down if order is carried out.

Bevan.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 812.512/387.

[Document 1250]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 8, 1914.

Following was telegraphed to Consul, Tampico, on August 4: [Quotes telegram of August 4, 1914, to Vice Consul Bevan.]

Consul has replied as follows: [Quotes telegram of August 6, 1914, from Vice Consul Bevan.]

Bring this matter most forcibly to General Carranza’s attention and urge that the decrees providing for unjust levies of taxes at Tampico be withdrawn, as they appear to be excessive and discriminatory and will result in closing down industrial institutions and thus be injurious to the welfare of Mexico. Request him to telegraph adequate order to Nafarrate,

Bryan.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/394.

[Document 1251]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Teoloyucan, August 12, 1914.

Department’s August 8. General Carranza is without advices in this matter up to this time. He has asked authorities at Tampico for information and explanation.

Silliman.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/392.

[Document 1252]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, August 13, 1914.

Several American firms were notified verbally this morning that war contributions would have to be paid within twenty-four hours. Nafarrate is out of town and subordinate is in Chargé. Subordinate agrees not to take any action until return of Nafarrate tomorrow. Same discriminatory list is being used. Spanish firms that have already made payments have been ordered to pay again double what they paid first time. American firms will likewise have no guarantee against same treatment should they make any payments. Bather than pay companies will close up and have requested that consular seal placed on their doors. Respectfully request instructions.

Bevan.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 812.512/392.

[Document 1253]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 15, 1914.

Refer to Department’s August 8 sent to Saltillo, regarding taxes imposed upon American firms at Tampico by General Nafarrate. Have you brought this matter to attention of General Carranza? If not do so at once, and insist that he immediately telegraph General Nafarrate to withdraw his demands, as taxes appear to be excessive and discriminatory, and if enforced will result in closing down these firms.

The Consul at Tampico has been instructed to advise American firms of Department’s attitude regarding payment of these taxes.

W. J. Bryan.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/396.

[Document 1254]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams—Extract.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, August 15, 1914.

Following advice this office American firms have not paid tax and so far no forceful measures have been adopted by Nafarrate, Several Spanish firms have paid. Clerks of other Spanish firms who refused to pay are now in jail for not making payments.

Bevan.

[Untitled] File No. 812.512/400.

[Document 1255]

[Untitled]

Tampico, August 17, 1914, 7 p.m.

Referring my August 15. Nafarrate has referred matter of war contribution to Governor Caballero and will take no further action relative to collection same pending instructions from his superior officer.

Bevan.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/403.

[Document 1256]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Mexico City, August 19, 1914

Having received various inquiries from American citizens regarding payment of mining taxes in Mexico I obtained the following instructions from Sr. Ignacio Bonillas, Acting Secretary: For payment of mining tax address Director General del Timbre, Mexico City, giving name of mine, number of pertenencias, location of mine in municipality, district, partido or canton, and state, name of party to whom title was issued, name of present owner, time for which the tax is due with the understanding that no payment made to officer of the Huerta Government since March 1st, 1913, is valid; if the last boleta is sent it will facilitate matters; if not give number of the title as well as the number of registry of the same. The tax is six pesos per pertenencia or fraction thereof per year payable every third of a year.

Silliman.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 812.512/403.

[Document 1257]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 22, 1914

Your August 19. Bring to attention of General Carranza following language in quoted instructions from Señor Bonillas: With the understanding that no payment made to officer of the Huerta Government since March 1st, 1913, is valid.

and state that the Department assumes that this apparent disregard of the right of American citizens and other foreigners, under the principles international law, to pay taxes to persons exercising de facto authority does not have General Carrana’s concurrence and that upon having the matter called to his attention he will take appropriate action.

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 812.512/412.

[Document 1258]

The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 27, 1914.

217. Department informed that demand has been made upon American Mining and Milling Company, owning Siglo XX, Dolores, Edwin E, Harriet M, mines, and Corwin and Green Consolidated Mining and Milling Company, owning Esperanza, Meliza and Ana Maria, mines; all located in La Luz Mineral District, Guanajuato, for repayment of taxes already paid by them to agents of Huerta administration.

Please bring to attention of General Carranza and request the issuance of orders against the exaction from these American corporations of taxes which they have already paid to persons exercising de facto authority. Since time limit for payment demanded expires August 31, orders in question should be issued immediately.

W. J. Bryan.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/415.

[Document 1259]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Mexico City, August 29, 1914.

Department’s August 22, regarding payment of mining taxes in Mexico Department’s objection is sustained, exception being made of cases in which payments were made to Huerta officials when they could have been made to Constitutionalist authorities in territory occupied by the Constitutionalists. For instance taxes on Sonora properties paid to Huerta authorities in Mexico City would not be considered valid.

Silliman.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 812.512/415.

[Document 1260]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 2, 1914.

Your August 29. Say to Carranza that this Government cannot consent to exception referred to but must insist that payment of taxes already paid by American citizens to persons exercising de facto authority in Mexico be not again exacted. In view of recent disturbed conditions in Mexico rendering it well-nigh impossible for Americans to determine what authorities were in control in certain sections at given times, and since by Mexican law taxes on mining property are payable to Federal Government, American citizens should not be penalized for having paid taxes to Huerta administration. Under principles of international law they were entitled to make such payments.

Bryan.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/437.

[Document 1261]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Mexico City, September 18, 1914.

In a very satisfactory interview this afternoon with Ernesto Perusquia, Director General of Stamp Tax Department, he stated that all questions regarding payment of mining and other taxes by foreigners will be equitably adjusted at the general stamp office in this city. Payments for the entire Republic may be made here until further notice. The general office will make proper explanation to the local offices. Correspondence with the general office is recommended to all persons interested. The proper address is Direccion General del Timbre, City of Mexico.

Silliman.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/468.

[Document 1262]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

No. 52.] Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, October 6, 1914.

Sir: Referring to your telegraphic communication 217 of August 27 last, relative to the American Mining and Milling Company of Guanajuato, I have the honor to inform you, so that the company in question be advised, that the Foreign Office on the date of October 1st, has been pleased to advise me that proper orders were issued to the collectors of taxes at Guanajuato, that no new payment shall be made on their properties, including Siglo XX, Dolores, Edwin E. Harriet, Corwin and Green, and those of the Consolidated Mining and Milling Co., known as Meliza and Ana Maria.

With assurances [etc.]

J. M. Cardoso de Oliveira.

Forced loans imposed on American citizensForced loans imposed on American citizens

[1263] The Secretary of State to Consul Hamm.

Department of State, Washington, May 12, 1913.

File No. 313.115/3.

[1264] Consul Schmutz to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Aguascalientes, June 12, 1913.

File No. 812.00/7910.

[1265] The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, July 21, 1913.

File No. 812.00/8013.

[1266] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihuahua, August 17, 1913.

File No. 812.00/8448.

[1267] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, August 20, 1913.

File No. 812.00/8448.

[1268] Vice Consul Blocker to the Secretary of State.

J American Consulate, Ciudad Porfirio Diaz, August 22, 1913.

File No. 312.115/9.

[1269] Mr. E. C. Bryan to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, August 23, 1913.

File No. 312.11/2070.

[1270] The Secretary of State to Mr. E. C. Bryan.

Department of State, Washington, August 23, 1913.

File No. 312.11/2070.

[1271] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, September 18, 1913.

File No. 812.00/8924.

[1272] The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

Department of State, Washington, September 24, 1913.

File No. 312.115/12.

[1273] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City (undated ; received October 1, 1913).

File No. 812.00/9031.

[1274] Consul Alger to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Mazatlan, October 6, 1913.

File No. 312.115/15.

[1275] The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Alger.

Department of State, Washington, October 8, 1913.

File No. 312.115/15.

[1276] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Monterey, October 19, 1913.

File No. 812.00/9313.

[1277] The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

Department of State, Washington, October 24, 1913.

File No. 312.115/17.

[1278] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Monterey, November 17, 1913.

File No. 312.115/19.

[1279] [Untitled]

American Consulate General, Monterey, November 18, 1913.

File No. 312.115/20.

[1280] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, November 19, 1913.

File No. 312.115/22.

[1281] [Untitled]

American Consulate, Tampico, November 20, 1913.

File No. 312.41/55.

[1282] The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

Department of State, Washington, November 21, 1913.

File No. 312.115/19.

[1283] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich.

Department of State, Washington, November 22, 1913.

File No. 312.115/21.

[1284] The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

Department of State, Washington, November 25, 1913.

File No. 312.115/23.

[1285] Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Nogales, November 25, 1913.

File No. 312.115/24.

[1286] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, December 6, 1913.

File No. 812.512/137.

[1287] The Secretary of State to chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, December 8, 1913.

File No. 812.512/137.

[1288] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, December 12, 1913.

File No. 312.115/31.

[1289] Consular Agent Taylor to the Secretary of State.

Guaymas (undated ; received December 12, 1913).

File No. 312.115/32.

[1290] The Secretary of State to Consular Agent Taylor.

Department of State, Washington, December 13, 1913.

File No. 312.115/32.

[1291] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, December 15, 1913.

File No. 312.115/33.

[1292] Vice Consul Guyant to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Ensenada, January 8, 1914.

File No. 812.00/10476.

[1293] The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Guyant.

Department of State, Washington, January 9, 1914.

File No. 312.115/41.

[1294] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, January 9, 1914.

File No. 312.115/42.

[1295] Consul Edwards to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Acapulco, January 12, 1914.

File No. 812.00/10533.

[1296] Vice Consul Davis to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Guadalajara (undated ; received January 14, 1914).

File No. 312.115/43.

[1297] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, January 14, 1914.

File No. 312.115/44.

[1298] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Davis.

Department of State, Washington, January 15, 1914,

File No. 312.115/43.

[1299] Vice Consul Stadden to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Manzanillo, January 19, 1914.

File No. 812.00/10612.

[1300] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, January 20, 1914.

File No. 812.00/10618.

[1301] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Stadden.

Department of State, Washington, January 21, 1914.

File No. 312.115/46.

[1302] The Secretary of State to chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, January 21, 1914.

File No. 312.115/47.

[1303] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, January 22, 1914.

File No. 312.115/48.

[1304] The Secretary of State to chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, January 24, 1914.

File No. 312.115/48.

[1305] Consul Gracey to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Progreso, January 24, 1914.

File No. 312.115/55.

[1306] The Secretary of State to Consul General Shanklin.

Department of State, Washington, January 30, 1914.

File No. 312.115/50.

[1307] The Secretary of State to Consul Hostetter.

Department of State, Washington, February 6, 1914.

File No. 312.115/59.

[1308] The Secretary of State to Consular Agent Lewis.

Department of State, Washington, February 27, 1914.

File No. 312.115/66a.

[1309] The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

Department of State, Washington, March 2, 1914.

File No. 312.115/49.

[1310] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, March 4, 1914.

File No. 312.115/69.

[1311] Consular Agent Lewis to the Secretary of State.

Los Mochis (undated ; received March 5, 1914).

File No. 312.115/67.

[1312] The Secretary of State to Consul Hostetter.

Department of State, Washington, March 13, 1914.

File No. 312.115/73.

[1313] Consul Hostetter to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Hermosillo, March 14, 1914.

File No. 312.115/75.

[1314] [Untitled]

American Consulate, Hermosillo, March 19, 1914.

File No. 312.115/76.

[1315] The Secretary of State to Consul Hostetter.

Department of State, Washington, April 9, 1914.

File No. 312.115/79.

[1316] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, May 16, 1914.

File No. 312.115/79A.

[1317] The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

Department of State, Washington, May 16, 1914.

File No. 312.115/79b.

[1318] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, June 5, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 312.115/85.

[1319] [Untitled]

American Consulate, Tampico, June 5, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 812.6363/105.

[1320] The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

Department of State, Washington, June 10, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 812.6363/105.

[1321] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, June 12, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 812.6363/104.

[1322] [Untitled]

American Consulate, Tampico, June 12, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 812.6363/107.

[1323] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Davis.

Department of State, Washington, August 29, 1914.

File No. 312.115/93.

[1324] Vice Consul Davis to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Guadalajara, September 10, 1914.

File No. 312.115/95.

[1325] Vice and Deputy Consul Germon to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Progreso, October 1, 1914.

File No. 312.115/99.

[1326] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Davis.

Department of State, Washington, October 8, 1914.

File No. 312.115/95.

[1327] Vice Consul Davis to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Guadalajara, October 17, 1914.

File No. 312.115/100.

[1328] The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City.

Department of State, Washington, October 19, 1914.

File No. 312.115/100.

[1329] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Young.

Department of State, Washington, October 22, 1914.

File No. 312.115/99.

[1330] Vice Consul Davis to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Guadalajara (undated ; received November 5, 1914).

File No. 312.115/103.

[1331] [Untitled]

American Consulate, Guadalajara, November 9, 1914.

File No. 312.115/106.

[1332] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, December 12, 1914.

File No. 312.115/110.

[1333] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, December 15, 1914.

File No. 312.115/108.

[1334] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, December 19, 1914.

File No. 312.115/111.

[1335] The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

Department of State, Washington, December 24, 1914.

File No. 312.115/110.

The Secretary of State to Consul Hamm. File No. 313.115/3.

[Document 1263]

The Secretary of State to Consul Hamm.

No. 103.] Department of State,
Washington, May 12, 1913.

Sir: The Department has received a communication, dated May 5, 1913, from Mr. Frank L. Peckham, attorney at law, of Washington, D. C, saying that the San Luis Mining Company, one of the properties owned by Mrs. Phoebe A. Hearst, having headquarters at Socavon, District of San Dimas, Durango, Mexico, has been forced to contribute the sum of $2,500, Mexican, to the so-called Constitutionalists in that district.

You are instructed to protest unofficially against the action of the so-called Constitutionalists to the Constitutionalist authorities.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

Consul Schmutz to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/7910.

[Document 1264]

Consul Schmutz to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

American Consulate,
Aguascalientes, June 12, 1913.

Sir: I have the honor to report that I left to [go to] the city of Zacatecas on the 10th instant to inquire into the conditions of the American and other foreign residents in that city.* * *

Pánfilo Natera levied a forced loan on the commercial and financial houses amounting to a total of $110,000.00 Mexican Cy. and the following are a few of the largest contributors: The National Bank of Mexico $9, 000. 00

Bank of Zacatecas 5, 000. 00

El Bote Mining Company (English) 5, 000. 00

Magistral Mine Company (American) 4, 000. 00

Parroquia 2, 000. 00

Fresnillo Mining Company (American) 800. 00

Gualterio C. Palmer (English) 500. 00

I have [etc.]

Gaston Schmutz.

The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 812.00/8013.

[Document 1265]

The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

No. 1375.] Department of State,
Washington, July 21, 1913.

Sir: I enclose herewith a copy of a despatch from the Consul at San Luis Potosi, in regard to political conditions in the city and state of San Luis Potosi.

You will bring to the attention of the appropriate authorities the outrages upon American citizens committed by revolutionists in the San Luis Potosi Consular district, and urgently request that adequate protection be afforded to American lives and property in that section.

I am [etc.]

J. B. Moore.

[Inclosure—Extract.]

Consul Bonney to the Secretary of State.

No. 96.] American Consulate,
San Lais Potosí, June 23, 1913.

Sir: I have the honor to report that since June 1, 1913, the injury to American interests has been greater than at any time before.

Case of Mexican Crude Rubber Company.

On June 4, 1913, a band of 217 rebels under Captain Luis Gutierrez and Roberto Rivas arrived in Cedral. They levied a forced loan of 1,000 pesos upon the Mexican Crude Rubber Company. To avoid further levies and annoyances the company closed its plant and suspended operations. The manager, Mr. R. C. Bean, was robbed on his way from Cedral to San Luis Potosi. The territory around Cedral has been held by rebels since April 28, 1913.

Case of Cía. Metalúrgica Nacional.

After the above occurrence the towns of Cedral and Matehuala were cut off from communication with this capital for some time. During that interval the rebels levied a forced loan upon the Cia. Metalurgica Nacional (a Guggenheim property), the amount being understood to be 5,000 pesos. A loan of 500 pesos was also forced from the Matehuala agency of the Waters Pierce Oil Company.

Case of Tiro General Mine.

On June 14, 1913, a band of rebels entered Charcas, San Luis Potosi; the small garrison of Federal troops retired. A loan was forced from the Tiro General Mine (property of the American Smelting and Refining Company). The amount paid is not known to me at this time, the manager having reported simply that the money was extorted.

Case of J. A. Cunningham, Jr.

On June 12, 1913, a small number of bandits entered the property of the Cunningham Investment Company near Ciudad del Maiz, San Luis Potosi, and threatened Mr. J. A. Cunningham, Jr., with death. They offered to compromise for 2,000 pesos. While the money was being collected, a large band of rebels, said to number 300, under General J. A. Castro, entered the plantation and frustrated the robbery, immediately executing two of the bandits. General J. A. Castro and his company represent what was formerly the 21st Corps of Rurales, known as Coahuila Volunteers, who revolted shortly after the existing Government was proclaimed. Mr. J. A. Cunningham is now in the City of San Luis Potosi and his property, with a large amount of finished sugar is in danger of Ciudad del Maiz.

Case of Tamasopo Sugar Company.

I am informed that on June 16, 1913, a band of rebels, led by Belen Carrillon entered, this property and took horses and other property besides 500 pesos in money. No detailed report has been received.

Case of E. C. Hull, Rascon, S. L. P.

On June 21, 1913, a group of 29 rebels entered the property of the Rascon Manufacturing and Development Company at Rascon, San Luis Potosi, demanding horses, stock, arms, ammunition and money. I am informed by wire from one of the employees that the rebels (or bandits) carried away with them the American Manager, Mr. E. C. Hull. Mr. Hull was later released. I immediately visited the Military Commandant of this district, General Gustave A. Maas, and he has issued orders for a detachment of troops to reach Rascon in a few hours and agrees to act with discretion for the protection of Mr. Hull and the Rascon property. A few days ago, at Mr. Hull’s request, I asked the local officer in charge of the Railroad guard for 20 soldiers to guard the Rascon property. If that request had been quickly granted the attack on Rascon would have been avoided.

The above are all American properties. In all the cases named I had previously demanded protection, first from the Governor and then from the highest military officer in the district. The reply from the Governor has been, for seven weeks past, that it was a physical impossibility to protect points and property outside this city. I have advised Americans throughout the district that they must not rely upon federal protection.

I have [etc.],

Wilbert L. Bonney.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/8448.

[Document 1266]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Consulate,
Chihuahua, August 17, 1913.

Acting Consular Agent, Parral, reports that rebels are threatening to force loan from Americans and that situation there is growing most unsatisfactory.

Letcher.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 812.00/8448.

[Document 1267]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 20, 1913.

Your August 17. Instruct Agent, Parral, if rebels attempt to extort forced loans from Americans to make unofficial and urgent protest against such action and if protest unavailing, to instruct Americans in question to pay under protest, making such protest a matter of record and securing receipts if possible.

Bryan.

Vice Consul Blocker to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/9.

[Document 1268]

Vice Consul Blocker to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

J American Consulate,
Ciudad Porfirio Diaz, August 22, 1913.

Have been informed that Jesus Carranza demands by four p.m. to-day $50,000 gold from Agujita Mining Company. Controlling interests is foreign. Have protested but with small success.

W. P. Blocker.

Mr. E. C. Bryan to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.11/2070.

[Document 1269]

Mr. E. C. Bryan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

El Paso, August 23, 1913.

Am fully conversant situation Parral, Mexico, also Santa Barbara. Leaders of occupying forces Manuel Chao and Monclova Herrera made demand August 10 for 10,000 pesos, not on Long and Parral and Durango Railroad alone, all foreign interests were included, and paid 6,500 pesos immediately, balance unpaid. Last advices, 14th, Chao also demanded all mining interests keep operating under threat turn men loose in mines and take ores. Also if money not paid would not be responsible for acts of men in his forces, meaning looting and destroying property. Pleased to deliver any special instructions American Consular Agent Parral also American residents and Chao.

E. C. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Mr. E. C. Bryan. File No. 312.11/2070.

[Document 1270]

The Secretary of State to Mr. E. C. Bryan.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 23, 1913.

Thank you for the offer. Say to the commander of troops in the Parral district that he can not relieve himself from responsibility for acts of men under him. He will be held personally responsible for whatever injury his soldiers inflict upon Americans or other foreigners. It might be well to deliver this message in the presence of two witnesses. Report names of commanders who received the message, their replies textually and the names of witnesses who accompanied you.

W. J. Bryan.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/8924.

[Document 1271]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, September 18, 1913.

Private information not confirmed indicates Mexican Government gathering information for the purpose of compelling foreign corporations as well as native corporations to make forced loans to Mexican Government in the form of purchase of bonds to relieve Government’s financial condition.

Miller.

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller. File No. 312.115/12.

[Document 1272]

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 24, 1913.

Your September 18. Make earnest protest in case any attempt is made to extort forced loans from American citizens. Keep the Department informed on the subject.

Bryan.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/9031.

[Document 1273]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City (undated ; received October 1, 1913).

523.* * * A movement is on foot to raise a loan from the great petroleum interests under threat of the national expropriation of all petroleum bearing lands within the United Mexican States.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

Consul Alger to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/15.

[Document 1274]

Consul Alger to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Consulate,
Mazatlan, October 6, 1913.

Buelna has demanded eight thousand dollars from Rosario Mining Company as a loan. They will have to pay or close down which means flooding of mine and a loss of half a million dollars.

Alger.

The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Alger. File No. 312.115/15.

[Document 1275]

The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Alger.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 8, 1913.

Your October 6th. Informally protest to Riveros against forced loan from Rosario Mining Company.

Moore.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/9313.

[Document 1276]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Consulate General,
Monterey, October 19, 1913.

Forced loan by the Federals is expected here. British Consul just now called and we shall recommend foreigners refusing payment.

Hanna.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna. File No. 312.115/17.

[Document 1277]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 24, 1913.

In event expectations of forced loan are realized, telegraph Department details thereof before recommending foreigners to refuse payment.

Bryan.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/19.

[Document 1278]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Consulate General,
Monterey, November 17, 1913.

An American manager of an American company received a demand from Federal military officers to send at once 10,000 Mexican dollars to the military headquarters. I am most decidedly opposed to pay such forced loans. We should remain neutral. If we pay the Federals, we will be compelled to pay the rebels later on. Is my position right? Please inform me.

Hanna.

[Untitled] File No. 312.115/20.

[Document 1279]

[Untitled]

American Consulate General,
Monterey, November 18, 1913.

Referring to my November 17. I have been informed by several Americans that they have been ordered to report to the Governor, to pay several thousand dollars each. On the basis of Department’s instructions to Consular service in Mexico, I shall earnestly protest against Americans being called to pay forced loans.

Hanna.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/22.

[Document 1280]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, November 19, 1913.

General Cándido Aguilar to-day sent communication to Huasteca Petroleum Company placing company war tax at $100,000. Complete copy this second demand being forwarded by mail. As yet have received no answer to letter sent to General Aguilar but copy issued was read to-day over telephone to his representative at Juan Casiano when he presented these second demands.

Miller.

[Untitled] File No. 312.41/55.

[Document 1281]

[Untitled]

American Consulate,
Tampico, November 20, 1913.

Petroleum Company has permission to resume operations until Monday night pending conclusion of negotiations. General Aguilar sent telegraphic reply to my letter and is following same with full reply by mail. States that they have given and will give guarantees to foreign companies. I have advised companies not to pay any of war tax demands. Necessary remain neutral but in last resort managers these companies may be compelled to pay sums demanded in preference to having valuable wells and storage destroyed. Respectfully request specific instructions on this point for benefit of companies.

Miller.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna. File No. 312.115/19.

[Document 1282]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 21, 1913.

Your November 17 and November 18. Make earnest protest against attempt to extort forced loans from American citizens. However, see Department’s October 24.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich. File No. 312.115/21.

[Document 1283]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 22, 1913.

Mexican Petroleum Company and Huasteca Petroleum Company, Casiano, seventy miles south of Tampico, report that General Aguilar has demanded $100,000 from them.

Bring to attention of Carranza and informally request him to issue orders to Aguilar to withdraw this demand and cease molesting these American companies.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller. File No. 312.115/23.

[Document 1284]

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 25, 1913.

Your November 20. You will continue to make earnest protest against attempts to extort forced loans from foreigners. Advise persons who may be compelled to comply with demands for money to obtain receipts for amounts paid. Report to Department all such cases coming to your attention.

Bryan.

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/24.

[Document 1285]

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Nogales, November 25, 1913.

Referring Department’s November 22. Carranza’s Minister of Foreign Affairs, Escudero, today replied in writing in substance as, follows: Regarding complaints of Mexican Petroleum Company and Huasteca Petroleum Company, Carranza sends word that he has despatched orders to General Aguilar to withdraw his demands for money made upon these companies and to cease molesting them.

Referring to the case of International Petroleum Company Carranza says orders have been sent to General Pablo Gonzalez, Military Commander in that region, not only to investigate the facts of the case of which the International Company complains but to make a record of the damages if the company has sustained losses in order that they may be adjusted in due time; Gonzalez is further ordered to see that these deplorable incidents are not repeated.

Regarding Department’s warning should Constitutionalists capture Mazatlan, Carranza says extra urgent orders have been issued to Constitutionalist commanders outside Mazatlan that should they take the city every effort be made to protect foreign lives and property. Carranza adds that his orders are usually delayed because of lack of communication with distant points but that in every case he tries to make orders effective as quickly as possible.

Simpich.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.512/137.

[Document 1286]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, December 6, 1913.

638. The Spanish Minister, the Dean of the Diplomatic Corps, has received a telegram signed by the Spanish Consul, Mazatlan, and the entire Consular Corps including the United States Consul, stating that Governor, Sinaloa, issued decree November 29 last assessing five per cent, tax on value of rural and urban real estate, chattel and personal property throughout the whole State under penalty of confiscation without preliminary legal valuation of property, this being utterly unconstitutional, if this tax is not paid on or before the eighth instant. These funds are to pay troopers defending Government. Commercial and banking firms of Mazatlan have already loaned the Government one hundred and fifteen thousand pesos and it is claimed that inasmuch as the Government only controls port of Mazatlan the commerce of that city will be the only one to meet this extraordinary tax. Poverty is raging in that city, many commercial and industrial institutions and two local banks have closed doors. Protest is signed as above stated with the request that matter be referred to President for assistance. German and English Ministers have telegraphed their subjects that international law expects them to pay the same taxes levied on Mexicans even though extraordinary or seemingly unjustifiable. French Minister has protested against forced loans and has referred matter to his Government. Secretary of the Treasury states he has no jurisdiction in matter and Minister of Government has telegraphed Governor of Sinaloa to be cautious and adhere strictly to law. I have expressed the opinion that tax might be impertinent and unjustifiable especially the confiscation sanction as no one can be deprived of his property without due process of law. The matter is of great importance because if the Government of Sinaloa insists upon it the Central Government can not do much as the question of taxation is legally within the sovereign rights of all independent Mexican States. I have the honor to request instructions in the premises.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

The Secretary of State to chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 812.512/137.

[Document 1287]

The Secretary of State to chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 8, 1913.

Your December 6. You are instructed to bring to attention of appropriate authorities any illegal procedure in connection with the levying of taxes in Sinaloa.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 312.115/31.

[Document 1288]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, December 12, 1913.

580. Department’s telegram December 8. Consul, Mazatlan, telegraphs: “Tax reduced two and one half per cent; time for payment extended to December 15.”

Bryan.

Consular Agent Taylor to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/32.

[Document 1289]

Consular Agent Taylor to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Guaymas (undated ; received December 12, 1913).

Additional exorbitant war tax five per cent on business capital imposed by Provisional Governor here payable by December 17, refusal involving penalties. German merchants have wired the German Ambassador, Washington, D. C, claiming exemption according to treaty between Mexico and Germany. American and Chinese merchants, referring to Article III, commercial treaty between the United States and Mexico of 1831, beg your early advice.

Taylor.

The Secretary of State to Consular Agent Taylor. File No. 312.115/32.

[Document 1290]

The Secretary of State to Consular Agent Taylor.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 13, 1913.

Treaty of 1831 no longer in force. Report to Department if there is any apparent illegal procedure or discrimination against foreigners in connection with levy of taxes by local authorities; also if nationals of any country are exempted from payment of taxes by virtue of treaty provisions or otherwise.

Bryan.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/33.

[Document 1291]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, December 15, 1913.

691. Referring to my telegram 638, December 6, I took the matter in question up informally with the Foreign Office dwelling on the unconstitutionality of the threat of confiscation and pointed out that writ of amparo would issue as t result of such action by the State Government. The Spanish Minister informs me that the amount of the tax has been reduced to two and a half per cent, the threat of confiscation withdrawn and a long term of easy payment granted which I trust is a satisfactory solution to the Department.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

Vice Consul Guyant to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/10476.

[Document 1292]

Vice Consul Guyant to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Ensenada, January 8, 1914.

American and Chinese merchants have asked my advice relative to expected attempt to collect more money from local firms for soldiers. Shall I advise them to refuse pay?

Guyant.

The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Guyant. File No. 312.115/41.

[Document 1293]

The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Guyant.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 9, 1914.

Your January 8th. Make urgent protest against any attempt to exact forced loans from foreigners. If, however, authorities persist in attempt, advise foreigners to pay under protest, making protest a matter of record if possible, and to secure receipts.

Moore.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/42.

[Document 1294]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, January 9, 1914.

Consular Agent, Tuxpam, reports that Federal authorities Tuxpam have demanded payment 70,000 Mexican dollars from business men and foreign companies, offer as excuse that Federal troops have not been paid and that there is reason to fear that they will join revolutionists. Amount collected and receipts given January 7th.

Miller.

Consul Edwards to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/10533.

[Document 1295]

Consul Edwards to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Acapulco, January 12, 1914.

Mariscal has entered Acapulco with 300 men asking for money and ammunition. The military commander made forced loans yesterday in order to raise money to pay the former’s troops including the Americans in his demands and threatening that Mariscal would not wait. There is great apprehension of trouble and the garrison is entirely insufficient to afford protection. Embassy advised.

Edwards.

Vice Consul Davis to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/43.

[Document 1296]

Vice Consul Davis to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Guadalajara (undated ; received January 14, 1914).

The Legislature State of Michoacan has decreed a forced loan equalling one year taxes to support federal troops in that state claiming the money will be returned. Several Americans here owning property in that state want to know if they have to comply.

Davis.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 312.115/44.

[Document 1297]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 14, 1914.

610. Make appropriate representations to proper authorities regarding needed protection for American interests in Acapulco, concerning which you have been advised by Consul Edwards.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Davis. File No. 312.115/43.

[Document 1298]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Davis.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 15, 1914,

If attempt is made to impose forced loans on Americans, you will make formal protest.

However, in case authorities persist in attempt to collect, advise Americans to pay under protest, making protest a matter of record if possible, and to take receipts for amounts paid.

Bryan.

Vice Consul Stadden to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/10612.

[Document 1299]

Vice Consul Stadden to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Consulate,
Manzanillo, January 19, 1914.

The Governor of the State of Colima called a meeting of residents of Colima on the seventeenth instant demanding that 100,000 pesos be furnished at once saying if not furnished voluntarily he would collect by some means. Demonstration caused by the demand, opposition and uprising probable. Representatives of American companies and interests request information as to whether they shall contribute or refuse to contribute. Embassy advised.

Stadden.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/10618.

[Document 1300]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, January 20, 1914.

Consul at Progreso telegraphs as follows: January 14. Mexican de facto authorities in the name of President called all the merchants and private landowners to the Government offices and required immediately sixty day loans for the purpose carrying on the northern campaign. Foreigners being obliged to contribute same as Mexicans practically enforced because of fear damage business if refused. Progreso contributions approximately thirty thousand pesos.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Stadden. File No. 312.115/46.

[Document 1301]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Stadden.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 21, 1914.

Your January 19. You will make formal protest against attempt to impose forced loan upon American citizens. If, however, authorities persist in attempt to collect, you will advise Americans to pay under protest, making such protest a matter of record if possible and to obtain receipts.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 312.115/47.

[Document 1302]

The Secretary of State to chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 21, 1914.

618. Your January 20. Instruct Consul at Progreso to enter formal protest against attempt to impose forced loan upon American citizens but that if authorities persist in attempt, to advise American citizens to pay under protest making protest a matter of record if possible and to take receipts.

Bryan.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/48.

[Document 1303]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, January 22, 1914.

735. Referring to Department’s 618, January 21. Many complaints are coming to this Embassy regarding forced loans upon American citizens. I have already advised Americans more or less in the sense of Department’s 618, January 21, but I have the honor to respectfully suggest that I be authorized to enter a formal protest with the Mexican de facto government in the premises.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

The Secretary of State to chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 312.115/48.

[Document 1304]

The Secretary of State to chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 24, 1914.

622. Your January 22. Present formal protest to central administration against imposition of forced loans upon American citizens.

Bryan.

Consul Gracey to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/55.

[Document 1305]

Consul Gracey to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 159.] American Consulate,
Progreso, January 24, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to make the following report regarding political and financial conditions in this district:

On January 12 the merchants and property owners of Progreso, both foreigners and Mexicans, were called to a meeting at the office of the jefe politico and requested to contribute fixed amounts “for carrying on the campaign in the north.” Approximately $30,000 Mexican was collected from local parties, including $3,000 from Mr. W. P. Young, an American, agent of the New York and Cuba Mail S. S. Co. Receipts were given for the amounts collected.

On January 14th the parties who had been forced to make these loans were again called to the jefetura and were requested to return the receipts, and a statement was prepared by the jefe politico to be signed by the contributors. Mr. Young refused to return his receipt without the return of the money, which was finally agreed upon and the $3,000 returned, thus closing the incident so far as Americans were concerned.

On January 16th the parties making contributions were again called to the jefetura and their money returned, it being apparent that the jefe politico had exceeded his authority in calling for the loans and making the receipts.

In Mérida the prominent merchants and planters were called to the Governor’s on the 15th instant and requested to raise a voluntary loan which they declined to do. After consultation however, it was agreed that an increased tax on henequen of one centavo per kilogram would be acceptable, and a decree was issued to that effect.

Wilbur T. Gracey.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Shanklin. File No. 312.115/50.

[Document 1306]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Shanklin.

No. 639.] Department of State,
Washington, January 30, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your despatch No. 1566 of January 12, 1914,103 enclosing a copy of a communication from Mr. C. L. Neal, Director of Los Institutes Central y Anglo-Mexicano, at Toluca, Mexico, saying that notices have been put up on the street corners at Morelia notifying every one who pays taxes on property there immediately to make a voluntary loan to the Government in proportion to the taxes paid. Mr. Neal also says that the Foreign Mission Board of the Southern Baptist Convention, located at Richmond, Virginia, owns a house there and, as their Treasurer in Mexico, he pays the taxes on the property, and asks whether he will have to pay the forced loan.

You are instructed to make a formal protest against the imposition of this forced loan upon American citizens, but to inform the interested Americans that if, in spite of this protest, the authorities continue in their effort to collect this loan from Americans, they should pay the loan under protest making such protest a matter of record if possible, and take receipts for the payments.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

103 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to Consul Hostetter. File No. 312.115/59.

[Document 1307]

The Secretary of State to Consul Hostetter. 104

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 6, 1914.

Reported to Department that Constitutionalists are threatening forced loan upon Almacla Sugar Refineries Company, American corporation owning large properties at Navolato near Culiacan.

Make protest to Constitutionalist leaders against imposition of this loan.

Bryan.

104 Same to the Consular officers at Nogales and Log Mochis.

The Secretary of State to Consular Agent Lewis. File No. 312.115/66a.

[Document 1308]

The Secretary of State to Consular Agent Lewis.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 27, 1914.

Department informed that Carranza recently in person demanded 200,000 pesos from Americans at Mochis, naming deportation as alternative. Telegraph facts.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller. File No. 312.115/49.

[Document 1309]

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 2, 1914.

Oil Fields of Mexico Company states that jefe politico of Tuxpam has requested company to subscribe two thousand dollars monthly to support State troops.

Make formal protest to appropriate authorities against imposition of this forced loan upon American citizens.

Bryan.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/69.

[Document 1310]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, March 4, 1914.

Department’s March 2. Consular Agent, Tuxpam, notified of instruction and requested to present protest to jefe politico. General Zaragoza, military commander and Governor at Tampico, assures me that Government does not wish to assess forced loans on foreigners.

Miller.

Consular Agent Lewis to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/67.

[Document 1311]

Consular Agent Lewis to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Los Mochis (undated ; received March 5, 1914).

You message 27th. Unable secure confirmation of statement regarding demand by Carranza. If such was made interested parties evidently not desirous of having matter known.

Lewis.

The Secretary of State to Consul Hostetter. File No. 312.115/73.

[Document 1312]

The Secretary of State to Consul Hostetter.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 13, 1914.

Department informed that Sinaloa authorities have imposed war levy five thousand pesos per month on Almada Sugar Refineries Company. Evidence in possession of Department appears to show that this company which owns Navolato property is American corporation organized October 1901 under laws of State of New York and that soon after organization it bought said property; that stock of company is almost entirely owned by Almada Sugar Corporation organized under laws of State of Delaware; that over five hundred thousand dollars American money has been invested in said property.

Endeavor to bring above information to attention of Governor Riveros and protest against above imposition on this American company.

Bryan.

Consul Hostetter to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/75.

[Document 1313]

Consul Hostetter to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Consulate,
Hermosillo, March 14, 1914.

Department’s March 13. Am informed by General Obregon whose brother-in-law is manager of Almada Sugar refineries that plant belongs to Almada, was sold on option to American company who did not comply with conditions and was returned to Almada about two months before Obregón took Culiacán. Have wired Governor Eiveros for full information and will wire answer.

Hostetter.

[Untitled] File No. 312.115/76.

[Document 1314]

[Untitled]

American Consulate,
Hermosillo, March 19, 1914.

Department’s March 13. Governor Riveros informs me that there is no doubt about the Navolato Sugar Refineries being returned to their original owners, the Almadas, some time before the capture of Culiacan and that Mr. Nelson Rhodes Jr., who is at present in the United States can give the Department full particulars regarding the same.

Hostetter.

The Secretary of State to Consul Hostetter. File No. 312.115/79.

[Document 1315]

The Secretary of State to Consul Hostetter.

[Telegram.]

No. 296.] Department of State,
Washington, April 9, 1914.

Sir: Having reference to previous correspondence in regard to the imposition of a forced loan upon the Alamada Sugar Refineries Company, there is enclosed copy of a further letter on the subject from Mr. J. Reuben Clark, Jr.

You will forward a copy of the enclosure to the appropriate authorities and earnestly renew the protest heretofore made against the imposition of the loan in question. I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

[Inclosure.]

Mr. J. Reuben Clark, Jr. to the Secretary of State.

Washington, D. C., April 4, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge yours of March 30, 1914.105 and to enclose herewith, copy of the letter105 addressed to me by Curtis, Mallet-Prevost & Colt, attorneys for the Almada Sugar Refineries Company, a New York corporation. You will perceive that this letter is a restatement of the facts as given by Curtis, Mallet-Prevost & Colt in a letter, a copy of which I left with Mr. Baker on February 14th, affords a complete answer to the insinuations and unsupported assertions made by General Obregon.

In my judgment, the American parties in interest in this matter have clearly shown a very large and substantial investment of American capital in this sugar enterprise, which cannot but be seriously affected and probably ruined by the continued unjustified and illegal hostility of the Mexican revolutionists, with the result that this large amount of American capital thus bona fide invested in this undertaking, will be wholly lost.

I therefore submit that these American interests are entitled to the fullest protection which this Government is able to give them under the existing circumstances, and I venture the opinion that such protection should not be further withheld or postponed, because of unsupported statements and allegations of the revolutionists themselves, whose interest lies in postponing vigorous American representation until they shall have extorted from the Company everything available for their purposes, and have left it ruined and helpless.

I am [etc.]

J. Reuben Clark, Jr.

105 Not printed.

105 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.115/79A.

[Document 1316]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 16, 1914.

We are informed that the commanding general at Tampico has asked those in business there to make voluntary contributions to the Constitutionalists without receipts being given and without crediting same on taxes. The merchants understand that failure to respond voluntarily will be followed by a demand for forced loans. Please bring the matter urgently to the attention of General Carranza and represent to him that it would be exceedingly unwise to make any harsh or unusual exactions; call his attention to the fact that the foreigners in Tampico would be quick to complain to their representatives and these in turn would feel it necessary to protest at such demands. Tampico being a seaport, foreign governments may feel that they can be more insistent in making objections to anything which they may consider unreasonable. Public opinion in foreign countries would take into consideration the difference between a seaport and an interior city. We earnestly hope that the Constitutionalist authorities will not be disposed to demand more than Huerta demanded when in control of Tampico and there was complaint against his demands.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller. File No. 312.115/79b.

[Document 1317]

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 16, 1914.

The following message was sent to George C. Carothers at Torreon to-day: [Here follows telegram to Special Agent Carothers, May 16, 1914.]

For fear communication may be interrupted between General Carranza and Tampico authorities above telegram is repeated to you. Please call upon the Constitutionalist Commander in authority at Tampico and communicate substance of this telegram. If he has not received instructions from General Carranza since the General received the above telegram, insist on delay until he hears from the General. It is important that nothing shall be done at Tampico that can give just cause for complaint from foreign residents.

Bryan.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/85.

[Document 1318]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, June 5, 1914, 8 p.m.

Department’s June 3106 was referred to Governor Caballero who replied as follows to-day: With real displeasure the Government under my charge has seen by your note which you received from Washington that the Department of State has been informed that the Constitutionalist Government of this State has levied forced loans as war taxes on business men including foreigners and, although this Government has formulated no official plan for following any procedure relative to loans, I beg to state that it is very far from the purpose of the revolution to levy any forced loans at all, especially against foreigners who have nothing to do with national affairs, and such sums that have been received in this way have been by the proper office and in the most spontaneous and voluntary manner on the part of the donors who desired to assist the revolution in this form; furthermore the revolution itself, and especially in the State of Tamaulipas which is under the control of the undersigned, has more than the needed resources not only to sustain itself but also to assure in this form at present and in future the integrity of the state, this well known sufficiency of resources on which it counts to participate in the general revolution in an effective manner, as it has always done.

Miller.

106 Relates to protection of Spanish subjects. Not printed.

[Untitled] File No. 812.6363/105.

[Document 1319]

[Untitled]

American Consulate,
Tampico, June 5, 1914, 10 p.m.

All of the oil company representatives in Tampico to-day received letter from Stephen II. Toot of Corona Petroleum Company and acting secretary Oil Association, Tampico, including copy of letter dated June 4th just received by Oil Association from Mr. Spieler, German president of chamber of commerce. Letter states that president of chamber of commerce was called before General Caballero who informed him that the new Government needed large sum of money for payment of arms and ammunition for the army; that a commission was appointed to study and designate the equitable sums which each business should pay; that on account of paralyzation of commerce during last six months and the forced loans of Federals before the evacuation of Tampico that the Constitutional Government had only been able to raise approximately about three hundred forty thousand pesos although all of this amount had not yet been subscribed; that said sum is not sufficient to meet the expenses and it was thought to assess the petroleum industry the balance needed, which is about two hundred thousand pesos. On strength of these representations, Mr. Toot, British subject, called meeting of Oil Association for Saturday night.

Miller.

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller. File No. 812.6363/105.

[Document 1320]

The Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 10, 1914, 5 p.m.

Your June 5, 10 p.m. Please report full result of meeting of Oil Association, held Saturday night, and what action was taken regarding loan of two hundred thousand pesos requested by Constitutionalists.

Bryan.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.6363/104.

[Document 1321]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, June 12, 1914, 8 p.m.

Department’s June 10, 5 p.m. Meeting of oil associations last Saturday took no action on $200,000 loan, but will hold another meeting June 13.

All petroleum production involved is now in territory controlled by Constitutionalists, but it is said that General Candido Aguilar is demanding payments of tax known as “Vera Cruz State tax”.

Miller.

[Untitled] File No. 812.6363/107.

[Document 1322]

[Untitled]

American Consulate,
Tampico, June 12, 1914, 10 p.m.

Referring to my June 12, 8 p.m. Placing oil producing district under General Candido Aguilar removes [sic] problem of collecting voluntary loans from foreign oil companies, Tampico, and vigilance of foreign consuls and foreign war vessels. It is believed Aguilar will attempt to repeat his success of last November when he successfully extorted 22,000 Mexican dollars from the Aguila and Huasteca Petroleum Companies after promises made by him to Admiral Fletcher and Consul of the United States at Tampico. Those two companies paid them, and all companies may now have to pay voluntary contributions and not dare to even report same because field operations, wells, transportation oil to coast will be completely at mercy of General Aguilar. Revolutionists will probably not demand forced loans or war tax from companies but will spare no pains to collect voluntary loans, and diplomatic protests and promises will avail nothing more than in last November.

Miller.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Davis. File No. 312.115/93.

[Document 1323]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Davis.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 29, 1914.

A. A. Neil and J. L. Burt, American citizens, owning bakery Guadalajara, known as “Cía Galletera Nacional “report that Constitutionalist authorities have imposed forced loan five thousand pesos, and these Americans desire postponement time limit to pay until they can reach Guadalajara by steamer sailing California for Manzanillo September 26.

Endeavor to secure desired postponement, and in reporting result of your efforts, state briefly facts regarding nature of loan imposed.

Bryan.

Vice Consul Davis to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/95.

[Document 1324]

Vice Consul Davis to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 508.] American Consulate,
Guadalajara, September 10, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to say that I am herewith forwarding the correspondence107 —so far had—between this Consulate and the Military Governor of this State, General Manuel M. Dieguez, on the subject of the Compañía Galletera Nacional—organized under the laws of Mexico—at least 97 per cent of whose stock is owned by Americans.

I feel quite sure that the reason of Governor Diéguez delay in answering my last note is because he has referred the matter to Mexico City for resolution.

Am I right in asking exemption from forced loans in such cases? I am not entirely sure, and I am asking information by this dispatch to avoid the possible necessity of having to telegraph.

I have [etc.]

Will B. Davis.

107 Not printed.

Vice and Deputy Consul Germon to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/99.

[Document 1325]

Vice and Deputy Consul Germon to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate,
Progreso, October 1, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to advise that the local State Government has issued a decree declaring a forced loan amounting to 8,000,000 pesos, to be contributed by all having a capital of real estate valued at more than 100,000 pesos.

The various allotments thus far run from 10,000 to 500,000 and the time allowed to contribute same was fixed at 5 days after date of said decree, namely, September 28th.

No definite conditions have been made upon which the loan is to be effected, that is to say, the contributors are expected to pay over this money” without a guarantee as to when same will be returned, nor for any specified length of time. These conditions are to be determined by the Government later on, as stated in the decree.

I have been approached by several Americans inquiring as to whether there existed a treaty exempting American citizens from such forced payment, and I have been unable to find anything in the Consulate upon a subject of this sort. I would appreciate advice from the Department upon this point, both where the American citizen owns property here, as well as when he does not.

I have [etc.]

J. W. Germon.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Davis. File No. 312.115/95.

[Document 1326]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Davis.

No. 158.] Department of State,
Washington, October 8, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your despatch No. 508, of September 10, 1914, concerning a special tax of ten thousand pesos imposed against the National Cracker Company, Limited, by General Alvaro Obregon, of the Constitutionalist Army, on July 29, 1914.

The Department approves your action in making representations against the forced loan imposed upon the National Cracker Company, and considers that you would be justified in making such representations on behalf of any company concerning which it is clearly proven that a majority of the stock is held by American citizens. In any doubtful cases, however, the matter should first be submitted to the Department for instructions. I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

Vice Consul Davis to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/100.

[Document 1327]

Vice Consul Davis to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Guadalajara, October 17, 1914.

Government threatening attachment Compañía Galletera Nacional, notwithstanding my formal protest. See my dispatch 508, September 10, and instruct.

Davis.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City. File No. 312.115/100.

[Document 1328]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister at Mexico City.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 19, 1914.

American Vice Consul in charge Guadalajara reports that in default payment special tax ten thousand pesos authorities threaten attachment property Compañía Galletera Nacional, stock of which is almost entirely American owned.

Please request appropriate authorities to order withdrawal of demand for payment this tax which appears to be an extraordinary special tax not general and uniform in operation.

Robert Lansing.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Young. File No. 312.115/99.

[Document 1329]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Young.

[Extract.]

No. 168.] Department of State,
Washington, October 22, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received from your office a letter dated October 1, 1914, concerning a recent decree of Mexican authorities which, you state, requires all persons having property valued at more than one hundred thousand pesos, to contribute to a loan to such authorities.

You are instructed that there appear to be no treaty provisions bearing upon the payment by American citizens of contributions or taxes in Mexico. Furthermore, in case of a contribution or tax levied according to the laws of Mexico, general and uniform in its character and operation and not confiscatory, it would appear that American citizens owning property in the sections covered by the contribution or tax would be legally bound to make payment thereof.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

Vice Consul Davis to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/103.

[Document 1330]

Vice Consul Davis to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Guadalajara (undated ; received November 5, 1914).

Sir: I have the honor to confirm my telegram to you on October 17. I afterwards came in possession of facts in connection with the concession of the Compañía Galletera Nacional which in substance are these: In the articles of concession the Company was exempt from all kind of taxation for a term of twenty years (State taxation), but the concessionaires waived all rights as foreigners in any and everything pertaining to its affairs.

This latter clause is upon what hinges the persistence of the local authorities here in prosecuting the matter, is my opinion.

I have [etc.]

Will B. Davis.

[Untitled] File No. 312.115/106.

[Document 1331]

[Untitled]

[Extract.]

No. 532.] American Consulate,
Guadalajara, November 9, 1914.

Sir:* * * I have the honor to say that this company [Compañía Galletera Nacional] has been advised direct from the tax office, that the forced loan imposed upon them has been abrogated.

I have [etc.]

Will B. Davis.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/110.

[Document 1332]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

No. 1316.] American Consulate,
Tampico, December 12, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to advise the Department that on December 7 General Manuel Peláez, who is in command of the Villa forces, sent a communication to the Compañía de Petroleo “El Aguila” S. A., a British corporation, imposing a forced contribution of $100,000 Mexican currency; and one to the Penn-Mex Oil Company, an American corporation, for $50,000 Mexican currency.

The two companies were also advised that the taxes imposed by the Carrancista government would have to be paid at Temapache to the Villa authorities. General Peláez has so far been unable to show any credentials from General Villa, or give any guaranties that if the taxes were paid in Temapache they would not have to be paid again in Mexico City. A copy of the General’s letter and its translation is enclosed for the information of the Department.

At the present time demands have been made in three different places for the payment of the oil taxes, namely, in Mexico City, in Veracruz, and in Temapache. On December 8 an official notice was issued by the Custom House in Tampico to all the oil companies notifying them that the Federal taxes would have to be paid to the regularly appointed Constitutionalist authorities, or to the head office in the city of Veracruz, and that such payments as may be made to other authorities, alien to the Constitutionalist Government, would be considered null and void. A copy and translation thereof is enclosed for the information of the Department.

This condition of affairs leaves the oil companies in a serious predicament. If they make any payments to the Villa agents, they will necessarily incur the disfavor of the Constitutionalists, whereas on the other hand, if they refuse to pay the taxes to the forces that are in control of the oil fields, they will have to suffer for the consequences. The companies have all decided to temporize and, if necessary, to compromise on the best terms they can for the time being, and await future developments.

In regard to these companies having to pay double taxes, I respectfully suggest that the Department endeavor to have General Carranza send a force large enough to protect the oil fields, or make some arrangement that would not force the companies to pay double. Col. Josué Benignos is at Tuxpam in command of about 600 troops, and with a few reinforcements would be able to protect the oil fields. However, his loyalty to General Carranza is doubted, and he is expected to go over to whichever side shows the most likelihood of winning out.

I have [etc.]

Thomas H. Bevan.

[Inclosure 1—Translation.]

General Peláez to the oil companies.

Nationalist Army, Peláez Brigade,
Temapache, December 7, 1914.

The undersigned, General in Chief of the Villista forces operating in the Huasteca region, imposes on the Compañía de Petroleo “El Aguila” a forced contribution for troop expenses of $100,000 (one hundred thousand pesos), which the General Superintendent of said company will please pay in to these Headquarters within the term of eight days.

The above company is also advised that, from now on, all taxes which the so-called Carrancista Government may have imposed upon it must be paid into these Headquarters, with the understanding that it cannot excuse itself from such payments even though it may claim to have made them to some authority appointed by said Government.

General Manuel Peláez.

[Inclosure 2—Translation.]

Custom House circular.

Office of the Stamp Tax,
Tampico, December 8, 1914.

The Head Office of the Stamp Tax, in Vera Cruz, in their circular No. 8, dated the 3rd inst, advise me as follows: The Department of Finance and Public Credit, in an order of this date, advise me as follows:

“By order of the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army, in charge of the Executive Power, all companies or owners of mining lands or petroleum explorations existing in this country, from this date must make payments for Federal taxes to the respective Head Offices of the Stamp Tax, under the Constitutionalist Government, or to the Head Office of the Stamp Tax, at present located in this city, provisional capital of the Republic; such payments as may be made to other authorities, alien to this Government, will be considered null and void.”

All of which I have the honor to transcribe to you for your information and action.

A. Guimbarda.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.115/108.

[Document 1333]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 15, 1914.

Bevan, Tampico, reports General Peláez, assuming to represent Villa, has demanded fifty thousand pesos of Penn Mex. Oil Co., American corporation.

Request Villa inform you whether Peláez is bona fide representative and if so to order him withdraw this demand.

Bryan.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.115/111.

[Document 1334]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

No. 1323.] American Consulate,
Tampico, December 19, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to advise the Department that during the first part of November General Manuel Peláez started a Villista movement in the Huasteca country, which comprises the oil fields in the Tuxpam District. On November 15 he sent Major Luis A. Ruiz to the camp of the Aguila Petroleum Company with instructions to demand 30,000 pesos, and if the demand was refused to take the money by force. It was explained to Major Ruiz that there was only money enough in the safe to meet the weekly payroll and that there were 1,000 men in the camp who would start a riot if they were not paid. He finally agreed to compromise for 15,000 pesos, leaving barely enough for the payroll. At the same time he took seven horses and several mules with equipment from the camp. The Penn-Mex Petroleum Company operating near Tuxpam has been subjected to the same kind of treatment. Practically the whole Tuxpam oil field is controlled by the Villistas, while Tuxpam and Tamiahua, the two outlets to this field, are still in the hands of the Constitutionalists or rather the Carrancistas. The Carrancistas have notified all the companies operating in this district that if it can be proved that they have aided these companies [sic] in any way, with arms, ammunition, or money, they would be closed down.

On December 6 another demand was made at the Pearson camp at Potrero del Llano for 30,000 pesos, which was refused. On the following day a written communication was sent to the general managers of the Aguila Petroleum Company and the Penn-Mex Petroleum Company demanding that the former company pay 100,000 and the latter 50,000 pesos for the support of the Villista troops. Eight days was given in which to make the payments.

Up to the present time neither of the companies has made the payment. This matter was reported by telegraph and both companies have been notified that the Department has taken the matter up with Consular Agent Carothers placing the matter before General Villa.

The Huasteca Petroleum Company, one of the largest companies operating in this district, has received entirely different treatment from the Villista troops. The superintendent of their large camp at Juan Casiano, State of Vera Cruz, received a notice from one of their chiefs, Alberto Medellin, giving them absolute guaranties to respect the interests and the personnel of said company. It has been rumored that the reason the Aguila Company was subjected to a forced contribution was on account of a long-standing feud between the company and the family of General Manuel Pelaez. The company however denies this emphatically.

Last night about six o’clock it was decided to send reinforcements to Tuxpam and all the private launches in Tampico were commandeered by the military authorities. All the speed boats and expensive launches were filled with soldiers and started out for Tuxpam. High-powered motor boats were used for towing large barges of soldiers, which heavy service practically ruins their motors. Consequently the oil industry is at a standstill as regards transportation. Several of the companies have been forced to close down their work because they have no means of sending men out on the work or of getting fuel oil to the camps. All the launches that have been commandeered are under Mexican registry; therefore the Mexican Government has the right to commandeer all ships flying the Mexican flag, and the oil companies have not disputed this right, notwithstanding the terrible hardships it works on their operations.

I have [etc.]

Thomas H. Bevan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada. File No. 312.115/110.

[Document 1335]

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 24, 1914.

Bevan reports authorities Temapache requiring foreign oil companies vicinity Tampico make second payment taxes.

Request Carranza send force sufficient protect companies from this imposition.

Bryan.

Protection by the United States of Spanish, British, French, German, and Chinese subjects and interests in Mexico; attitude of Gen. Carranza toward unofficial representations in behalf of non-American foreign persons and interests by American officials—Protection by the United States of Spanish, British, French, German, and Chinese subjects and interests in Mexico; attitude of Gen. Carranza toward unofficial representations in behalf of non-American foreign persons and interests by American officials—

Contents

Protection of Spanish subjects and interestsProtection of Spanish subjects and interests

[1336] Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Madrid, January 8, 1914.

File No. 312.52/102.

[1337] The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard.

Department of State, Washington, January 5, 1914.

File No. 312.52/102.

[1338] The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Hostetter.

Department of State, Washington, January 5, 1914.

File No. 312.52/102.

[1339] Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Madrid, January 6, 1914.

File No. 312.52/106.

[1340] The Spanish Ambassador to Counselor Moore.

Royal Spanish Embassy, Washington, January 7, 1914.

File No. 312.52/127.

[1341] The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Hamm.

Department of State, Washington, January 7, 1914

File No. 312.52/112a.

[1342] The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, January 8, 1914.

File No. 312.52/106.

[1343] The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard.

Department of State, Washington, January 8, 1914.

File No. 312.52/106.

[1344] Consul Alger to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Mazatlan, January 9, 1914.

File No. 312.52/110.

[1345] The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, January 10, 1914.

File No. 312.52/112c.

[1346] The Secretary of State to Consul Alger.

Department of State, Washington, January 14, 1914

File No. 312/52/110.

[1347] Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Madrid, January 14, 1914.

File No. 312.52/123.

[1348] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, January 15, 1914.

File No. 312.52/123.

[1349] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard.

Department of State, Washington, January 16, 1914.

File No. 312.52/123.

[1350] Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Madrid, January 21, 1914.

File No. 312.52/141.

[1351] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, January 21, 1914.

File No. 312.52/144.

[1352] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard.

Department of State, Washington, January 23, 1914.

File No. 312.52/141.

[1353] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, January 23, 1914.

File No. 312.52/144.

[1354] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, February 6, 1914.

File No. 312.52/156c.

[1355] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, February 7, 1914.

File No. 312.52/157a.

[1356] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, February 8, 1914.

File No. 312.52/158.

[1357] Consul Hostetter to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Hermosillo, February 9, 1914.

File No. 312.52/159.

[1358] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, February 9, 1914.

File No. 312.52/161 a.

[1359] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihauhua, February 12, 1914.

File No. 312.52/164.

[1360] Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Nogales, February 19, 1914.

File No. 312.52/180.

[1361] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, February 25, 1914.

File No. 312.52/179.

[1362] The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, February 28, 1914.

File No. 312.52/182a.

[1363] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich.

Department of State, Washington, March 2, 1914.

File No. 312.52/180.

[1364] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihuahua, March 16, 1914.

File No. 312.52/194.

[1365] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, March 17, 1914.

File No. 312.52/194.

[1366] The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy, Washington, April 3, 1914.

File No. 312.52/206.

[1367] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, April 6, 1914.

File No. 312.52/208a.

[1368] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, April 6, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11419.

[1369] The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, April 7, 1914.

File No. 312.52/229a.

[1370] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, April 7, 1914.

File No. 312.52/212.

[1371] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, April 7, 1914.

File No. 312.52/212.

[1372] The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, April 8, 1914.

File No. 312.52/212.

[1373] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, April 8, 1914.

File No. 312.52/216.

[1374] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, April 8, 1914.

File No. 312.52/216.

[1375] Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Madrid, April 8, 1914.

File No. 312.52/217.

[1376] The Spanish Ambassador to Counselor Lansing.

Spanish Embassy, Washington, April 9, 1914.

File No. 312.52/221.

[1377] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, April 9, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 312.52/224.

[1378] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, April 9, 1914.

File No. 312.52/221a.

[1379] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, April 9, 1914.

File No. 312.52/222.

[1380] The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, April 10, 1914.

File No. 312.52/221.

[1381] Consul Hamm to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, April 10, 1914.

File No. 312.52/225.

[1382] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard.

Department of State, Washington, April 10, 1914.

File No. 312.52/217.

[1383] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, April 11, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 312.52/224.

[1384] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, April 11, 1914.

File No. 312.52/225.

[1385] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, April 11, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 312.52/227.

[1386] [Untitled]

El Paso, April 11, 1914.

File No. 312.512.228.

[1387] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, April 12, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11755.

[1388] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, April 14, 1914.

File No. 312.52/230.

[1389] [Untitled]

El Paso, April 14, 1914, 6 pm.

File No. 312.52/232.

[1390] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihuahua, April 15, 1914.

File No. 312.52/236.

[1391] The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, April 17, 1914.

Fle No. 312.52/236.

[1392] Consul Hamm to the Secretary of State.

Torreon, April 19, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11703.

[1393] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Monterey, April 29, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 312.52/255.

[1394] The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy, Washington, May 3, 1914.

File No. 312.52/258.

[1395] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, May 4, 1914.

File No. 312.52/258.

[1396] The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy, Washington, May 10, 1914.

File No. 312.52/266.

[1397] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, May 11, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 312.52/266.

[1398] The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

Department of State, Washington, May 11, 1914.

File No. 312.52/266.

[1399] Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Madrid, May 11, 1914.

File No. 312.52/267.

[1400] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard.

Department of State, Washington, May 12, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 312.52/267.

[1401] The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy, Washington, May 12, 1914.

File No. 312.52/271.

[1402] The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, May 13, 1914.

File No. 312.52/266.

[1403] The Secretary of State to Consul Hamm.

Department of State, Washington, May 14, 1914.

File No. 312.52/271a.

[1404] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, May 14, 1914.

File No. 312.52/271b.

[1405] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy.

Department of State, Washington, May 19, 1914.

File No. 312.52/271.

[1406] The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, May 19, 1914.

File No. 312.52/271.

[1407] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, May 20, 1914.

File No. 312.52/277.

[1408] The Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State.

Navy Department, Washington, May 21, 1914.

File No. 312.52/290.

[1409] Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Madrid, May 23, 1914.

File No. 312.52/289.

[1410] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard.

Department of State, Washington, May 24, 1914.

File No. 312.52/289.

[1411] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, May 27, 1914.

File No. 312.52/296.

[1412] The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy, Washington, June 2, 1914.

File No. 312.52/308.

[1413] [Untitled]

Spanish Embassy, Washington, June 2, 1914.

File No. 312.52/305.

[1414] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, June 2, 1914.

File No. 312.52/305.

[1415] The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy, Washington, June 4, 1914.

File No. 312.52/311.

[1416] The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, June 6, 1914.

File No. 312.52/305.

[1417] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard.

Department of State, Washington, June 8, 1914.

File No. 312.52/286.

[1418] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, June 8, 1914.

File No. 312.52/311.

[1419] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, June 8, 1914.

File No. 312.52/308.

[1420] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, June 10, 1914.

File No. 312.52/320.

[1421] The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy, Washington, June 12, 1914.

File No. 312.52/323.

[1422] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. .

Department of State, Washington, June 13, 1914.

File No. 312.52/323.

[1423] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, June 13, 1914.

File No. 312.42/325.

[1424] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, June 15, 1914.

File No. 312.52/330.

[1425] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, June 19, 1914.

File No. 312.52/332.

[1426] [Untitled]

El Paso, June 21, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 312.52/335.

[1427] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

San Antonio, June 28, 1914.

File No. 312.52/348.

[1428] The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy, Washington, July 4, 1914.

File No. 312.52/353.

[1429] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Keys.

Department of State, Washington, July 7, 1914.

File No. 312.52/353.

[1430] The Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires.

Department of State, Washington, July 8, 1914.

File No. 312.52/348.

[1431] The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy, Washington, July 12, 1914.

File No. 312.52/369.

[1432] The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

Department of State, Washington, July 16, 1914.

File No. 312.52/369.

[1433] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Monterey, July 17, 1914.

File No. 312.52/373.

[1434] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, July 23, 1914.

File No. 312.52/380.

[1435] The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, July 25, 1914.

File No. 312.52/353.

[1436] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, July 29, 1914.

File No. 312.52/353.

[1437] The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy, Washington, August 5, 1914.

File No. 312.52/394.

[1438] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, August 5, 1914.

File No. 312.52/394.

[1439] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Monterey, August 5, 1914.

File No. 312.52/404.

[1440] The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy, Washington, October 9, 1914.

File No. 312.52/441.

[1441] The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy, Washington, October 9, 1914.

File No. 312.52/440.

[1442] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy.

Department of State, Washington, October 10, 1914.

File No. 312.52/440.

[1443] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy.

Department of State, Washington, October 12, 1914.

File No. 312.52/441.

[1444] The Acting Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State.

Navy Department, Washington, October 15, 1914.

File No. 312. 52/445.

[1445] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy.

Department of State, Washington, October 19, 1914.

File No. 312.52/440.

[1446] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihuahua, October 19, 1914.

File No. 312.52/452.

[1447] The Acting Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State.

Navy Department, Washington, October 27, 1914.

File No. 312.52/454.

[1448] The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy, Washington, November 20, 1914.

File No. 312.52/478.

[1449] [Untitled]

Spanish Embassy, Washington, November 26, 1914.

File No. 312.52/471.

[1450] Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Madrid, November 27, 1914.

File No. 312.52/469.

[1451] The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

Department of State, Washington, November 28, 1914.

File No. 312.52/471.

[1452] The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

Brazilian Legation, Mexico City, November 29, 1914.

File No. 812.00/1390.

[1453] The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

Department of State, Washington, November 30, 1914.

File No. 312.52/478.

[1454] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard.

Department of State, Washington, December 1, 1914.

File No. 312.52/469.

[1455] The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy, Washington, December 4, 1914.

File No. 612.002/90.

[1456] The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

Department of State, Washington, December 5, 1914.

File No. 612.002/90.

[1457] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, December 8, 1914.

File No. 312.52/480.

[1458] The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

Department of State, Washington, December 10, 1914.

File No. 312.52/480.

[1459] The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, December 10, 1914.

File No. 312.52/481.

[1460] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, December 11, 1914.

File No. 312.52/489.

[1461] The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy, Washington, December 11, 1914.

File No. 312.52/486.

[1462] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, December 12, 1914.

File No. 312.52/485.

[1463] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Veracruz, December 18, 1914.

File No. 312.52/497.

[1464] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, December 22, 1914.

File No. 312.52/488.

Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/102.

[Document 1336]

Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Madrid, January 8, 1914.

Minister for Foreign Affairs under date of January 2 writes me: Please let some one translate to you the original telegram I received and please be so good as to renew your recommendations to Washington in behalf of those poor Spaniards so cruelly and persistently persecuted by Mexican rebels.

Following is a translation of the telegram above referred to, to Prime Minister, Madrid, Spain: El Paso, December 30, 1914.

Notwithstanding efforts made by Minister for Foreign Affairs at Washington near revolutionists, Villa continues expulsion of Spaniards Parral, plundered movable property, confiscating immovable property. Beg you to take energetic steps to avoid cruel abuses otherwise an unfortunate or fatal precedent will be established for Spaniards residing in republican places invaded or which may be invaded by revolutionists causing loss of lives and many millions of pesos by Spanish Colony at Chihuahua.

Vega Angoitea.

I await your instructions.

Willard.

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard. File No. 312.52/102.

[Document 1337]

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 5, 1914.

Inform Foreign Office that Department has done and is doing everything in its power to protect lives and property of Spanish subjects in Mexico, and that telegraphic instructions have been sent to Consuls at Hermosillo and Chihuahua regarding subject matter your January 3, directing them to extend all possible and proper protection to Spaniards.

Moore.

The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Hostetter. File No. 312.52/102.

[Document 1338]

The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Hostetter.109

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 5, 1914.

American Embassy, Madrid, reports receipt of most urgent request from Foreign Office for extension of American protection to Spanish subjects in Mexico, particularly at Parral, where it is said they are being expelled, their movable property plundered and their immovable property confiscated. Foreign Office fears that the repetition of such acts, before committed at Chihuahua, means their extension to all parts of Mexico controlled by revolutionists.

Extend all possible and proper protection to Spanish subjects in Parral and elsewhere in your district. Unofficially represent to the Constitutionalist leaders the inevitable effect upon public sentiment of the continuance of acts such as those complained of and the complications they are likely to produce. Report result of representations and any obtainable information regarding treatment of Spaniards in Parral.

Moore.

109 Mutatis mutandis to American Consul, Chihuahua.

Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/106.

[Document 1339]

Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Madrid, January 6, 1914.

Your telegram January 5 just received. At the diplomatic dinner last night the King called me aside and said he had received several telegrams from Chihuahua addressed to him personally in regard to the killing of two Spanish subjects and other outrages committed by revolutionists. He requested me to again urge my Government to take energetic measures looking to the protection of his subjects. He said that he understood that the action of the revolutionists was probably in part the result of Huerta’s attitude toward the Spaniards, especially Huerta’s having invited the officers of Spanish war vessel Carlos V, to visit Mexico City as his guests. He concluded by advising me that he was informed that at the time of the killing of the two Spaniards referred to two Japanese were killed. The King asked me to inform you immediately as he felt after a short delay he should tell the Japanese Minister here.

Willard.

The Spanish Ambassador to Counselor Moore. File No. 312.52/127.

[Document 1340]

The Spanish Ambassador to Counselor Moore.

Royal Spanish Embassy,
Washington, January 7, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Counselor: I beg to inform you that I have received a telegram from the Spanish Minister in Mexico, in which he states that Arredonclo, Municipal Chief of Guanacevi, Durango, under orders from Villa is about to confiscate the mine El Desengafio, giving as an excuse and explanation the pretext which has been so often invoked by the Constitutionalists, that the owners of the mine were taking part in Mexican politics.

This mine is the property of two Spanish subjects, Rodriguez Hermanos, two Mexicans, and an American citizen of the name of Francis Knotts, and I should esteem it a great favor if the Department of State would once more interpose its good offices on behalf of my countrymen in order to avoid the looting and the confiscation of their property.

Believe me [etc.]

Juan Riaño.

The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Hamm. File No. 312.52/112a.

[Document 1341]

The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Hamm. 110

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 7, 1914

Spanish Embassy states it is in receipt of telegram from Spanish Minister, Mexico City, saying that Arredondo, Municipal Chief of Guanacevi, Durango, under orders from Villa is about to confiscate the mine El Desengaño, alleging owners were taking part in Mexican politics. Mine said to be owned by Spanish subjects, two Mexicans and an American citizen.

Use your good offices with revolutionary leaders to see that this property receives protection.

Moore.

110 Same telegram to Vice Consul Simpich at Nogales.

The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.52/106.

[Document 1342]

The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 8, 1914.

Investigate and report as to responsibility for killing of two Spanish subjects whose bodies were recently found in or near Chihuahua, and also as to action, if any, taken by authorities to ascertain responsibility and punish guilty persons.

Moore.

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard. File No. 312.52/106.

[Document 1343]

The Acting Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 8, 1914.

Your January 6. Inform King contents Department’s January 5, and also that Department has directed American Consul, Chihuahua, to investigate and report as to killing of two Spanish subjects. You will be informed regarding report.

Consul, Hermosillo, reports that Constitutionalist leaders have heard no complaint of mistreatment Spaniards, Parral, but are investigating by telegraph.

Moore.

Consul Alger to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/110.

[Document 1344]

Consul Alger to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Mazatlan, January 9, 1914.

Your instructions of December 18.111 Request interpretation as meaning of “all proper protection to property of foreigners.”

Alger.

111  For. Rel. 1913, p. 908. It reads: “You are instructed to extend all possible and proper protection to the lives and properties of Spanish subjects in your district * * *. This also applies to all other foreign subjects within your district.”

The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.52/112c.

[Document 1345]

The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 10, 1914.

Spanish Embassy states that it is in receipt of telegram from Spanish Minister, Mexico City, stating that Arredondo, municipal chief of Guanacevi, Durango, under orders from Villa, is about to confiscate the mine El Desengaño, alleging owners are taking part in Mexican politics. Mine said to be owned by two Spanish subjects, two Mexicans and an American. If you can readily reach Villa, represent to him the increasing number of complaints coming to us from foreign governments including those of France, Germany and Great Britain, with requests for measures to protect the lives and property of their citizens. It should be pointed out that the acts which give rise to these complaints also create a widespread public sentiment adverse to the Constitutionalists and tend to defeat their professed objects. This international aspect of the subject is of great importance and, in view of its practical bearings and possibilities, should not be overlooked.

Moore.

The Secretary of State to Consul Alger. File No. 312/52/110.

[Document 1346]

The Secretary of State to Consul Alger.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 14, 1914

Your telegram January 9. Department’s December 18 intended to instruct you to extend same protection to other foreigners as to Americans,

Bryan.

Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/123.

[Document 1347]

Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Madrid, January 14, 1914.

Minister for Foreign Affairs informs me that his Government is sending Secretary of Legation at Habana, Mr. Cardenas, to El Paso arriving there evening 17th instant to learn condition and render assistance to suffering Spaniards at Chihuahua. Minister for Foreign Affairs wishes that Cardenas may communicate direct and cooperate with our Consuls there and elsewhere. Please advise me.

Willard.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.52/123.

[Document 1348]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 15, 1914.

Señor Juan Francisco de Cardenas, Secretary of Spanish Legation, Habana, has been ordered by his Government to El Paso, where he will probably arrive to-morrow or the day after. He will later visit certain points in Mexico on special mission regarding protection Spanish subjects in that country. The Department would greatly appreciate any courtesies and assistance you could extend to him. Please telegraph when he will leave for Mexico and what points he will visit in order that our consular officers may be instructed to facilitate his mission. Confer with Mr. Cobb, Collector of Customs, and ask his cooperation.

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard. File No. 312.52/123.

[Document 1349]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 16, 1914.

Your January 14. Appropriate telegraphic instructions have been sent to Consuls in Chihuahua. Other consular officers will be suitably instructed to facilitate Mr. Cardenas’s missions at other points he may visit.

Bryan.

Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/141.

[Document 1350]

Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Madrid, January 21, 1914.

Minister for Foreign Affairs requests me to thank the Department of State for the prompt assistance rendered by our Consul at Chihuahua and Consular agent at Torreon to Cardenas now at El Paso. He earnestly requests that said Consuls be permitted to further assist Cardenas in establishing the fact that the sixty self-supporting Spanish families and the ten families supported by charity, all in El Paso, have taken no part in Mexican affairs, and thereby secure such guarantees from the revolutionist commanders as will justify these families in returning to their home.

Willard.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/144.

[Document 1351]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, January 21, 1914.

Department’s January 8. José and Agustín Gonzalez, brothers, Spanish subjects, who conducted a fish market and restaurant at Chihuahua, were found murdered at the public cemetery of Chihuahua on the morning of December 12, the day on which all Spaniards ordered expelled from Chihuahua by Villa left by special train for El Paso. The bodies lay exposed until about eight o’clock at night following when they were carried to the public morgue. I am informed by the British Vice Consul who has been informally representing Spanish interests in Chihuahua at the request of the Spanish Minister to Mexico that the authorities promised to investigate the murder of these two men. If this promise has been complied with the results of such investigation have not been made public. Circumstances all point in my judgment to a quasi official execution, the two men having evidently been carried alive to a point near where their bodies were found and there murdered. The bodies were dragged from the roadside where the murder occurred to a ravine some twenty yards distant. I personally visited the spot on the day of the murder and saw the pool of blood at the point where apparently the murder occurred. I am informed that the Gonzalez brothers were very bitter and outspoken in their protest against the action of the authorities in expelling them from Chihuahua and in their characterizations of such authorities. This circumstance coupled with the fact that the wounds indicated a formal execution lends color to the opinion that the execution was official.

Letcher.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard. File No. 312.52/141.

[Document 1352]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 23, 1914.

Your January 21. Full instructions have been given to American Consuls in Chihuahua.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.52/144.

[Document 1353]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 23, 1914.

Ascertain and report whether authorities made the promised investigation of murder of Spanish subjects, and if so, as to outcome. If investigation not made, informally urge that it should be made at once.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.52/156c.

[Document 1354]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. 112

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 6, 1914.

Have been shown Associated Press dispatch stating that Villa is anxious to have the Spanish Ambassador at Washington know that Spaniards in Torreon may expect no mercy. He is reported as requesting that the Ambassador be advised that Spaniards had better get out while they can. Please see Villa at once and say that the United States cannot believe that the report is authentic but we feel compelled to protest in the most emphatic terms against cruelty to foreigners whether Spaniards or citizens of other countries. We are sure that Villa will on reflection realize the importance of observing the rules of war and respect the person and property of foreigners.

Bryan.

112 Same telegram to the Consuls at Chihuahua and Hermosillo. See also footnote 114.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.52/157a.

[Document 1355]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 7, 1914.

Gonzalez brothers case. Spanish Government manifesting deep interest. Press for immediate investigation and adequate punishment of those guilty. Please prepare exhaustive confidential report giving facts as you found them, your sources of information, and your own deductions.

Bryan.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/158.

[Document 1356]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, February 8, 1914.

Villa arrived in Juarez this morning. I interviewed him at once and he has renewed his assurances of protection to all foreigners including Spaniards, says inform you he can not respond for lives of those killed during battle but those there after battle will be given every protection. I am satisfied now that he will be amenable your telegram of today received. I will follow Villa and do everything possible. I advise sending special messenger to Torreon via Eagle Pass. Please telegraph me authority to send him and wire Bonnet in my care here to follow my instructions. This will accompany messenger. It will be very hard to arrange neutral zone as outlined by you as Federals are not so favorably disposed to us. Villa will not release Terrazas, Junior, but has assured me positively no harm shall befall him nor further molestation to his person occur. Letter follows. He will be in Juarez several days.

G. C. Carothers.

Consul Hostetter to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/159.

[Document 1357]

Consul Hostetter to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Consulate,
Hermosillo, February 9, 1914.

General Carranza wires regarding the Associated Press reports regarding action of Villa when he gets to Torreon in treatment of Spaniards: Carranza says Associated Press is not always to be believed, and he does not believe Villa made said statements, as he has notified chief that all foreigners and their properties will be respected.

Hostetter.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.52/161 a.

[Document 1358]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 9, 1914.

On December 12 Jose and Agustin Gonzalez, brothers and Spanish subjects, conducting restaurant and fish market at Chihuahua, were found dead in cemetery of that place, circumstances pointing to formal execution. Spanish Government deeply interested. In course of your conversation with Villa regarding Department’s telegram of February 6, bring up this case as an instance of the deplorable effect of any mischance of foreigners in territory under control of Constitutionalists. Emphasize strongly interest of Spanish and American Governments in this case. Impress upon him the advantage and increased confidence he would gain from enforcing a rigid investigation and adequate punishment of those guilty. Failure to fix responsibility will cause highly unfavorable impression of Constitutionalists in the United States as well as throughout the civilized world.

W. J. Bryan.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/164.

[Document 1359]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Chihauhua, February 12, 1914.

Department’s January 23 and February 7. General Chao, acting governor, informed me yesterday very frankly that no investigation of the killing of the two Spanish brothers on December 13 [12] has been made and further that they had been executed by superior military order, meaning by order of Villa, under the law known as the Juarez Decree of 1862 which has reference to foreigners taking up arms in domestic conflicts. As far as I can learn the Spaniards who were executed were not implicated in political or military measures adverse to the present authorities.

Letcher.

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/180.

[Document 1360]

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

No. 289.] American Consulate,
Nogales, February 19, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s telegraphic instructions of January 7, 1914, regarding alleged depredations against the Desengaño mine in Durango, which question I immediately took up by telegraph with General Carranza.

In reply, dated January 27 at Culiacan, Carranza’s Secretary of Foreign Affairs says: I have received your message In which you ask protection for the Deserigano mine, owned by Spaniards, Mexicans and one American; and that the Spanish Minister reports that the municipal presidente of Guanacevi, obeying orders of Gen. F. Villa, was about to confiscate the mine.

I must state that representations and claims of these foreigners should be made to General Carranza through the Secretary of Relations, by the diplomatic representatives of the countries to which they belong.

I have [etc.]

Frederick Simpich.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.52/179.

[Document 1361]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 25, 1914.

In compliance with a request from the Spanish Embassy, renew your efforts to have an investigation of the killing of the Gonzalez brothers. Impress with all earnestness upon appropriate authorities the extreme importance of having this action taken immediately.

Bryan.

The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.52/182a.

[Document 1362]

The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. 113

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 28, 1914.

Spanish Ambassador informs Department that despite Villa’s assurances regarding protection of foreign property, Constitutionalist forces under Tomas Urbina have confiscated the Desengaño mine at Guanacevi, Durango, belonging to Rodriguez Brothers, Spanish subjects. Use best efforts to secure restitution of this property.

Moore.

113 Same to Consul, Durango.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich. File No. 312.52/180.

[Document 1363]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich. 114

No. 386.] Department of State,
Washington, March 2, 1914.

Sir: The Department acknowledges the receipt of your despatch No.

289, of February 19, 1914, with regard to the protection of the Desengaño mine at Guanacevi, Durango, which is the property, mainly, of Spanish subjects. You state that Carranza’s Secretary of Foreign Affairs has replied to you that he must state that representations and claims of these foreigners should be made to General Carranza through the Secretary of Relations, by the diplomatic representatives of the countries to which they belong.

The Department has read this reply with equal regret and concern, and its sense of apprehension would be greatly intensified if it were convinced that the reply was made in full contemplation of the grave situation which it would’, in its practical application, necessarily create. The Department, however, cannot help believing that the circumstances were not fully considered, and that General Carranza will not, upon further reflection, desire either to increase the difficulties and embarrassments with which, in the disturbed conditions existing in Mexico, foreign Governments and their citizens have been obliged to contend, or to force upon such Governments the consideration of new and serious complications.

The foreign powers have and can have in the Mexican Republic only one set of diplomatic representatives, and those representatives are, as General Carranza is aware, at the City of Mexico, which is the capital of the Republic. That city is in the possession of the administration presided over by General Huerta, which exercises actual control, north and south, over a number of the States of the Republic. In these circumstances it is no more possible for the diplomatic representatives at the City of Mexico to address representations to General Carranza, then it would be for them, if the case were reversed, to address representations to General Huerta.

In these circumstances the consular representatives of foreign Governments, including those of the United States, have, in conformity with the usages and necessities incident to such a situation, made unofficial representations to the local authorities in the territory controlled by General Carranza and the forces that acknowledge him as their leader. At various points, however, within that territory, countries other than the United States are not represented by consular officers, and unless representations can be made in behalf of their citizens through the American consuls, such representations can not be made at all.

The representations thus made through the American consular officers in behalf of other foreigners are strictly in accordance with international law and usage. It is a common thing for the consular representatives of one country to act in an unofficial capacity for the citizens or subjects of other countries. This is a matter of constant, indeed almost daily, occurrence, in peace as well as in war. To prohibit the exercise of such friendly offices would in any circumstances be a deplorable act; but, in the midst of conditions such as exist today in Mexico, it assumes an aspect peculiarly grave and could not fail to give rise to a feeling of anxiety. The Government of the United States has up to the present time exerted all its influence to prevent the adoption of coercive measures on the part of foreign powers for the redress of grievances in Mexico, and in so doing has lent to its influence the weight of its own example; but it is compelled to feel the utmost solicitude as to the situation which would be likely to arise, if it should be announced as the final determination of General Carranza that, within the territory which he controls, requests for the protection of foreigners and their interests may be made only on conditions that manifestly preclude such requests altogether.

It is needless to say that these representations are made in the same friendly spirit that has heretofore inspired the course of this Government, and the Department does not permit itself to doubt that General Carranza, with that intelligence and high sense of justice which are understood to characterize him, will see to it that the consuls of the United States are permitted in the future, as they have been in the past, to use their good offices in behalf of other foreigners in the territory under his control.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

114  This instruction was communicated to the American Embassies at London and Mexico City, to the American Consuls at Ciudad Juarez and Chihuahua and to Special Agent Carothers.

The reply of General Carranza to the representations made in pursuance of this instruction is printed under Protection of British Subjects, pp. 850–860 [Pgs. 850–860 include portions of Doc. 1494, Doc. 1495, Doc. 1496, Doc. 1497, Doc. 1498, Doc. 1499, Doc. 1500, Doc. 1501, Doc. 1502, Doc. 1503, Doc. 1504, Doc. 1505, Doc. 1506, Doc. 1507, Doc. 1508, Doc. 1509, Doc. 1510, Doc. 1511, Doc. 1512, Doc. 1513, Doc. 1514, Doc. 1515, and Doc. 1516] of this volume, in Vice Consul Simpich’s telegram of Mar. 11, 1914. The papers relating to this controversy, in their chronological order, are: Bryan’s Oct. 19, 1913 (protection of British subjects)’; Bryan’s Feb. 6, 1914 (protection of Spanish subjects); Simpich’s No. 289, Feb. 19, 1914 (protection of Spanish subjects); Bryan’s Feb. 24, 1914, to Simpich (protection of British subjects); Simpich’s Feb. 26 (protection of British subjects); Bryan’s Feb. 27 to Simpich (protection of British subjects); Simpich’s Feb. 28 (protection of British subjects); Bryan’s No. 386, Mar. 2, to Simpich (protection of Spanish subjects); Simpich’s Mar. 11 (protection of British subjects); Bryan’s Mar. 14 (protection of British subjects); Spring Rice’s Mar. 16 (protection of British subjects); Bryan’s Mar. 18 to Spring Rice (protection of British subjects); Bryan’s Apr. 6 (protection of Spanish subjects); Carothers’s Apr. 9, 7 p.m.; Apr. 11, 7 p.m.; Apr. 12; Apr. 14 (protection of Spanish subjects); Bryan’s Apr. 14 (protection of German subjects); Letcher’s Apr. 15 (protection of German subjects); Letcher’s Apr. 15 (protection of Spanish subjects); Lansing’s Apr. 17 (protection of Spanish subjects); Lansing’s Apr, 17 (protection of German subjects); Bryan’s (2d) June 8 to Carothers and Miller (protection of Spanish subjects); Miller’s June 10 (protection of Spanish subjects); Bryan’s June 18 to Hanna (protection of German subjects); Bryan’s June 24 (protection of British subjects); Carothers’s June 28 (protection of Spanish subjects); Bryan’s July 8 (protection of Spanish subjects); Hanna’s Aug. 5 (protection of Spanish subjects); Riano’s Nov. 20 (protection of Spanish subjects); Bryan’s Dec. 2 (protection of French citizens); Bryan’s Dec. 5; Dec. 10 to Canada (protection of Spanish subjects); Canada’s Dec. 18 (protection of Spanish subjects).

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/194.

[Document 1364]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Chihuahua, March 16, 1914.

Department’s February 25. Military Governor Chao replies on behalf of General Villa to my note directed to the latter urging an investigation of the killing of Jose and Agustin Gonzalez that the state government is not authorized under orders prevailing to treat on matters of international bearing and that questions of this character should be addressed to the First Chief of the revolution.

Letcher.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.52/194.

[Document 1365]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 17, 1914.

Your March 16. Take up on first suitable occasion with Carranza matter of investigation of killing of Gonzalez brothers.

Bryan.

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/206.

[Document 1366]

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, April 3, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: I have the honor to inform your excellency that my Government, to which I forwarded in due time the contents of your excellency’s note of February 19th last115 relative to the murder of the Spanish subjects Gonzalez brothers at Chihuahua, instructs me to express its thanks for the attitude of the United States in the case and, at the same time, to say to your excellency that it cherishes the hope that your excellency will insist by all means at your disposal that a thorough investigation of the facts be made by the Constitutionalist authorities.

I avail [etc.]

Juan Riaño.

115 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.52/208a.

[Document 1367]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 6, 1914.

Newspaper reports indicate that orders have been given by General Villa for the deportation of about 600 Spaniards from Torreon. Department hopes report is incorrect. If upon investigation you find it to be true you are instructed to unofficially bring this matter to the attention of Carranza and represent to him courteously but in the most impressive manner that this Government has entertained the hope that the expulsion of Spaniards from Chihuahua would not be treated as a precedent; that the hardships involved in the enforcement of a similar order against large numbers of persons at Torreon, who must in the main be innocent of any complicity in the pending contest in Mexico involving any further indiscriminate deportations of foreigners, will produce a most, unfavorable impression and it is hoped that he will appreciate the expediency of using every means at his command to prevent any such orders being carried into effect.

The Spanish Ambassador has requested this Government to act in view of the absence of a representative of his Government. Telegraph result of your representations as soon as possible. Collaborate with Edwards until further orders.

Bryan.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11419.

[Document 1368]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

El Paso, April 6, 1914.

Spaniards assembled in three buildings in charge of Deputy Consular Agents appointed by Acting Consular Agent Ulmer. On afternoon of 3rd Villa in person accompanied by members of his staff went to place where most of them were and in speech told them that they had assisted Federals morally and by force of arms; that he had proof of many sufficient to justify their execution but that in order that foreign nations, not understanding his motives, might not call him an assassin he would only expel them from Mexico; that the feeling amongst his soldiers was so intense that unless he did so, many of them would be killed if turned loose in streets. I and all the best members of his staff used every means of inducing him to rescind the order but he was unchangeable. The property of some of them will undoubtedly be confiscated. 1 believe all of them will be sent to El Paso and an investigation committee formed and many be permitted to return at once. All other foreigners are receiving every protection and are in no danger whatever. Ulmer is good man in the office and deserves great credit for manner in which he handled matters during battle.

G. C. Carothers.

The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador. File No. 312.52/229a.

[Document 1369]

The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 7, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: After your call at the Department on the afternoon of the 6th instant, during which an order, said to have been given by General Villa, providing for the expulsion of Spanish subjects from Torreon, was discussed, the Department instructed its representative at El Paso, Texas, by telegraph, to ascertain if any such order had been given, and, if it had, to interview General Venustiano Carranza with a view to having the order rescinded.

Before this telegram could have reached the Department’s representative and been deciphered, the Department was informed, in a telegram from him, that— [Résumé of telegram from Special Agent Carothers, dated April 6, 1914.]

As soon as a reply to the representations made to General Carranza is received, the Department will inform you of the result thereof. I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/212.

[Document 1370]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, April 7, 1914.

I have just interviewed Carranza based upon your telegram April 6. I have requested reply in writing. Verbally Carranza expressed his unwillingness to interfere with Villa’s orders; that it is his desire that all Spaniards in Mexico leave country before he gets to Mexico City because he would have to order many of them executed if caught; that he has positive proofs that the Spanish element in the country is responsible for the maintenance of the Huerta regime through financial support and the arming of men on their ranches under pretense of defense against bandits; that the Torreon contingent will have to leave if so ordered by Villa. When I questioned him as to possibility of many returning upon proving their neutrality he stated that he would take no action whatever before going south personally, expecting to leave within two or three days. From his and Villa’s attitude I take it that Chihuahua and Torreon incidents will serve as precedents throughout progress of revolution. They are conscientious in their belief that these measures are necessary for the pacification of the country. Will telegraph text of reply upon its receipt. The order of expulsion was given by Villa in Torreon in my presence after the most vigorous influence had been brought to bear upon him by me and members of his staff. This caused me to come here at once realizing nothing further could be accomplished there.

Carothers.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.52/212.

[Document 1371]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 7, 1914.

Your April 7, and that part of your April 6 referring to Spaniards.

Discreetly represent to Carranza that since he plans to go south so soon it is hoped he will foresee the wisdom of securing a suspension of deportation order until he can communicate fully with Villa regarding the inexpediency of wholesale deportation and the advisability of having the investigation committee do its work in Torreon, where accurate evidence would seem to be more naturally obtainable.

Does the history of Chihuahua deportation tend to support your belief that if deportation from Torreon occurs now many Spaniards will after investigation at El Paso be permitted to return to Torreon? How many of the Spaniards deported from Chihuahua have been permitted to return there?

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador. File No. 312.52/212.

[Document 1372]

The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, April 8, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: Referring to the Department’s note of yesterday regarding the expulsion of Spanish subjects from Torreon, Mexico, I beg to inform you that the Department is in receipt of a telegram from its representative at El Paso, Texas, stating [résumé of telegram from Special Agent Carothers, dated April 7, 1914].

Immediately upon receipt of the above message, the Department, late yesterday, despatched a telegram to its representative at El Paso, in which he was instructed [resume of telegram to Special Agent Carothers dated April 7, 1914].

The Department will be glad to keep you informed of whatever additional information is received from its representative in regard to this matter.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/216.

[Document 1373]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, April 8, 1914.

Train bearing about 700 Spaniards arrived in Juarez this morning. Are all passing quarantine station now. No difficulties were encountered en route. All Government departments are facilitating their entrance to El Paso. Many of them will be in great need and some are almost destitute. What can I do to assist them? They all know me and look to me for assistance and advice.

G. C. Carothers.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.52/216.

[Document 1374]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 8, 1914.

Your April 8. The Red Cross will doubtless be able to extend some assistance to destitute Spanish refugees from Torreon. Please ascertain if such assistance will be acceptable to them, and the amount necessary for temporary relief.

Bryan.

Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/217.

[Document 1375]

Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Madrid, April 8, 1914.

A personal note from the Minister for Foreign Affairs, which is being fully communicated to the Department by mail, earnestly requests me to do everything possible with the Department to secure protection of Spaniards in the part of Mexico controlled by Villa and Carranza and particularly near Torreon whence Minister for Foreign Affairs states they have been ordered expelled by Villa, and that Carranza refuses the request of American representatives on behalf of Spaniards for the revocation of Villa’s order. While expressing thanks for American action on behalf of Spaniards Minister for Foreign Affairs nevertheless characterizes position of Spaniards in North Mexico as strange and untenable. States that the rebellion derives its principle strength from the attitude of the United States; declares that rebels act in a way unknown to civilized warfare, and says that he is at a loss to know how to secure protection of Spaniards. Will the Department please telegraph me the strongest assurances it is able to give that everything within the scope of its powers is being done to secure protection of Spaniards and Spanish interests and at the same time renew as determinedly as possible its efforts to secure revocation of the Villa order of expulsion which is the direct cause of the anxiety and solicitude of the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

Willard.

The Spanish Ambassador to Counselor Lansing. File No. 312.52/221.

[Document 1376]

The Spanish Ambassador to Counselor Lansing.

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, April 9, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Counselor: I am in receipt of your note of April 8, informing me of the telegram which the Department has received from its representative at El Paso, Texas, dated April 7, giving an account of his interview with General Carranza upon the subject of the expulsion of the Spaniards from Torreon.

I have not failed to inform my Government of your note, and although I have as yet received no instructions upon the subject, I can not allow the opportunity to pass without protesting in the most vigorous manner against the accusations of the constitutionalists against my compatriots of having taken part in the internal politics of Mexico.

I trust that the Department of State will not lend any credence to these accusations, and will appreciate that the expulsion of the Spaniards from Torreon was prompted by the same motives which inspired their expulsion from Chihuahua so clearly demonstrated by the loot and confiscation of their property. I feel that in the absence of any proof hitherto shown of their active participation in the political struggle of Mexico, the accusations of the constitutionalists should not prevail against treaty rights and the treatment which generally obtains amongst civilized communities.

I thank you for the instructions which you inform me have been communicated to your representative to obtain from General Carranza the suspension of the expulsion order, and for your offer to keep me informed of whatever additional information upon this matter is received by the Department.

Believe me [etc.]

Juan Riaño.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/224.

[Document 1377]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, April 9, 1914, 7 p.m.

This morning rather serious situation arose. Acting Secretary Foreign Relations Fabela informed me that Department is in error as to interpretation of Carranza’s reply116 to Consul Simpich at Agua Prieta by inferring that Carranza agreed to accept representations regarding foreigners not Americans through American representatives; that original reply given Simpich clearly stated that Carranza agrees to receive such representations when requested to do so by Ambassador or Minister of country having no consular representative. He contends that such requests from Ministers should be made direct to him after which he will accept representations through our agents as a matter of information. I have requested him to state definitely if statement by you in telegrams containing representations that such request had been made made to you by ministers would be sufficient or if he insists positively that ministers must first notify him that they had requested you to act in their behalf. I have been unable to secure reply but am promised one tomorrow.

My representations were made through Fabela because I desire to submit instructions from you before seeing Carranza personally on this subject. This incident is what is holding up his reply to my communication in writing to him regarding your telegram April 6, to which I asked for reply in writing.

G. C. Carothers.

116 See footnote 114, second paragraph.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.52/221a.

[Document 1378]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 9, 1914.

Newspapers this morning printed statement from General Carranza to the effect that property of Spaniards expelled from Torreon will not be molested. Please telegraph immediately if this is authentic.

W. J. Bryan.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/222.

[Document 1379]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, April 9, 1914.

Carranza undoubtedly gave statement to press to effect that property of Spaniards will not be confiscated. I fear he will take no action with Villa considering his former statement to me that he would not interfere with the orders given by Villa. Cotton belonging to Spaniards and others, among it six cars belonging to Purcell and Co., is beginning to arrive in Juarez. I believe Carranza will go to Chihuahua to meet Villa who will go there from Torreon about Sunday, the 12th. I believe he will take no action whatever until after the meeting.

G C. Carothers.

The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador. File No. 312.52/221.

[Document 1380]

The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, April 10, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your note of April 9, in regard to the expulsion of Spanish subjects from Torreon, and in reply to inform you that the Department is in receipt of a telegram from its representative at El Paso, Texas, dated April 9, in which it is stated that General Venustiano Carranza undoubtedly gave to the press the statement attributed to him in yesterday’s newspapers to the effect that the property of Spaniards expelled from Torreon would not be confiscated.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Consul Hamm to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/225.

[Document 1381]

Consul Hamm to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

El Paso, April 10, 1914.

Arrived Torreon last Monday. Everything is still chaotic. In several interviews with Commander in Chief he has promised to protect all foreign property with the exception of Spaniards towards whom and their interests he is absolutely uncompromising. States all Spaniards must leave sections of the Republic under his control. I made especial plea for the Durango Spaniards which was unheeded. A great many flagrant cases confiscation abandoned Spanish property already occurred in Torreon and vicinity.

Hamm.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard. File No. 312.52/217.

[Document 1382]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 10, 1914.

Your April 8. You may inform the Spanish Government that this Government is doing everything within the scope of its powers for the protection of Spanish subjects and their properties in Mexico. A telegram from the Consular Agent at Juarez states that General Carranza has given out statement to the effect that property of Spaniards expelled from Torreon will not be confiscated.

Everything possible is being done to induce Carranza to revoke the order of expulsion. Hereafter you will be kept fully informed by mail.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.52/224.

[Document 1383]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 11, 1914, 8 p.m.

Your April 9, 7 p.m., regarding interests of nationals of foreign powers other than the United States. Ascertain, if possible, who have been Carranza’s advisers in connection with this matter.

Department infers Carranza is being advised by competent international lawyers, and if so hopes that its instructions of March 2, through Consul Simpich, copy of which went to American Consul, Juarez, which reflects Department’s position, will be seriously studied before a definite position is assumed by the Constitutionalists.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.52/225.

[Document 1384]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 11, 1914.

Consul Hamra now at Torreon telegraphs that a great many flagrant cases of confiscation of abandoned Spanish property have already occurred at Torreon and vicinity. In view of General Carranza’s published statement in the press a few days ago to the effect that Spanish property at Torreon would not be molested, you will please call the Torreon situation to Carranza’s attention and endeavor to secure a definite expression from him as to what may be expected regarding the abandoned property of Spanish subjects at Torreon and what steps will be taken to secure the protection of this property and the punishment of those guilty of looting and confiscating Spanish property.

Bryan.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/227.

[Document 1385]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

El Paso, April 11, 1914, 7 p.m.

Fearing that Carranza would depart without arriving at a definite understanding regarding representations made through Department of State in interest of foreigners not Americans, I last night delivered him in writing a request that he reply to the several representations I have made, and that he make a definite statement as to his intentions in future on similar representations. This afternoon I held conference with Pesqueira at his request. He informed me he and Carranza had discussed matter of my request, and that I may assure you that Carranza has agreed to accept them upon your statement that representations are made at request of foreign government. This will clear up situation, and I hope for telegraphic reply to my several communications. With few exceptions, Carranza officials and all of Villa’s men do not agree with Carranza on his attitude in opposing the mediation of United States regarding foreigners, and many have openly expressed their discontent. I hope for complete understanding between Carranza and Villa in Chihuahua next week.

G. C. Carothers.

[Untitled] File No. 312.512.228.

[Document 1386]

[Untitled]

El Paso, April 11, 1914.

Your April 11, 8 p.m. My telegram 7 p.m. today contains present status of situation. Isidro Fabela and Zubaran Capmany are those who are unfavorable, whilst Pesqueira and de la Garza have insisted that favorable solution be given.

Pesqueira leaves to-night for Nogales, returning Monday. He offers to accompany me to Chihuahua immediately on return and secure satisfactory and positive solution of matter. I have copy of your instruction of March 2d to Consul Simpich, which I shall carefully translate into Spanish before going. Their international lawyer resides in Washington. I am led to believe that Luis Cabrera will assume portfolio of Foreign Relations immediately upon his return, which will be very fortunate. Both Cabrera and Pesqueira are extremely friendly to United States. So is Carranza, but he appears to fear committing some act which might compromise him in eyes of Mexican people. Villa fears nothing, but acts quickly, according to his ideas of justice. He is not only friendly, but extremely grateful, to United States.

G. C. Carothers.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11755.

[Document 1387]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Extract]

El Paso, April 12, 1914.

Sir:* * * Regarding the stand that Carranza took116 in connection with your instruction of March 2 to Consul Simpich. Mr. Fabela, Sub-Secretary of Relations, called my attention to the fact that there was some misunderstanding on your part as to what Carranza had replied. He handed me a copy of the reply, in Spanish, and his contention was more or less true. I told him that it was strange to me that, knowing as they did that the Department had taken it as an established fact that Carranza would accept the mediation of the United States as concerned foreigners not Americans, they had not called the attention of the American Government to this long ago, and not waited until such an important matter as the expulsion of the Spaniards arose; that it appeared to me that they were purposely holding back such important matters, so as to use them in order to gain time when they got into a tight place. That I considered it an opportune moment to come to a definite understanding as to what their intentions are in future, so that when another important matter arises, they can do business with us promptly. He promised to assist me in every manner, and deemed it prudent for me to say nothing personally to Carranza about it, as he believed he could obtain the desired results. On the evening of the 10th instant he telephoned me that they were going to Chihuahua the next day, and that he had been unable to get Carranza to agree on a basis. This prompted me to write Carranza, asking him to give me a definite reply, both as to his future course, and as to the reply to my communications that were pending. I have received no written reply, but yesterday morning Mr. Pesqueira requested a conference with me, so at 3 p.m. we met. He told me that he had seen my letter, and had discussed the matters with Carranza, that he had insisted with him that he give a satisfactory solution to this matter, and that Carranza told him that he would receive and give attention to our representations when stated in your telegrams and instructions that the request is made by the Government at whose instance the representations are made. This prompted my telegram to you of last night at 7 p.m.

Mr. Pesqueira is very anxious to see that there is no delay in replying to our representations, and has offered to accompany me to Chihuahua upon his return from Nogales, and there secure in writing a definite solution.

In view of what I have said about the relations between Villa and Carranza, and the delay in securing results through Carranza, I believe it will be policy to continue instructing the Consular officers to settle all matters that come up locally with the authorities de facto in places where difficulties arise, in which way the majority of cases will be settled satisfactorily before they become matters of international importance. Such cases as arise where Villa refuses to act, can easily be carried before Carranza. This is entirely in line with what Villa told me when I left Torreon, that for me to tell Acting Consular Agent Ulmer to go to him personally with any matter that arose, and that he would give him every assistance. That he would immediately punish anyone who would molest Americans or their property.

I am using every effort to preserve friendly feeling on all sides, and at the same time accomplish the desired results.

I have [etc.]

G. C. Carothers.

116 See footnote 114, second paragraph.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/230.

[Document 1388]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

El Paso, April 14, 1914.

Just received following telegram from Sub-Secretary Fabela: Chihuahua, April 14, 1914, 4 pm.

Referring to your representation to First Chief of Constitutionalist Army regarding the misinterpretation of Secretary of State in Washington on the attitude of First Chief as to representations made by American Government in matters of foreigners not Americans, I have the honor to inform you that if representative of foreign government accredited to United States Government makes the request to the First Chief through the Secretary of State and the Consular representatives such representations will be received and given attention with the understanding that the form which you suggested verbally will be accepted by the First Chief. I write you today. Receive an affectionate salutation.

Fabela.

Verbal form referred to means that in body of telegram of instruction you state that representation is made at request of foreign power’s representative in Washington as you have been doing lately. I anticipate no further question on this matter.

G. C. Carothers.

[Untitled] File No. 312.52/232.

[Document 1389]

[Untitled]

El Paso, April 14, 1914, 6 pm.

I received information today from Torreon that Villa issued orders that no Spanish property be touched until he personally gave orders. Carranza will probably go to Torreon to see Villa instead of Villa going to Chihuahua as Villa’s presence is necessary at the front.

G. C. Carothers.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/236.

[Document 1390]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Chihuahua, April 15, 1914.

Department’s April 11. Carranza replies through Secretary Foreign Affairs that his attitude in case of Spaniards is identical with that assumed in Benton case,117 that is to say that interested governments must address themselves to Carranza through the Department of State and then only when there is no accredited representative of such country on the ground. Fabela explains verbally that this attitude should not be construed to imply any lack of gratitude on part of Carranza for favors shown by our Government but that it is assumed to force other foreign countries to deal directly with Carranza on matters affecting their respective nationals, such dealings constituting quasi recognition of Constitutionalist Government. He further points out that Great Britain has already accepted Carranza’s requirements.

Letcher.

117 Protection of British interests, pp. 856–857 [Pgs. 856–857 include portions of Doc. 1506, Doc. 1507, Doc. 1508, and Doc. 1509]. See also, under protection of German interests, Mr. Letcher’s April 15, 1 p.m.

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador. Fle No. 312.52/236.

[Document 1391]

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador. 118

Department of State,
Washington, April 17, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: For your information, I beg to advise you that the Department is in receipt of a telegram from its Consul at Chihuahua, Mexico, saying he is informed by General Venustiano Carranza that in territory under control of the constitutionalists all foreign governments must address themselves to him through their accredited representatives, and that such representations should be made to him through his foreign office.

General Carranza has expressed his willingness for this Government to make representations in behalf of the nationals of other governments in sections where such governments have no representatives, provided the governments concerned will request this Government to make such representations.

Whenever requested to do so, this Department will be glad to make representations to General Carranza, as heretofore, in localities where your Government has no representative.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

118 Mutatis mutandis to the French and British Embassies, and to the Spanish Embassy April 20, 1914.

Consul Hamm to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11703.

[Document 1392]

Consul Hamm to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 347.] Torreon, April 19, 1914.

Sir:* * * Immediately upon my arrival in Torreon I sought and obtained an interview with Generalisimo Villa, who was in a most communicative frame of mind, discussing future plans with me with entire freedom.

General Villa discussed the Durango situation with entire frankness, stating that he realized that that State had suffered as no other on account of having been dominated by the worst elements of the revolution, and ended by expressing his determination of personally visiting Durango immediately upon his return from Juarez and bringing peace and order out of anarchy and chaos, even if he had to execute one half of the revolutionists of that section, strongly intimating that it would be necessary to apply that summary treatment to some of the principal leaders at least.

Towards the Spaniards personally he is still absolutely uncompromising; towards their interests he was evasive. It continues to be his fixed determination to expel all Spaniards from every foot of territory under his dominion, and my second plea for the Durango Spaniards, whom I know have not mixed in political matters, fell on deaf ears. He only gave them a respite until such time as he could turn his attention to the affairs of the State of Durango. With regard to the confiscation of Spanish property, he stated that each case would be decided upon its merits, but the fact remains that many Spanish store properties in Torreon and much Spanish cotton on the neighboring haciendas have already been seized without any pretense of a prior investigation, statements issued by Venustiano Carranza to the contrary notwithstanding.

I next questioned him with respect to his attitude towards the property of Americans and other foreigners, and he replied that all other foreign property would be duly respected. Shipping facilities are at once to be placed at the disposal of all foreign shippers who care to send cotton or other products to the United States; Americans will pay no taxes or contributions other than the ordinary freight rates; other foreign shippers must pay a local export tax. Thus as far as General Villa is concerned all foreigners are divided into three classes, the Americans being the most favored, with absolutely no restrictions placed upon their business transactions; foreigners other than Spaniards must pay moderately for the privilege of transacting their own business; Spanish property must not be disposed of in any manner, as it is considered legitimate booty of war.

General Villa was very anxious that I should bring to the attention of my Government the fact (?) that he was scrupulously complying with all the usages of civilized warfare in regard to his treatment of prisoners and wounded of the enemy, his treatment of neutrals and their interests, with the single exception of the Spaniards, who he claims have forfeited all rights to protection on account of their avowedly hostile attitude towards the cause.

I have [etc.]

T. C. Hamm.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/255.

[Document 1393]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Consulate General,
Monterey, April 29, 1914, 6 p.m.

Department’s April 27, 6 p.m.,119 received. On the morning of the entrance of the Constitutionalist army in Monterey, I took occasion to call the attention of some of the generals to the general good behavior and exceptional neutrality of nearly all Spaniards in this locality. The generals informed me that they were glad to know it, and up to now the Spaniards have been respected and are being well treated. None of them have been deported nor ordered to go away but on the contrary are being treated well by all the chiefs the same as all other foreigners. I am confident that all well behaved Spaniards will continue to be treated the same as all foreigners.

Hanna.

119 See quotation thereof in telegram of May 12 to Ambassador Willard.

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/258.

[Document 1394]

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, May 3, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: I beg to inform you that I received a telegram last night from Sr. Joaquin Armendaiz, who is now at Alpine, Texas, in which he states that the Constitutionalists at Monterey have demanded 40,000 pesos from him as a payment to avoid the confiscation of his property. It is absolutely impossible for him to pay this sum and he asks me to appeal to you for protection.

Sr. Armendaiz has never taken any part in the politics of Mexico; he has already suffered greatly in his interests at the hands of the Constitutionalists, and if this last demand is enforced, it means financial ruin to him.

I beg you therefore to interpose your good offices on his behalf, and to make the necessary representations to the Constitutionalists, in order to prevent the confiscation of the property of my compatriot.

Believe me [etc.]

Juan Riaño.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.52/258.

[Document 1395]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 4, 1914.

Department learns through the Spanish Ambassador, who asks its good offices in his behalf, that Joaquin Armendaiz, a Spanish subject now at Alpine, Texas, has been called upon by Constitutionalists at Monterey to pay forty thousand pesos to avoid confiscation of his property. Armendaiz has already suffered greatly in his interests although he has never taken any part in the politics of Mexico. If this demand is enforced it means his financial ruin.

You will lay the above before General Carranza and express to him the Department’s sincere hope that he will direct that this Spanish subject be generously dealt with, as several of the women members of his family are dependent upon him for support, and also because it is understood that Armendaiz has complied with former demands to the extent of his ability.

Bryan.

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/266.

[Document 1396]

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, May 10, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: With reference to previous correspondence, I beg to inform you that Sr. Armendaiz telegraphs me under the date of the 9th instant, that the Constitutionalists at Monterey have forced the representative of his firm in that town to give them a draft of $12,000 on Sr. Armendaiz, and if this draft is not paid the agent will be put in the penitentiary.

I beg to call your attention once more to this case, and to request you with the utmost earnestness to exert your influence with the Constitutionalists to avoid this robbery with which Mr. Armendaiz is menaced.

Believe me [etc.]

Juan Riaño.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.52/266.

[Document 1397]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 11, 1914, 5 p.m.

On May 4 the Department telegraphed Consul, Chihuahua, as follows: Department learns through the Spanish Ambassador, who asks its good offices in his behalf, that Joaquin Armendaiz, a Spanish subject now at Alpine, Texas, has been called upon by Constitutionalists at Monterey to pay 40,000 pesos to avoid confiscation of his property. Armendaiz has already suffered greatly in his interests although he has never taken part in the politics of Mexico. If this demand is enforced it means his financial ruin.

Department is today advising Consul General, Monterey, that it has been informed by Spanish Ambassador that home of sisters of Joaquin Armendaiz, with furniture, was being used by Constitutionalists at Monterey; that if true Department would not object to Consul General’s taking charge unofficially of homes and office building of Joaquin Armendaiz estate if this would not interfere with work of Consulate or with good understanding between Consul General and authorities.

Department has this date received note from Spanish Ambassador making clear that Armendaiz agent at Monterey has been informed that if he does not cash draft for $12,000 gold, drawn on Joaquin Armendaiz, Alpine, Texas, agent will be imprisoned and held until the forty thousand pesos, or its equivalent, shall be paid over to Constitutionalists.

You will lay the above before General Carranza and express to him the Department’s sincere hope that he will direct that this Spanish subject be generously dealt with as several of the women members of his family are dependent upon him for support, and also because it is understood that Armendaiz has complied with former demands to the extent of his ability.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna. File No. 312.52/266.

[Document 1398]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 11, 1914.

Information reaches the Department through the Spanish Ambassador that Constitutionalists at Monterey are using the home of sisters of Joaquin Armendaiz, with the furniture. The Spanish Ambassador states that he will be pleased to have you take charge of the homes and office building of the Joaquin Armendaiz estate. If the above is true this Department would not object to your taking charge unofficially of this Spanish subject’s home arid office building, provided you think this can be done without hampering the work of your Consulate or lessening the good understanding existing between you and the authorities. You are given full discretion in the matter.

Bryan.

Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/267.

[Document 1399]

Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Madrid, May 11, 1914.

Minister of State has just communicated to me following telegram dated May 10th from commander of Spanish war vessel Carlos V to Minister of Marine: Minister Plenipotentiary states situation at capital very grave. He fears catastrophe for Spaniards if American Government does not very soon intervene there with its military forces.

Minister of State requests without specifying what they shall be that “immediate steps be taken by the American Government” and states that the case is urgent and the situation of Spaniards in Mexico City is very dangerous citing the recent treatment of Spaniards at Torreon and Chihuahua. I would appreciate whatever statement of a reassuring nature the Department can send me for communication to the Spanish Government.

Willard.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard. File No. 312.52/267.

[Document 1400]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 12, 1914, 6 p.m.

Your May 11. In order that you may have a general idea of the Department’s efforts in connection with the protection of the lives and property of Spaniards, Department’s telegram to the American Consul, Monterey, dated April 27, 6 p.m., is quoted below: The Department feels the keenest interest in the treatment that will be accorded to the Spanish by the Constitutionalists. When Villa took Chihuahua the deportation order allowing Spaniards ten days to depart was taken advantage of on the morning of the fourth day and all Spaniards, except those who are said to have been executed at the order of the Military Commander at Chihuahua, left for El Paso.

Villa confiscated their property to the value it is said of several million dollars.

Immediately after this deportation order had been given by Villa, the Department ordered the Consular Agent at Torreon, George C. Carothers, who was visiting in Texas, and who was understood to have considerable influence with Villa, to proceed to El Paso and endeavor to secure a suspension of the deportation order. He was unsuccessful in this. From that time until the fall of Torreon the Department offered repeated suggestions to Constitutionalist authorities regarding the inexpediency of permitting to be applied to any other foreigners the treatment which was imposed upon the Spaniards at Chihuahua.

The fact that after all of these carefully prepared instructions, which we have reason to believe were conscientiously and opportunely presented to the Constitutionalist authorities, they deported the Spaniards from Torreon, and have not, until this date, permitted any to return, causes this Government to look with grave concern upon the fate of Spaniards in Monterey.

You will use your supremest efforts to prevent the deportation or unjust treatment of any foreigners in Monterey.

Monterey was taken by the Constitutionalists about April 24, since which time the Department has not been informed of the deportation of any Spaniards. You may assure the Government to which you are accredited that while the Department will gladly exert its utmost diplomatic pressure in order to secure the greatest possible protection to Spaniards and their property, it does not, at this time, consider intervention in Mexico wise or necessary.

Bryan.

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/271.

[Document 1401]

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, May 12, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: The Minister of Spain to Mexico wires me that the Spanish colony of the port of Guaymas consisting of about two hundred persons is completely shut out from communication with our representative at the capital of the neighboring Republic and fears that it may be left without adequate protection if the town should be taken by the revolutionists.

In view thereof I have recourse to your excellency’s courtesy and beg you kindly to instruct the Consul of the United States at Guaymas, Sonora, Mexico, to protect the said Spanish subjects when necessary.

Thanking your excellency in advance, I avail [etc.]

Juan Riaño.

The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador. File No. 312.52/266.

[Document 1402]

The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, May 13, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your note of May 10, in which it is stated that your Embassy is in receipt of a telegram from Señsor Armendaiz, under date of May 9, to the effect that the Constitutionalists at Monterey have forced the representative of his firm in that city to give them a draft of $12,000 on Senor Armendaiz, and that, if this draft were not paid, the agent would be put into the penitentiary.

Upon receipt of your note, I am pleased to inform you, a telegram was despatched to the Department’s special representative at El Paso, instructing him to bring this matter to the attention of General Venustiano Carranza and to use his best efforts to have the latter revoke the order mentioned, thus relieving Senor Armendaiz from the payment of this amount. I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The Secretary of State to Consul Hamm. File No. 312.52/271a.

[Document 1403]

The Secretary of State to Consul Hamm.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 14, 1914.

The Spanish Ambassador called to-day to say that the Spanish residents of Torreon had been trying to secure an adjustment of the tax on or contribution from cotton which they held. I think it was taken by Constitutionalists. They are anxious to have the matter settled so that they can sell their cotton. I believe that they have offered to pay $15 a bale which, putting the cotton at $60 a bale, is 25 per cent. tax. General Carranza, we are informed, has asked for 50 per cent or $30 per bale.

Please bring the matter to the attention of General Carranza and urge as liberal settlement as can be effected. In view of the increasing interest that foreign nations are taking in what the Constitutionalists do, it is, we believe, the part of wisdom that they act with such moderation as to avoid such criticism.

Also bring to the attention of General Carranza the fact that there is a large amount of foreign property in the neighborhood of Tampico. The Netherlands Minister called to-day in regard to a well called the Corona in the Panuco District. The British also have large property interests there and the Americans more probably than any other nationality. Say to him that we regard this as an opportunity for him to make a favorable impression by the moderation and reasonableness of the contributions asked, also explain to him that it would greatly embarrass us if anything were attempted that could be fairly regarded as extortionate.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.52/271b.

[Document 1404]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 14, 1914.

The following telegram has been sent to American Consulate at Durango: [Telegram to Consul Hamm, May 14, 1914.]

We suggest that you take the matter up with Villa also.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy. File No. 312.52/271.

[Document 1405]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy.

Department of State,
Washington, May 19, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose a copy of a note from the Spanish Ambassador at this capital in which he states that he is advised that the Spanish colony in the port of Guaymas, Mexico, is completely shut off from communication with the Spanish Minister at Mexico City, and the latter is apprehensive that the colony may be left without adequate protection if the town should be taken by the revolutionary party.

This Department will be glad to have orders given to the naval commander in the waters about Guaymas to extend all practicable and proper protection to the Spanish subjects mentioned, in case necessity for such protection shall arise.

In this connection you are informed that the Department is advised that its consular agent at Guaymas is now in the United States and that there is at present no representative of this Department in Guaymas.

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador. File No. 312.52/271.

[Document 1406]

The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador.

No. 263.] Department of State,
Washington, May 19, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 12th instant concerning the dangers apprehended by the Spanish colony in the port of Guaymas in case the town should be taken by the revolutionary party. You request that instructions may be issued to the consular officer of the United States at Guaymas to protect the Spanish subjects above mentioned in case it should prove necessary.

I have the honor to say in reply that-according to information received by the Department its consular agent at Guaymas is now in the United States and there is at present no representative of this Department in Guaymas. In these circumstances the Department has communicated a copy of your note to the Secretary of the Navy and has asked him to issue orders to the American naval commander in the waters about Guaymas to extend all practicable and proper protection to the Spanish subjects in that town in case necessity for such protection should arise.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.52/277.

[Document 1407]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 20, 1914.

On behalf of Spanish cotton growers in Torreon district, from whom Constitutionalists have seized large amount of cotton, Spanish Ambassador requests aid of Department in arranging with Carranza for restoration of seized property to owners upon payment by them by way of contribution of fifteen pesos per bale of cotton.

Bring matter to attention of Carranza and say that the Department considers that it would be more advantageous in the long run to the Constitutionalist authorities to enter into such arrangement than to continue to withhold from these Spanish subjects the property in question, which latter course of action would tend to place the Constitutionalist authorities in a bad light before the governments of the world as oppressors of foreigners residing or having interests within their jurisdiction. Urge acceptance of this arrangement.

Bryan.

The Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/290.

[Document 1408]

The Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State. 120

Navy Department,
Washington, May 21, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your letter of May 19, enclosing a copy of a note from the Spanish Ambassador at this capital, in which he states that he is advised that the Spanish colony at the port of Guaymas, Mexico, is completely shut off from communication with the Spanish Minister at Mexico City, and the latter is apprehensive that the colony may be left without adequate protection if the town should be taken by the revolutionist party.

The request of the Department of State that orders be given to the Naval Commander in the waters about Guaymas to extend all practicable and proper protection to the Spanish subjects mentioned, in case necessity for such protection shall arise, is noted, and will be complied with.

It is also noted that the Consular Agent of the United States at Guaymas is now in the United States, and that there is at present no representative of the Department of State in Guaymas. Sincerely yours,

Josephus Daniels.

120 Communicated to the Spanish Ambassador May 28, 1914.

Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/289.

[Document 1409]

Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Madrid, May 23, 1914.

On several occasions recently the King has pointedly questioned me regarding Mexico and the suffering there of Spaniards and their interests. He has just inquired regarding the Spanish Vice Consul at Tampico whom the press reports held for ransom by Constitutionalists and regarding press reports that Villa has again declared he would kill all Spaniards. I am to see the King Monday night and if I could reenforce the reassurances (based on belated press reports and such news as I can obtain otherwise) I am constantly making on appropriate occasions on my own account with some pertinent message or up to date news from the Department from time to time I could be more instrumental counteracting the somewhat unsympathetic and aggrieved attitude of this Government. I would especially appreciate a message that I could use Monday night.

Willard.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard. File No. 312.52/289.

[Document 1410]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 24, 1914.

Please inform Foreign Office that we are in constant touch with Spanish Ambassador and are assisting him in every way. Evidently many false reports are being circulated in Spain. We would hear immediately if any violence was being done or threatened to Spaniards in Mexico. Villa expelled Spaniards from Torreon on the ground that they were actively participating with Federals but no Spaniards were killed. We protested most earnestly against expulsion and have cooperated with Spanish Ambassador in efforts to protect property. Say to Foreign Office that the interests of foreigners have our constant care and effort equally with American interests. Mediation is in progress and we are hoping for satisfactory results.

Bryan.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/296.

[Document 1411]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. 120

[Telegram.]

El Paso, May 27, 1914.

Following results have been accomplished with De la Garza regarding cotton situation and Spaniards. Nine of the largest planters have arranged satisfactorily for export of their cotton, paying fifteen dollars gold per bale war tax and also to go back and take possession of their properties when they consider it safe. Many others are trying to effect same arrangements and in order to determine whether or not they were involved in the politics of Mexico a committee composed of Alberto Madero, E. R. Barrera, Carlos Arguelles, Alberto Pani, and Adrian Aguirre Benavades have been appointed to investigate their record and any Spanish subject may appear before this committee and present his case. After being passed upon by this committee favorably they will be permitted to return and their cotton delivered. No other foreigners have been refused permission to export their cotton upon payment of tax. De la Garza has handed me letter explaining their position which I am sending by mail. I return to Torreon tomorrow.

G. C. Carothers.

120 Communicated to the Spanish Ambassador May 28, 1914.

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/308.

[Document 1412]

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

[Translations.]

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, June 2, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: I hasten to apprize your excellency that I have received telegraphic instructions from the Government of His Majesty the King, my August Sovereign, directing me to apply to your excellency for your good offices to prevent the Constitutionalists from enforcing the loan of 500,000 pesos they demand of the Spaniards at Tampico.

I am carding out those instructions in asking that you will bring all your influence to bear in order to prevent the consummation of this fresh outrage on my fellow countrymen and I am sure that His Majesty’s Government will highly appreciate such action as your excellency may see fit to take to that end.

I avail [etc.]

Juan Riaño.

[Untitled] File No. 312.52/305.

[Document 1413]

[Untitled]

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, June 2, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: With reference to the confiscation of cotton by the Constitutionalists from Spanish subjects, I beg to inform you that I have today received advice from El Paso, Texas, according to which the revolutionaries have not only refused to permit all the Spaniards to redeem their cotton on the payment of $15 per bale, but they have refused $20 from a great many of my compatriots.

Their animosity seems to be specially directed against Sr. Arocena, who is the largest grower, and Senores Turanzas and Olano, on the ground that these gentlemen have been very active in the measures they have taken to avoid being plundered by the Constitutionalists; and I beg to call your attention once more to this situation, which I consider of a serious character, in the hope that you will exercise all your influence in order to ameliorate it.

Believe me [etc.]

Juan Riaño.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.52/305.

[Document 1414]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 2, 1914.

With reference to the confiscation of cotton by the Constitutionalists, Department begs to inform you that it has this day received from Spanish Ambassador advices to effect that Constitutionalists have not only refused to permit Spaniards to redeem their cotton on payment of $15 per bale, but that they have refused $20 from a great many Spaniards. Department hopes that you will succeed in convincing Constitutionalist authorities of the inadvisability and inexpediency of putting Spaniards in a class by themselves and demanding from them more redemption than has been insisted upon from other foreigners. It seems to this Department that the treatment of the Spaniards at Chihuahua and Torreon has been very severe and that Constitutionalists should consider the advisability of permitting Spaniards to redeem their cotton upon payment of same amount as has been accepted from other foreigners.

Bryan.

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/311.

[Document 1415]

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, June 4, 1914.

Mr. Secretary. I have the honor to inform your excellency that according to reports I have received by wire from the Minister of Spain to Mexico, the revolutionists are laying, at Monterey and other places, as they have done at Tampico, on the Spaniards and Mexicans burdens from which other foreigners are exempt.

I am advised that around Monterey the Constitutionalists are pretending to make arrests with the purpose of demanding ransom from the Spaniards.

I bring these facts to your excellency’s knowledge and again call your attention to the discrimination shown against my fellow countrymen by the Constitutionalists, for which treatment there is no warrant as the Spaniards, as I have repeatedly had the honor to tell your excellency, have not meddled in the external politics of Mexico, nor am I informed that there is any proof of their guilt in that respect.

I therefore once more ask your excellency kindly to use your good offices toward remedying a state of affairs that is so unjustified and is causing serious losses to the Spaniards whose conduct entitles them to the same respect as is shown to other foreigners and avail [etc.]

Juan Riaño.

The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador. File No. 312.52/305.

[Document 1416]

The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, June 6, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 2nd instant in which you report that you have been advised that the revolutionary authorities have not only refused to permit all the Spaniards to redeem their cotton on the payment of $15 per bale, but that they have refused $20 per bale from a great many of your compatriots.

In reply I beg to say that I at once telegraphed Mr. Carothers on the subject and urged him to endeavor to convince the Constitutionalist authorities of the inadvisability of putting Spaniards in a class by themselves and demanding from them more redemption money for their cotton than had been demanded from other foreigners. Mr. Carothers was told to point out to these authorities that the Department was of the opinion that the treatment of the Spaniards at Chihuahua and Torreon had been very severe and that the Constitutionalists should consider the advisability of permitting Spanish subjects to redeem their cotton upon the payment of the same amount as had been accepted from other foreigners.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard. File No. 312.52/286.

[Document 1417]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard.

No. 39.] Department of State,
Washington, June 8, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your No. 81 of the 11th ultimo121 enclosing a copy of a letter addressed to you by the Spanish Minister of State expressing uneasiness as to the fate of Spanish subjects in Mexico City.

In reply the Department desires to say that inasmuch as no crisis appears imminent in the political situation in Mexico City, it would seem premature at this time to suggest to the Constitutionalist leaders that measures for the protection of Spanish subjects in that capital be taken. This Government has made frequent representations in behalf of the Spanish Government to the Constitutionalist leaders, with a view to secure protection for the lives and property of Spaniards in the cities and districts which appeared about to fall into the hands of the Constitutionalist forces. It will continue to exert its influence to this end, as occasion requires. This Government’s efforts in this respect do not appear to be fruitless, for this Department is credibly informed that Spanish subjects are receiving much more considerate treatment now than in the early stages of the Constitutional movement.

I am, [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

121 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.52/311.

[Document 1418]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. 122

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 8, 1914.

Spanish Ambassador, this city, reports that Constitutionalists at Monterey are levying discriminatory taxes against Spaniards and making unfounded arrests for purpose of demanding ransom from Spaniards.

Bring to attention of Carranza and urge that no discriminatory or confiscatory action be taken against property of Spaniards and that they be not arrested without good cause.

W. J. Bryan.

122 Similar telegram to the American Consul General at Monterey.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.52/308.

[Document 1419]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. 123

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 8, 1914.

Spanish Ambassador, this city, by direction of his Sovereign, has requested the Department to use its good offices to prevent Constitutionalists from enforcing loan of 500,000 pesos demanded of Spaniards at Tampico.

Bring to attention of Carranza, stating that this is done at request of Ambassador and urge that no discriminatory or confiscatory action be taken against Spaniards.

W. J. Bryan.

123 Similar telegram to the American Consul at Tampico.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/320.

[Document 1420]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, June 10, 1914.

Department’s June 8, relative request of Spanish Ambassador in regard reported forced loan of 500,000 pesos; following reply has been received from General Caballeros: This Government has not imposed upon residing Spaniards payment forced loan of 500,000 pesos or any other loan and has not even exacted war contributions from them. It is therefore very strange 1 at said foreigners should complain of prejudices or damage which they have not sustained nor are threatened with, and it is also very strange that said subjects of a nation which has recognized the Huerta Government should solicit of the Department of State of your country seeking its good service in defence of what they pretend to make believe are Spanish interests. Steps are being taken to require Spanish residents in Tampico to state to this Government from what source or authority they have received impositions of forced loan of which complaint is made.

Miller.

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/323.

[Document 1421]

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, June 12, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: I beg to inform you that according to a telegram I have just received from the Spanish Consul at Veracruz, ‘dated June 12, the Constitutionalists of Tampico are continuing to impose enforced loans upon the Spaniards, and that upon the vouchers which they give as a receipt of the sums collected, it is stated that these are a voluntary contribution. Two Spanish subjects, Juan Isusi and Ramon Junco have been arrested for refusing to contribute.

I call your attention to this serious situation, in the hope that you will exert your influence with the Constitutionalists to obtain the suspension of the order imposing these enforced loans.

Believe me [etc.]

Juan Riaño.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. . File No. 312.52/323.

[Document 1422]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. 123 .

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 13, 1914.

Spanish Ambassador reports receipt of information that Constitutionalists at Tampico continue to impose forced loans on Spaniards and have arrested Juan Isusi and Ramon Junco for refusing to pay. According to Ambassador’s advices authorities style these loans as voluntary contributions and this may explain why they have denied that such loans were being imposed.

Use your good offices with General Carranza to end that imposition these forced loans be abandoned and that Spaniards under arrest be released.

Bryan.

123 Similar telegram to the American Consul at Tampico

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.42/325.

[Document 1423]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. 124

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, June 13, 1914.

Department’s June 8. Spanish Vice Consul in the name of Spanish colony yesterday requested me to request State Department to take no further action on the question of enforced loans and stated that payments which have been made were voluntary and that Spaniards have made no complaint. Governor General Caballero has distributed circulars calling a meeting of Spanish colony at Governor’s palace for next Sunday morning.

Miller.

124 Communicated to the Spanish Ambassador June 19, 1914.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/330.

[Document 1424]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. 124

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, June 15, 1914.

Department’s June 13, received yesterday and was shown to Spanish Vice Consul who informs me that the arrested men have been released and that they had only been detained a few hours, and he again requested that no further action be taken in matter. Further stated that in answer to circular of General Caballero calling meeting of Spanish Colony for Sunday morning, a commission waited on General Caballero who wished to know who had notified Spanish Ambassador about loans, Vice Consul accepted responsibility and commission was ordered to report again to-day, and that to-day commission was notified that Spaniards who wished to remain in Tampico should register as Mexican citizens, otherwise they should leave. Vice Consul has resigned and preparing to leave. Not yet known what action the six or seven hundred Spanish citizens will take.

Spanish Vice Consul states that representations of the Government of the United States have made matters worse, and that any representations may make still worse.

Miller.

124 Communicated to the Spanish Ambassador June 19, 1914.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/332.

[Document 1425]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]125

El Paso, June 19, 1914.

Relative your telegram about forced loan 500,000 pesos at Tampico, Carranza says that he has not authorized it and has issued orders to General Caballero not to collect it. Carranza has also ordered investigation as to persecution of Spanish subjects at Monterey and promised to have it stopped.

Carothers.

125 Communicated to the Spanish Ambassador June 23, 1914.

[Untitled] File No. 312.52/335.

[Document 1426]

[Untitled]

El Paso, June 21, 1914, 11 p.m.

General Villa’s decree permitting Spaniards to return to Torreon and Chihuahua will be published in newspapers to-morrow provided for return of all who are conscious of not having taken part in any manner in internal affairs of Mexico. Am forwarding copy of text by mail. This has had good effect and many will return.

G. C. Carothers.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/348.

[Document 1427]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

San Antonio, June 28, 1914.

Sir: When I was in Saltillo on my last visit to Mr. Carranza, his sub-Secretary of Foreign Relations, Mr. Fabela, was very anxious to have me write you regarding the diplomatic representations made in behalf of other nations, to see if it would not be possible to have the diplomatic representatives in Washington make them direct to Carranza, through the Foreign Relations office, as England has been doing for several months. England has appointed Mr. Miles as Vice Consul in El Paso, and is obtaining very satisfactory results through his representations. If you could induce the Spanish Ambassador to do the same, I am sure that Carranza would not only appreciate it, but would concede very promptly to requests made by the Ambassador.

I have [etc.]

G. C. Carothers.

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/353.

[Document 1428]

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, July 4, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: I have just received a telegram from the Fathers of San Fernando Cathedral, San Antonio, Texas, informing me that Bishop Segura and Father Vilalta, the last a Spanish subject, have been imprisoned by the Constitutionalists at Tepic.

I beg to call your attention to the matter and to request your good offices with the Constitutionalists in order to obtain the release of these two priests.

Believe me [etc.]

Juan Riaño.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Keys. File No. 312.52/353.

[Document 1429]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Keys.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 7, 1914.

Reported by Spanish Ambassador that Bishop Segura and Father Vilalta, Spanish subjects, imprisoned by Constitutionalists at Tepic.

Make such investigation as practicable and if circumstances appear to warrant, request release of prisoners.

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires. File No. 312.52/348.

[Document 1430]

The Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires. 126

Department of State,
Washington, July 8, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Chargé d’affaires: As you have heretofore been informed, the Government of the United States is glad to have its consular officers in that part of Mexico controlled by the Constitutionalists act in representation of the interests of the nationals of France who may require their good offices. I deem it proper, however, that I should make known to you, not by way of suggestion, but for your information merely, the substance of a communication which I have received from Mr. Carothers as follows:

Mr. Carothers reports that on his last visit to Mr. Carranza, his Subsecretary of Foreign Relations, Mr. Fabela, was very anxious to have Mr. Carothers inquire whether it would not be possible to have the Diplomatic representatives at Washington make representation directly to Mr. Carranza “through the Foreign Relations office.” Mr. Carothers adds that England has appointed a Vice Consul at El Paso and is obtaining very satisfactory results through his representation, and that should it be your pleasure “to do the same” he felt sure that Mr. Carranza would not only appreciate it but would accede very promptly to your requests.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

126 Mutatis mutandis to the representatives of the Netherlands, Germany and Spain.

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/369.

[Document 1431]

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, July 12, 1914.

Mr Secretary: I have the honor to inform your excellency that it appears from a telegram I have just received from the Minister of Spain in Mexico that the Constitutionalists at Zacatecas have shot three priests and expelled about twenty. Senor Cologan adds that several Sisters of St. Therese are in hiding at that place.

I beg your excellency kindly to take an interest in the fate of those unfortunate people and commend to your attention more particularly the Sisters of St. Therese of whom several are Spanish.

I avail [etc.]

Juan Riaño.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna. File No. 312.52/369.

[Document 1432]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 16, 1914.

Spanish Ambassador informs the Department that he has received information that Constitutionalists at Zacatecas have shot three priests and expelled about twenty and that several sisters of Saint Therese of whom some are Spanish are in hiding at that place.

Bring to attention of Carranza with renewed suggestion as to advisability of moderate and kind treatment of persons connected with religious organizations.

Bryan.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/373.

[Document 1433]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. 127

[Telegram.]

American Consulate General,
Monterey, July 17, 1914.

Department’s July 16, Referring to reports coming to Spanish Ambassador concerning priests being shot and imprisoned, have been brought to attention of Carranza.

Hanna.

127 Communicated to the Spanish Ambassador July 22, 1914.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/380.

[Document 1434]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. 128

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, July 23, 1914.

Marcial Guerrero, Spanish priest at Cerritos, San Luis Potosi, arrived Tampico. Is detained at Jefatura de Armas awaiting transportation from country, he having been expelled from country by order of military commander at Cerritos. Is a Spanish subject.

Miller.

128 Communicated to the Spanish Ambassador July 27, 1914.

The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador. File No. 312.52/353.

[Document 1435]

The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, July 25, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: Referring to your note of the 4th instant in regard to the imprisonment of Bishop Segura, a Mexican citizen, and Father Vilalta, a Spanish subject, I beg to say that the Department has received a telegram from its Special Agent at Rosario in which he states that he has investigated the case. He reports that Bishop Segura’s father was a Mexican and that Father Vilalta has been sentenced to imprisonment for eight years because of his advocacy of the federal cause in the public press. He adds that General Obregon, now at Guadalajara, has the power to release.

This Government has already made representations to General Carranza looking to more considerate treatment of those connected with religious orders. The facts which you have communicated to the Department will be brought to General Carranza’s attention with the observation that this Government will greatly appreciate it if he will give personal consideration to the case of the Spanish subject Father Vilalta.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 312.52/353.

[Document 1436]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 29, 1914.

Reported by Spanish Ambassador that Father Vilalta, Spanish subject, imprisoned by Constitutionalists at Tepic.

Please confer with General Carranza and say that this Government will greatly appreciate it if he will give personal consideration to the case of Father Vilalta.

Bryan.

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/394.

[Document 1437]

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, August 5, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: The Spanish Minister in Mexico telegraphs me under yesterday’s date that the Constitutionalists who have occupied San Luis Potosi are enforcing loans from the Spanish residents of that town and are confiscating cattle from their ranches with the purpose of exporting it, probably to the United States.

I should esteem it a very great favor if you could exercise your good offices in order to obtain a proper treatment for my countrymen in that town.

Believe me [etc.]

Juan Riaño.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 312.52/394.

[Document 1438]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 5, 1914.

Spanish Embassy reports Constitutionalists at San Luis Potosi are exacting loans from Spanish residents there and are confiscating their cattle.

Request Carranza to telegraph orders to local authorities at San Luis Potosi to discontinue enforcing unjust loans and to return confiscated property to rightful owners.

Bryan.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/404.

[Document 1439]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General,
Monterey, August 5, 1914.

Sir: Making reference to exchange of certain telegrams between the Department and this Consulate General relative to the persecution of Spanish subjects and especially persons connected with religious organizations at Zacatecas, I have the honor to quote herein the English translation of a reply from Mr. Fabela, Secretary of Foreign Relations for General Carranza, under the date of August 5th, 1914, which reply says: Referring to your courteous note of the 17th ult. File 840.4 relative to the executions which were said to have taken place in Zacatecas, and in which mention is made of several Sisters of Santa Teresa, some of them Spanish, who were in hiding in that place, I beg to say that an answer to your note has been made to Mr. Manuel Walls y Merino, Counselor of the [Spanish] Embassy [at Washington] and Sped a: Representative of the Spanish Kingdom near the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army.

I renew [etc.]

Isidro Fabela.

I have [etc.]

Philip C. Hanna.

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/441.

[Document 1440]

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, October 9, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: Since I had the honor of addressing to your excellency my note relative to the situation which threatens the Spanish colony at Mazatlan, I have received a cable despatch from the Spanish Minister in Mexico, laying before me the fact that the military garrison at Acapulco is at this time in a state of insurrection and is committing every kind of atrocity, their victims being the Spanish residents of that place.

I would be very grateful to your excellency for any orders that might be given to certain of the warships of the American fleet now stationed in those waters to take up the question of protection of the lives and property of Spanish residents so gravely menaced.

I have no doubt but that you will direct that every appropriate action be taken in this respect and repeating to your excellency my thanks,

I take [etc.].

For the Ambassador:
Manuel Walls.

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/440.

[Document 1441]

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, October 9, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: I appeal to the kind services of your excellency for the purpose of entreating that you will be good enough to give the necessary orders, with all the despatch which the case requires, for a United States warship to be sent to Mazatlan, if possible, for the protection of Spanish subjects resident at that place.

I am informed by telegraphic despatches just received, that these people are being subjected to fresh acts of injustice at the hands of the Constitutionalist forces, who have also arrested the Spanish Consular Agent at that port.

Expressing, in anticipation, to your excellency my sincere thanks,

I take [etc.].

Juan Riaño.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy. File No. 312.52/440.

[Document 1442]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy.

Department of State,
Washington, October 10, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose for your information a copy of a note which has just been received by this Department from the Spanish Embassy at this capital, with reference to conditions at Mazatlan, Mexico. It appears, from the note of the Spanish Ambassador, that the Spanish Consular Agent at Mazatlan has been arrested and that Spanish subjects there are being subjected to fresh acts of injustice at the hands of the Constitutionalist forces.

I beg to request that you send a telegram to the Commander of the fleet on the west coast of Mexico, instructing him to send a naval vessel to Mazatlan, with order to investigate and report on conditions there and to render such assistance to Spanish subjects and other foreigners as the circumstances may justify.

I have [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy. File No. 312.52/441.

[Document 1443]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy.

Department of State,
Washington, October 12, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith a copy of a note, dated October 9th, from the Spanish Embassy at this capital, in which it is stated that the military garrison at Acapulco, Mexico, is in a state of insurrection, and is making attacks upon the Spanish residents at that place. The Embassy requests that an American warship be despatched to Acapulco for the purpose of affording protection to the lives and properties of Spanish subjects.

I have the honor to suggest, therefore, that a United States naval vessel be sent to Acapulco, for the purpose of observing and reporting on conditions there, and to afford such protection to Spanish subjects and other foreigners as the circumstances may justify.

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The Acting Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State. File No. 312. 52/445.

[Document 1444]

The Acting Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State.

Navy Department,
Washington, October 15, 1914.

Sir: In reference to your letter of October 10th [and October 12th], which enclosed for the information of this Department a copy of a note received by the Department of State from the Spanish Embassy at this Capital with reference to conditions at Mazatlan [and Acapulco] I have the honor to inform you that this Department is in receipt of the following despatch from the Commander in Chief of the Pacific Fleet: Replying Department’s radio, noon Tuesday, conditions in Mazatlan quiet. Trouble mainly in commercial cases, banks, and mining companies. Acapulco has no one in charge, every day a different man. Yorktown is doing everything practicable to protect life and property. Conditions La Paz quiet. Santa Rosalia quiet but very unsettled. Conditions will improve when troops are withdrawn. All commanding officers instructed to give all practicable protection to foreigners, every port. Signed. Howard.

Sincerely yours,

Franklin D. Roosevelt.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy. File No. 312.52/440.

[Document 1445]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy.

Department of State,
Washington, October 19, 1914.

Sir: Referring to the Department’s letter of October 10, in regard to the situation of Spanish subjects at Mazatlan, Mexico, I have the honor to inform you that the Spanish Embassy has made inquiry concerning the welfare of the Spanish Consular Agent at Mazatlan, who has been reported as being under arrest at that place.

The Department of State has the honor to suggest that you send a telegram to the Commander of the fleet in Mexican west coast waters to have the naval vessel now at Mazatlan report as to the welfare of the Spanish Consular Agent.

I have [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/452.

[Document 1446]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate,
Chihuahua, October 19, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to report that the Acting Consular Agent at Parral has reported to this office that on September 29, 1914, following the withdrawal of Generals Maclovio and Luis Herrera from Parral with all their forces, in consequence of Villa’s declaration of rebellion against the Carranza provisional government, Parral was occupied by some 4,000 Villa troops under command of General Rodriguez, and that Antonio Larrucea, the leading Spanish subject remaining in Parral, was immediately thereafter arrested and thrown into prison. The Acting Consular Agent was thereupon visited by a delegation of Spaniards, who besought his aid in securing protection for their countryman, it being understood by them that Larrucea was to be shot on the following morning. The Acting Agent called upon the commanding officer in Larrucea’s behalf and gained the assurance that the prisoner would not be executed, although it was stated that a demand for the equivalent of $2500, U. S. gold, would be enforced against him. On October 4, as reported by the Acting Agent later, Larrucea was released upon payment of the sum mentioned, and was allowed to leave Parral for El Paso, Texas.

In view of the general orders for the expulsion of Spaniards from the State issued by General Villa last December, which have never been rescinded, it is well to note that the Herreras, who have commanded at Parral continuously since the triumph of the Constitutionalists in this State, refused to carry out Villa’s orders with respect to Spanish subjects, and, in fact, forbade the exodus of Spaniards from that part of the State controlled by themselves. As a consequence of their position in the matter a number of Spaniards were found at Parral pursuing their ordinary course of business when Villa’s troops entered the place after the Herreras’ withdrawal. It may be noted that the Herreras have been particularly considerate of the rights of foreigners, Americans among them, in and about Parral, a circumstance of striking peculiar import when the bitter anti-American speeches to which attention was recently called as having been endorsed by them are considered, their action in this connection standing in strong contrast to that of many other Constitutionalist military leaders who have been very free in expressing general sentiments of amity for the American nation but very slow in granting even rudimentary justice to foreigners, Americans included.

Attention may be called to the fact that the professional defenders of Villa made much ado some months ago over the fact that the orders for the expulsion of Spaniards had been rescinded, or, at least, so modified as to permit those Spanish subjects who would prove themselves guiltless of participation in domestic politics to return to the country. I might note that not a single Spaniard has availed himself of the apparent opportunity thus offered him ‘to return to Chihuahua.

I have [etc.]

Marion Letcher.

The Acting Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/454.

[Document 1447]

The Acting Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State.

Navy Department,
Washington, October 27, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of October 19, which refers to the letter of the Department of State dated October 10, in regard to the situation of Spanish subjects at Mazatlan, Mexico. It is noted that the Spanish Embassy has made inquiry concerning the welfare of the Spanish Consular Agent at Mazatlan, who has been reported as being under arrest at that place.

I have the honor to invite your attention to this Department’s letter of October 15, in reply to your letter of October 10. In addition thereto, the following information has been received from the Commander in Chief of the U. S. Pacific Fleet: 9 p.m. Saturday, Oct. 24, 14.—Reference Department’s radiogram Oct. 22d, Raleigh reports quiet Mazatlan. No change in conditions and status of Spanish Consul same as reported in my 9 p.m. Saturday, October 10th.

The Commander in Chief’s despatch, 9 p.m., Saturday, Oct. 10th, above referred to, reads as follows: Spanish Consul at Mazatlan is under arrest, reported cause interference mines operated by Constitutionalists. He has communicated with Spanish Ambassador, Mexico City, who is investigating case.

Sincerely yours,

Victor Blue.

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/478.

[Document 1448]

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

[Translations.]

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, November 20, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: The Spanish Minister in Mexico informs me that our Consular Agent at Vera Cruz has advised him that the Consular Agent of the United States at Tampico, who has charge of Spanish interests at that place, has communicated to him respecting a recent case which needed the prompt action of the Consul at Tampico in favor of the interests of Spanish subjects, that he has been advised by the Honorable Secretary of State at Washington, that he should communicate with Washington on all matters concerning the protection of Spaniards, before doing so with the Mexican authorities.

I would be much indebted to your excellency, if, without interfering with the Consul’s compliance with the orders referred to, they might be amplified to the extent of authorizing him to make use of his own judgment when the cases require a prompt action, because under other conditions, and considering the circumstances which now exist in our neighbor Republic, the interests of my nationals, the protection of which is committed to the said American Agent, might suffer grave injury.

Expressing my thanks in advance to your excellency, I take [etc.]

Juan Riaño.

[Untitled] File No. 312.52/471.

[Document 1449]

[Untitled]

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, November 26, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: I have received telegraphic instructions from my Government to call to your excellency’s attention the situation prevailing in the capital of Mexico where, in spite of the guaranties offered by the Chief of the Zapatista forces, several Spaniards have been murdered and houses owned by our people have been plundered and sequestered while our diplomatic representative does not even know of any one to apply to for due redress and discontinuance of such acts.

In thus carrying out my instructions, I avail [etc.]

Juan Riaño.

Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/469.

[Document 1450]

Ambassador Willard to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Madrid, November 27, 1914.

7. Minister of State requests me to inform you of contents of telegram received last night from Spanish Minister, Mexico City, Bouquet: Notwithstanding absolute guaranties repeatedly given by the chief of the Zapata forces, various Spaniards have been assassinated, many houses sacked and frequent robberies in the streets, there being a total absence of energetic action on part of authorities which change from day to day. For the moment there are no persons to whom to apply for protection.

Willard.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico. File No. 312.52/471.

[Document 1451]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Minister to Mexico.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 28, 1914.

336. Department informed by Spanish Embassy at this capital that several Spanish subjects have been murdered and their houses plundered by Zapata forces. Please investigate and telegraph facts.

If such acts have been committed please bring to attention of appropriate authorities and urgently insist that the guilty parties be adequately punished and that proper steps be taken to prevent a recurrence of such crimes.

Robert Lansing.

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/1390.

[Document 1452]

The Brazilian Minister to Mexico to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Brazilian Legation,
Mexico City, November 29, 1914.

227. Some isolated cases of violence and robbery by irresponsible bands took place in suburbs during first two days against Mexicans and foreigners indiscriminately, including Americans, but the cases have been punished, in some instances even with execution of culprits, the Zapatista authorities always trying their best redress the damage done. Minister of Spain as much if not more than all other colleagues is being attended in his requests to the point of having obtained a safe conduct in favor of Consul of Spain, ordering everybody to obey and help him in his work in behalf of Spaniards. A general order from Villa published to the effect that full guarantees be accorded to all, any wrong to be punished by death.

Up to the present moment and if things do not change by unforeseen circumstances, general situation in the capital can be now considered as surprisingly good.

Cardoso de Oliveira.

The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Miller. File No. 312.52/478.

[Document 1453]

The Acting Secretary of State to Consul Miller.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 30, 1914.

Referring to previous instructions directing you to report facts to Department before taking action for protection of Spaniards, you are now authorized in cases where in your opinion prompt action is needed, to extend friendly good offices on behalf Spaniards before receiving Department’s instructions in particular cases.

Lansing.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard. File No. 312.52/469.

[Document 1454]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Willard. 129

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 1, 1914.

Department is unable to obtain confirmation of reported assassination of Spaniards referred to in your No. 7, November 27. Brazilian Minister at Mexico City was requested to report regarding this matter and he telegraphed November 29th that the Spanish Minister’s representations are being complied with by authorities; that there had been some isolated cases of violence and robbery by irresponsible bands in the suburbs of Mexico City; that such cases have been punished with execution of the culprits; that Zapatista authorities are trying their best to redress damage done; that a general order from Villa was published extending guarantees to everybody, wrongs to be punished by death. He concludes his telegram with the statement that the general situation can be considered surprisingly good.

Yesterday Silliman telegraphed from Mexico City that the city continued quiet and was well policed; that no political arrests had been made; that the Zapatistas had not molested natives or foreigners except in a few very aggravated cases; that the Zapatistas are compelling the return to owners of personal effects removed from private dwellings and disposed of by Carrancistas; and that banks and stores are resuming business.

W. J. Bryan.

129 Communicated to the Spanish Ambassador Dec. 1, 1914.

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 612.002/90.

[Document 1455]

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, December 4, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: The Spanish Minister in Mexico telegraphs me that railway communication between Veracruz and the capital having been cut by order of General Carranza, grave fears are entertained by several foreign importers for the safe arrival to the capital of a large consignment of merchandise which is now in transit.

These goods are valued at 10,000,000 pesos, and they belong half of them to Spanish firms and the other half to English and French importers, and most of them originate from this country.

I venture to request, in order to prevent the loss of this valuable merchandise, that you employ your good offices with General Carranza in order to obtain a guarantee for its safe arrival at the capital.

Believe me [etc.]

Juan Riaño.

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada. File No. 612.002/90.

[Document 1456]

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 5, 1914.

At request Spanish Ambassador, use good offices with Carranza to facilitate safe arrival at Mexico City of goods stated by Ambassador to be valued at 10,000,000 pesos belonging to Spanish, French and English importers and in transit from Vera Cruz concerning which fears for safety are entertained because of discontinued railway operations.

Bryan.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/480.

[Document 1457]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, December 8, 1914.

Vicente Vidal and Eduardo Sabugal, Spanish subjects, were shot in Tampico this morning at sunrise by order of Governor Caballero, Last night Colonel Francisco Gonzalez the chief military official in Tampico told me that he did not know upon what charge the men were held. The Spaniards told me personally that they were absolutely ignorant of the cause for which they were detained. This morning Colonel Gonzalez advised me that he had received orders last night to shoot them at daybreak and stated that he did not know what charge was against them but he was compelled to carry out orders from his superior. My despatch of December 3rd to Governor Caballero requesting information relative to the arrest of the Spaniards remains unanswered. Julian Zorilla one of these has not yet been ordered shot. Respectfully suggest that Department take up matter with General Carranza requesting the release of Zorilla.

Bevan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada. File No. 312.52/480.

[Document 1458]

The Secretary of State to Consul Canada.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 10, 1914.

Request Carranza to inform you immediately reason for execution Spanish subjects Vidal and Sabugal, inviting his attention to facts reported by Bevan that chief military official, Tampico, ignorant of reason and Governor Caballero failed to reply to Bevan’s request for information, although latter is in charge Spanish interests. Ask Carranza to give immediate orders that no summary measures be taken against remaining Spanish prisoner Zorilla.

Advise Bevan these instructions and that Department directs him to insist that local authorities take no summary measures against Zorilla.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador. File No. 312.52/481.

[Document 1459]

The Secretary of State to the Spanish Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, December 10, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: I regret to inform you that the Department has received a telegram from the American Consul Bevan at Tampico stating that Vicente Vidal and Eduardo Sabugal, Spanish subjects, were shot in Tampico December 8 pursuant to orders from Governor Caballero to Colonel Francisco Gonzales, the chief military official at Tampico. Mr. Bevan stated that Colonel Gonzales told him on the night of December 7 that he did not know upon what charge the men were held. It appears also that the Spaniards told the Vice Consul that they were absolutely ignorant of the cause of their detention.

It appears further that Mr. Bevan addressed a despatch to Governor Caballero on December 3 in behalf of these Spanish subjects, and of another named Julian Zorilla, who is still under arrest, but that his despatch had not been answered at the time of the shooting. In a later telegram from Tampico, dated December 9, 9 a.m., Mr. Bevan quotes General Caballero’s reply to his representations, reading as follows: Referring to individuals mentioned in your telegram, I have documents that prove their complicity in a movement of General Carrena Torres. Request that you advise all foreigners to remain absolutely neutral for I am disposed to punish very severely those guilty.

The Vice Consul adds that General Carrena Torres is in command of the forces of General Francisco Villa at Juanave, State of Tamaulipas, and is conducting a campaign against General Caballero.

Immediately after the receipt of these telegrams, the Department sent telegraphic instructions to the American Consul at Vera Cruz, directing him to request General Venustiano Carranza to inform him immediately of the reason for the execution of these Spanish subjects, and to ask him to give immediate orders that no summary measures be taken against Mr. Zorilla. The Vice Consul at Tampico was also instructed to insist that the local authorities there shall take no summary measures against this Spanish subject.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/489.

[Document 1460]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

No. 1315.] American Consulate,
Tampico, December 11, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to advise the Department that on the 3rd of December this office was notified by the Spanish ex-Consul that three Spaniards were arrested in Victoria, Tamps., and were sent to Tampico and detained at the military headquarters in this city. An official letter was sent to the chief military official, Colonel Francisco Gonzalez, requesting information relative to their arrest and detention. The colonel replied that he was ignorant of why these Spaniards were arrested and sent to Victoria, and referred me to the governor of the State in Victoria. Thereupon a similar communication was addressed to General Caballero, the governor of the State. Up to the present time this letter remains unanswered.

At five o’clock in the afternoon of December 7th, I made a personal visit to the Jefature de Armas to see Col. Francisco Gonzalez in regard to the matter. He advised me that he had received no instructions as to what disposition was to be made of the case of the Spaniards. I then saw the three Spaniards, Vicente Vidal, Eduardo Sabugal, and Julian Zorrilla and had an interview with them. They assured me that they had not the slightest idea as to why they were under arrest. I went with them to their private room and asked them again in confidence, advising them that it was best that I know everything in regard to the case, but they remained firm in their statement that they knew of no charge against them.

The next morning at seven o’clock, I was advised of the execution of Eduardo Sabugal and Vicente Vidal. I went immediately to see Col. Francisco Gonzalez, who stated that he had received instructions after midnight to have the two Spaniards executed at daylight that day. I requested to know on what charge they were sentenced to death, but he showed me a telegram from General Caballero ordering the execution, and said he knew nothing more than he did two days previous.

I immediately sent another message to the General requesting to be informed on what charge the men were executed. A despatch reporting the case was also sent to the State Department. The following day I received a message from the Governor stating that he had in his possession documentary evidence proving that the Spaniards were complicated in a movement in favor of General Carrera Torres, who is in charge of the Villa forces now stationed at Juanave, State of Tamaulipas. I am now waiting for instructions from the Department, and will not request copies of the governor’s evidence against these men unless instructed to do so by the Department.

The local conditions in Tampico at the present time are worse than they have been for many years. There is hardly a day passes that some Mexicans are not taken out and shot. All their property is then confiscated by the authorities. A number of the local military chiefs have banked in El Paso and in Laredo amounts ranging from $50,000 to $80,000 United States currency since they entered Tampico in May of the present year.

The Spaniards, Eduardo Sabugal and Vicente Vidal advised me the afternoon before they were shot that they had property in Victoria worth over $100,000 Mexican Cy., and they were willing to give bond for that much pending the trial of their case.

It may be that these Spaniards were indiscreet enough to become mixed up in the local politics, but I can hardly believe that they would go as far as to plot against the Carranza Government.

Any future developments in the case will be promptly reported to the Department.

I have [etc.]

Thos. H. Bevan.

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/486.

[Document 1461]

The Spanish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Spanish Embassy,
Washington, December 11, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Secretary. It is with a very deep regret that I have received your note of yesterday informing me of the telegram you have received from the American Consul at Vera Cruz stating that two Spanish subjects, Vicente Vidal and Eduardo Sabugal, had been shot at Tampico by order of Governor Caballero.

I at once telegraphed a resume of your note to my Government.

A telegram which I have subsequently received from the Spanish Consul at Monterey confirms the information given to the Department by Mr. Bevan, American Consul at Tampico. The two Spaniards who have been shot were respectable law abiding citizens, whose conduct had always been praiseworthy, and their execution, without any form of trial will fill with indignation the heart of every Spaniard in Mexico.

I thank you most sincerely for everything which you inform me has been done to save their lives, and I trust that you will spare no effort to secure the release of Julian Zorilla who is menaced by the same fate as his unfortunate compatriots Vidal and Sabugal, and that you will endeavor to impress upon General Carranza that such savage and inhuman methods, on the part of his subordinates, are not to be tolerated.

Believe me [etc.]

Juan Riaño.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/485.

[Document 1462]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. 130

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, December 12, 1914.

Local military authorities advised me that the life of Julian Zorrilla would be spared and he would be allowed to leave the country.

Bevan.

130 Communicated to the Spanish Ambassador December 14, 1914.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/497.

[Document 1463]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

No. 1095.] American Consulate,
Veracruz, December 18, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s telegraphic instructions of December 10, and to transmit enclosed herewith copies and translations of two replies131 to my representations to Genera] Carranza in the matter of the execution at Tampico of the Spanish subjects Vicente Vidal and Eduardo Sabugal and the detention of Julian Zorrilla.

I have [etc.]

Wm. W. Canada.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

The Acting Foreign Secretary of the Carranza Government to Consul Canada.

Sir: With reference to your note of the 10th instant, in which you insert a telegram received from the Department of State in Washington, asking the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army in Chargé of the Executive Power for a report on the execution of the Spanish subjects Vicente Vidal and Eduardo Sabugal, as well as with regard to the imprisonment of the Spaniard Julian Zorrilla, I have the honor to inform you that, in accord with the First Chief, since Spanish subjects are under consideration, and their kingdom has accredited diplomatic representation in Mexico City, that Legation, as well as others, through their accredited consuls in this port, have until the present presented their claims in all matters with regard to their countrymen and those claims have been duly attended to. The First Chief, in Charge of the Executive Power, hopes to have the honor of considering this matter with the legal representation of Spanish interests in Mexico, or through their delegation here.

This does not mean that the First Chief did not take steps, as soon as the matter came to his attention, to the end of obtaining a detailed report on the execution of Vidal and Sabugal and with regard to the imprisonment of Julian Zorrilla, and you may be sure that, if due legal procedure has not been observed, he will take such action as will bring to punishment the person or persons who may be guilty; but, in any case, sir, this Department respectfully calls your attention to the fact, and you will understand the reason, that it is with the legitimate representative of Spanish interests here that this matter must be handled and with whom all transactions in the case must be negotiated.

Please accept [etc.]

M. Davalos.
Foreign Office,
Veracruz , December 16, 1914.

131 One not printed.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.52/488.

[Document 1464]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. 132

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, December 22, 1914.

Julian Zorrilla was released this evening upon payment of 10,000 pesos and condition he would leave Mexico immediately by steamer. Have sent him to Sabine, Texas, on oil tanker.

Bevan.

132 Communicated to the Spanish Ambassador December 24, 1914.

Protection of British subjects and interests. Execution of William S. Benton, a British subject; good offices of the United StatesProtection of British subjects and interests. Execution of William S. Benton, a British subject; good offices of the United States

[1465] The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Dublin, New Hampshire, August 31, 1913.

File No. 312.41/30.

[1466] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, September 29, 1913.

File No. 312.41/30.

[1467] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, October 18, 1913.

File No. 812.00/92T5.

[1468] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, October 19, 1913.

File No. 812.00/9275.

[1469] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich.

Department of State, Washington, October 23, 1913, 2 p.m.

File No. 812.00/9275.

[1470] The British Embassy to the Department of State.

British Embassy, Washington , November 19, 1913.

File No. 312.41/69.

[1471] The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, December 3, 1913.

File No. 312.41/70.

[1472] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich.

Department of State, Washington, December 6, 1913.

File No. 312.41/70.

[1473] The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich.

Department of State, Washington, January 3, 1914.

File No. 312.41/70.

[1474] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, February 19, 1914.

File No. 312.41/93a.

[1475] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, February 19, 1914.

File No. 312.41/94.

[1476] Consul Edwards to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Ciudad Juarez, February 19, 1914.

File No. 312.41/95.

[1477] [Untitled]

American Consulate, Ciudad Juárez, February 20, 1914.

File No. 312.41/119.

[1478] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, February 20, 1914.

File No. 312.41/99

[1479] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, February 20, 1914.

File No. 312.41/96.

[1480] The Secretary of State to Consul Edwards.

Department of State, Washington, February 21, 1914.

File No. 312.41/95.

[1481] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, February 21, 1914.

File No. 312.41/103.

[1482] [Untitled]

El Paso, February 21, 1914.

File No. 312.41/104.

[1483] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich.

Department of State, Washington, February 21, 1914.

File No. 312.41/101b.

[1484] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, February 21, 1914.

File No. 312.41/124.

[1485] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, February 21; 1914.

File No. 312.41/101a.

[1486] The British Embassy to the Department of State.

British Embassy, Washington , February 22, 1914.

File No. 312.41/112.

[1487] Consul Edwards to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Ciudad Juarez, February 22, 1914.

File No. 312.41/105.

[1488] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, February 22, 1914.

File No. 312.41/105a.

[1489] Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, London, February 22, 1914.

File No. 312.41/106.

[1490] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, February 28, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 312.41/107a.

[1491] The Secretary of State to Consul Edwards.

Department of State, Washington, February 23, 1914.

File No. 312.41/107b.

[1492] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, February 23, 1914.

File No. 312.41/108.

[1493] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, February 23, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 312.41/111a.

[1494] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich.

Department of State, Washington, February 24, 1914.

File No. 312.41/125a.

[1495] Consul Edwards to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Ciudad Juarez, February 24, 1914.

File No. 312.41/113.

[1496] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihuahua, February 24, 1914.

File No. 312.41/114.

[1497] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, February 24, 1914.

File No. 312.41/114.

[1498] The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, February 24, 1914.

File No. 312.41/132.

[1499] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, February 25, 1914.

File No. 312.41/130b.

[1500] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihuahua, February 25, 1914.

File No. 312.41/126.

[1501] Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Nogales, February 26, 1914.

File No. 312.41/139.

[1502] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, February 26, 1914.

File No. 312.41/138.

[1503] The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, February 26, 1914.

File No. 312.41/148.

[1504] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihuahua, February 26, 1914.

File No. 312.41/137.

[1505] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, February 27, 1914.

File No. 312.41/137.

[1506] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich.

Department of State, Washington, February 27, 1914.

File No. 312.41/139.

[1507] The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, February 27, 1914.

File No. 312.41/149.

[1508] Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Nogales, February 28, 1914.

File No. 312.41/187.

[1509] Collector of Customs Cobb to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, March 1, 1914.

File No. 312.41/150.

[1510] Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Nogales, March 2, 1914.

File No. 312.41/162.

[1511] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, March 2, 1914.

File No. 312.41/159a.

[1512] The British Embassy to the Department of State.

British Embassy, Washington , March 3, 1914.

File No. 312.41/181.

[1513] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, March 4, 1914.

File No. 312.41/170.

[1514] Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

Douglas, March 11, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11151.

[1515] The Secretary of State to the Italian Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, March 14, 1914.

File No. 812.00/11151.

[1516] The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, March 16, 1914.

File No. 312.41/197.

[1517] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, March 18, 1914.

File No. 312.41/197.

[1518] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, March 18, 1914.

File No. 312.41/197.

[1519] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihuahua, June 4, 1914.

File No. 312.41/254.

[1520] The British Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy, Washington, June 18, 1914.

File No. 312.41/258.

[1521] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, June 24, 1914.

File No. 312.41/258.

[1522] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, July 10, 1914.

File No. 312.41/269.

[1523] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihuahua, August 6, 1914.

File No. 312.41/288.

[1524] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, September 1, 1914.

File No. 312.41/288.

[1525] The British Embassy to the Department of State.

British Embassy, Washington , November 17, 1914.

File No. 312.41/300.

[1526] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy.

Department of State, Washington, November 19, 1914.

File No. 312.41/300.

[1527] The Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State.

Navy Department, Washington, November 20, 1914.

File No. 312.41/305.

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/30.

[Document 1465]

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy,
Dublin, New Hampshire, August 31, 1913.

Dear Mr. Secretary of State: I am loath to trouble you in the present time of stress and the more so as the present letter is I have no doubt an unnecessary precaution.

My request is that when your Consuls or other officials in Mexico receive intimation of any steps or events likely to affect the safety of foreigners they may at once impart their knowledge to all foreigners alike. A similar practice has been followed to my own knowledge in other countries in troublesome times and I have not the slightest doubt that, whether by instruction or not, it is the rule of your officials. You of course are aware of the great number of British subjects from all part of the King’s Dominions (mostly quite indistinguishable from Americans) who are resident in Mexico and very closely concerned in all that happens there. My Government is of course in honor bound to bear this fact in mind and to leave no precaution neglected in order that they may be in as good a position as anyone else to provide for their safety.

It is from all these points of view that Sir E. Grey feels he can rely on your Government in case you are forced in the future to take decisive action of a nature to affect the safety of foreigners (which could properly be imparted to foreign nations) to give if possible timely warning in order that my Government may be enabled to take in time the necessary steps to provide for the safety of British subjects.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice.

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador. File No. 312.41/30.

[Document 1466]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, September 29, 1913.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your note of August 31, wherein you suggest that, when American Consular officers or other officials in Mexico receive intimation of any steps or events likely to affect the safety of foreigners, they may at once impart their knowledge to all foreigners alike.

In reply I beg to advise you that instructions in the sense indicated had already been given to all American Consuls in Mexico.

In this relation I beg also to advise you that the United States Transport Buford, now on the west coast of Mexico for the purpose of bringing out refugees, has been instructed to furnish transportation to any foreigners who desire to leave Mexico, in so far as the capacity of the vessel will permit.

I am [etc.]

John E. Osborne.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/92T5.

[Document 1467]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, October 18, 1913.

564. German Minister has called on me and requested me to make urgent representations to my Government regarding the forty Germans detained in Torreon by Francisco Villa. He states that Francisco Villa is permitting American citizens to depart but has informed the other foreigners that he will hold them hostages against an attack by the Federal forces. The Minister is exceedingly earnest regarding the lives of these German subjects and states that he has been sure that the United States Government can and will use its unofficial good offices with the rebel leaders to the end that these German subjects may be immediately released. The other foreigners in Torreon whom Villa refuses to release are seven Englishmen, forty Frenchmen and great number of Spaniards and Italians.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 812.00/9275.

[Document 1468]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 19, 1913.

Use every available means to deliver following telegraphic instructions to American Consul Torreon: Please see at once those in authority at Torreon and say that Department is informed that seven Englishmen, forty Frenchmen, some Spanish and Italians and about forty Germans are detained there against their will and not allowed to leave. Make clear to the authorities that we are obligated to foreign nations to extend to other nationals the same protection that we extend to American citizens and that we therefore demand that all foreigners desiring to leave shall be permitted to go unmolested. Report fully any objections which may be made or failure to carry out these instructions by the authorities.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich. File No. 812.00/9275.

[Document 1469]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 23, 1913, 2 p.m.

Department is informed that Francisco Villa is holding seven Englishmen, forty Frenchmen, several Spaniards and Italians and about forty Germans as “hostages against an attack by the Federal forces.”

Bring to attention of General Carranza and say that in view of authority which he is reported to exercise over revolutionary leaders, it is hoped he will desire to order that all foreigners in Torreon be given immediately absolute liberty to depart from Torreon at will and that ample protection be afforded. Report action Carranza takes.

Bryan.

The British Embassy to the Department of State. File No. 312.41/69.

[Document 1470]

The British Embassy to the Department of State.

memorandum.

His Britannic Majesty’s Embassy has the honour to inform the Department of State that a telegram has been received from the British Minister in Mexico City to the effect that great alarm exists among foreign residents who fear serious danger to life, even in the towns, if any action should be taken by the United States which might excite popular feeling. Sir L. Carden anticipates that the dispatch of a peremptory note which might be published, the landing of marines, or a blockade of Mexican ports might have such an effect. In the event of a blockade of the ports the dock laborers, who are a turbulent class and would be left without work, would be sure to commence robbing. It is also anticipated that if the Government should be obliged to withdraw the greater part of the present garrison from the capital there would be grave danger of a rising of the numerous criminal class. In the event of lack of funds to pay the troops they would probably mutiny.

His Majesty’s Embassy is not unmindful of the assurance received privately from the Department of State on August 2, that in the event of any decisive step diplomatic or otherwise being determined on, it would be duly advised; and it is very sensible of the courtesy of the Department of State in informing it on September 29 of the instructions issued to American Consular officers or other officials in Mexico desiring them, if they receive intimation of any steps or events likely to affect the safety of foreigners, to impart their knowledge at once to all foreigners alike.

In view of the present situation in Mexico His Majesty’s Embassy is instructed to draw the attention of the Department of State to the importance of timely notice if possible being given of any steps which the United States Government may contemplate taking and which might result in danger to the lives of British subjects and other foreigners in order that they may have time to come in from outlying districts.

His Majesty’s Embassy has already had occasion more than once to express the gratitude of His Majesty’s Government for assistance rendered by United States ships in conveying British subjects to places of safety. It appears that real danger at this moment threatens British subjects at Puerto Mexico and the region round Tampico. His Majesty’s Government feel it incumbent upon them to make arrangements for their protection, and two ships are being sent to those ports to protect British lives and property and to take off refugees. They trust that pending the arrival of these ships they may again have recourse to the assistance of the United States ships in affording British subjects such protection as may be possible.

British Embassy,
Washington , November 19, 1913.

Note.—Assurance of protection given verbally to the British Embassy November 19, 1913.

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/70.

[Document 1471]

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy,
Washington, December 3, 1913.

Dear Mr. Secretary: I have just received a telegram from a British subject named Richard Keays, dated from El Paso, Texas, today, stating that his property and that of other foreigners in the district of Juarez, Chihuahua, is in grave danger from the Constitutionalists in that neighborhood, and asking that protection be given to them I have referred this request by telegraph to H. M. Minister in Mexico City, but I venture to inform you at the same time, in the hope that it may be possible to instruct the United States authorities on the spot to cooperate with their British colleagues in taking all possible steps to obtain protection for the properties in question. I am emboldened to make this request by the unvarying courtesy and readiness which the United States Government have shown to cooperate with the British authorities in case of danger to foreign life and property in Mexico. Any steps which you can properly take in the direction indicated, will, i. am confident, be highly appreciated by my Government.

I am [etc.]

For the Ambassador:
Colville Barclay.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich. File No. 312.41/70.

[Document 1472]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 6, 1913.

The British Embassy at this capital is in receipt of a telegram from Richard Keays, a British subject in the district of Juarez, stating that his property is in grave danger from Constitutionalists. Please confer with appropriate authorities and urge upon them the importance of giving suitable protection to the property of Mr. Keays as well as the property of other foreigners in that district.

Bryan.

The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich. File No. 312.41/70.

[Document 1473]

The Acting Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 3, 1914.

Department’s December 6. Department now informed Villa has seized about eight hundred head of cattle from Keays, British subject, at Palomas, Chihuahua, on which he paid to Constitutionalist Government one thousand dollars gold export duty. Villa refuses to permit Keays to cross the cattle to United States. You will ask that cattle be returned to Keays and that he be permitted to pass them out of Mexico.

J. B. Moore.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.41/93a.

[Document 1474]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. 133

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 19, 1914.

British Ambassador advises Department of receipt of a telegram from a Mrs. Benton, dated at El Paso, in which she says that her husband, William Benton, British subject, went to Juarez on February 17, and after a heated discussion with Villa was thrown into jail. It is stated that when friends of Benton visited Villa in Benton’s behalf Villia replied. “I have not got him prisoner. I saw him this morning. I decline to talk any more on the subject.” Mrs. Benton expresses fears for her husband’s life and Ambassador desires this Government to make inquiries and use good offices with Villa and to secure Benton’s liberation. The matter is reported as most urgent and the Department desires you to give it your immediate attention. Department is also communicating with Consul at Juarez.

W. J. Bryan.

133 Similar telegrams to Consul Edwards and Vice Consul Simpich.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/94.

[Document 1475]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, February 19, 1914.

Your telegram re Benton. Villa informs me Benton not under arrest. Says suspects Benton of being in plot to kill him. I believe he is held until Villa goes south to-morrow when he will be released. Will continue investigation. Am confident he is not dead.

G. C. Carothers.

Consul Edwards to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/95.

[Document 1476]

Consul Edwards to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Ciudad Juarez, February 19, 1914.

Department’s February 19. This Consul visited General Villa in his private office this afternoon and informed him of instructions of Honorable Secretary of State Bryan, at the request of British Ambassador. General Villa stated that he was anxious that my Government and the British Government should know the facts with reference to William Benton and that he is dead. That Benton came to his house armed and attempted to kill him. Villa produced large pistol which he said Benton brought with him. I will convey the facts to the family and send full particulars to the Department by next mail.

Edwards.

[Untitled] File No. 312.41/119.

[Document 1477]

[Untitled]

No. 204.] American Consulate,
Ciudad Juárez, February 20, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to refer Department’s telegram February 19, and telegram from this office under date of February 19, 1914, announcing the death of William Benton, a British subject, at the hands of the Constitutionalist authorities in Ciudad Juarez on the afternoon of the 17th of February last. This Consul, as stated, after the receipt of Department’s instructions made by request of his excellency the British Ambassador, immediately went to the headquarters of General Villa and revealed to him the contents of said telegram.

After which General Villa said that he had abstained from giving the facts to the newspapers and public, but inasmuch as I represented the American Government he was in duty bound to give me the facts in the case of Sr. Benton, only however to be imparted to my Government and to his family.

Señor Benton is dead. He came here to this house and attempted to kill me. He was armed and came here for that purpose. He was a dangerous man. I knew him, he had killed several men in Mexico. I could not afford to let such a man live. Here is the gun that he had on his person when he came here (displaying a large pistol and cartridge belt well filled).

The Consul did not inquire as to the manner of execution, and no trial or court-martial was mentioned, but Villa was asked if he would permit the wife to have the remains. His answer was: “Not now. Later I will do so.” The Consul asked as a favor that he have the grave marked so that it might be located in the future by his relatives. This he promised to do.

The General then made a statement, saying that Benton before his death admitted that he (Benton) brought the trouble on himself, and asked him (Villa) to do him the favor to convey to his wife that it was his wish that all his property in Mexico should be given her; that half of his holdings in Mexico was his, and the other half belonged to his cousin. General Villa requested me to so inform Mrs. Benton. Villa stated that the Benton property would not be confiscated. This closed the interview. General Villa left for Chihuahua the following morning.

The Consul related the above to Mrs. Benton with the exception of seeing the pistol which Villa claimed her husband was armed with, as it is my intention to endeavor to ascertain a description of the gun usually carried by the deceased.

This Consul will later send such information as he may gather from incidents and rumors heard on the streets and in newspapers, which occurred previous to William Benton’s departure to Juarez, also such evidence as he considers of value in proving or disproving the having on his person by Benton of a pistol etc.

I have [etc.]

Thomas D. Edwards.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/99

[Document 1478]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, February 20, 1914.

Resolutions adopted at mass meeting demanding investigation Benton matter. Have not received copy of proceedings but expect them early in morning. It appears to me that Benton went to Juarez seeking trouble. His cousin and business associate William Benton told me in Cobb’s presence that he had urged Benton not to go, that he would get into trouble, but he insisted stating he was going to tell him what he thought of him. He secured a card from Alfredo Farias which secured him admittance to Villa’s room. He at once commenced to rail at Villa and heated discussion resulted. Insults were passed by both, a struggle ensued but they were separated by Andres L. Farias. Villa ordered Benton taken to guardhouse. Some doubt exists as to after procedure and execution which will be explained in alleged military proceedings.

G. C. Carothers.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.41/96.

[Document 1479]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 20, 1914.

Your February 20. Obtain without fail and forward to the Department at your earliest convenience copy of sentence under which Benton is said to have been executed. If not a violation of confidence you may give to the press copy of court proceedings. Collaborate with American Consul and telegraph after mass meeting statement embracing all reliable information obtainable.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Edwards. File No. 312.41/95.

[Document 1480]

The Secretary of State to Consul Edwards.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 21, 1914.

International interest displayed in details connected with Benton matter makes it necessary that you telegraph all obtainable facts. Department desires to know especially the form of encounter which took place in Villa’s room, and if witnesses were present the name of each. Did Benton draw a gun and threaten to shoot Villa? What was the physical condition of Benton when he was removed from the presence of Villa? Who removed him? Where was he taken? Give facts about the trial and execution. Secure written statements from all witnesses whose testimony would be valuable.

Bryan.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/103.

[Document 1481]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams—Extracts.]

El Paso, February 21, 1914.

Sentence just handed me is too lengthy to telegraph. Tribunal composed or seven officers. Two witnesses, Major Manuel Banda and Andres L. Farias, testified they were present at altercation; that Benton drew his pistol on Villa; that Villa disarmed Benton and that if Villa had not been so quick Benton might have killed him; that Benton was well known to be an enemy of the Constitutionalists and had openly assisted Huerta and Orozco, furnishing them information as to their movements. Sentence appears to be in proper form. Penalty of death assessed unanimously. Sentence signed by Major Jesús M. Rodríguez as Military Judge and Raoul López, Secretary. Mass meeting last night presided over by ex-Governor Curry of New Mexico.

G. C. Carothers.

[Untitled] File No. 312.41/104.

[Document 1482]

[Untitled]

El Paso, February 21, 1914.

I to-day requested Villa to order Benton’s body delivered to wife. Have no answer yet. I omitted mention to-day’s telegram that I have known both Banda and Farias several years, their testimony deserves credence.

G. C. Carothers.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich. File No. 312.41/101b.

[Document 1483]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich. 134

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 21, 1914.

British Ambassador communicates telegram from Mrs. Benton praying that her husband’s body be recovered before decomposition sets in. Endeavor to secure compliance with this request.

Bryan.

134 Same to Consul Edwards.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/124.

[Document 1484]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, February 21, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose original copy of the sentence under which William Benton was executed.135

I have [etc.]

G. C. Carothers.

135 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.41/101a.

[Document 1485]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 21; 1914.

Unofficially interview Villa and represent that in view of the many conflicting reports regarding just exactly what did occur when Benton interviewed Villa, Department would appreciate having a signed statement from him, covering Benton’s call upon him including a statement of how the encounter and arrest occurred, conditions under which the trial was conducted and by whom the execution-order was given. If you succeed in securing statement telegraph important portions thereof immediately.

Bryan.

The British Embassy to the Department of State. File No. 312.41/112.

[Document 1486]

The British Embassy to the Department of State.

memorandum.

The British Ambassador presents his compliments to the Secretary of State and has the honour to thank him for the information contained in his letter of the 21st February135 and also for the promptness and courtesy with which, on the Ambassador’s representations, instructions were dispatched to the agents of the State Department to use their good offices with Villa.

The Secretary of State has no doubt observed that the information which he is good enough to forward presents certain difficulties. It is also in parts in contradiction with information which has reached this Embassy.

The British Ambassador is confident that the Secretary of State will cause a full and impartial enquiry to be made into all the circumstances of the case, and in view of the threatening language used by Villa and the fact that no other foreign power has the means of communicating with him, that he continue to exert his influence in the most unmistakable manner in the cause of humanity.

British Embassy,
Washington , February 22, 1914.

135 Not printed.

Consul Edwards to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/105.

[Document 1487]

Consul Edwards to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Ciudad Juarez, February 22, 1914.

Department’s February 21. Request for the body of William Benton was made by me during interview of the evening of nineteenth. Villa said he could not let the body go now but would do so later. He was then requested as a favor to me to mark well the grave. This he promised to have done. Will make another attempt to secure the body.

Edwards.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.41/105a.

[Document 1488]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 22, 1914.

Urge upon Villa the necessity of delivering the body of Benton to relatives or friends requesting same. The failure to deliver body is being made the basis of speculation and bitter criticism.

Bryan.

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/106.

[Document 1489]

Ambassador Page to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
London, February 22, 1914.

Sir Edward Grey showed me a telegram he is sending to Spring Rice asking United States Government’s permission for a British Consul to investigate Benton’s death. He thinks such an investigation, in addition to our own or in conjunction with it, will quiet excitement here. House of Commons summoned him to-day out of regular order to question him. He informed me that he wished the truth to be got at independently of Villa’s version, and he expressed confidence in our good will and in the effectiveness of our investigation if we take it vigorously in hand and summons all possible witnesses.

Page.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.41/107a.

[Document 1490]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 28, 1914, 1 p.m.

British Ambassador communicated on February 21 a telegram from Mrs. Benton praying that her husband’s body be recovered before decomposition sets in.

Unofficially inform Villa that the failure to deliver body is being made the basis of speculation and bitter criticism. Request that he give immediate orders that body be delivered up to relatives or to Collector of the Port of El Paso.

Act quickly and telegraph result.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Edwards. File No. 312.41/107b.

[Document 1491]

The Secretary of State to Consul Edwards.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 23, 1914.

Unofficially call upon de facto authorities in Juarez in company with two witnesses whose standing will likely cause you to receive the highest consideration, and if convenient take Zach Cobb with you. Request to see the body of Benton and if granted take accurate note of every detail of its condition.

If previous burial makes granting of request impossible ask to be shown where body is interred, if possible have witnesses accompany you to the spot and take such observations as will enable grave to be unmistakably located.

Secure written statement regarding condition of Benton’s body after death, from undertaker who embalmed it, from those who prepared it for burial or interred it, or from any and all available witnesses.

Department expects your report already mailed will embrace every detail available, wishes telegraphic answer as to the result of above representations and to know just what efforts you have made and are making to get written statements from responsible sources.

Bryan.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/108.

[Document 1492]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, February 23, 1914.

I to-day received following from Villa regarding delivery of Benton’s body: Very sorry can not deliver Benton’s body at present time. When time comes to do it, I will comply with my obligations, and will give an account of my proceedings to the whole world.

I immediately telegraphed him text your telegram, and reiterated my request. Expect reply in morning.

G. C. Carothers.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.41/111a.

[Document 1493]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 23, 1914, 11 p.m.

Department’s February 23, 1 p.m. If authorities object to exhumation of Benton’s body, endeavor to impress upon them the great importance of its immediate disinterment and its examination by competent and impartial physicians. In no other way can the impression be avoided that an effort is being made to suppress the facts. Such an impression would necessarily give rise to the most unfavorable inferences, would increase resentment and would further complicate a case already sufficiently grave. You are authorized to employ both medical and legal assistance, if you deem it desirable. Telegraph result of these representations.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich. File No. 312.41/125a.

[Document 1494]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 24, 1914.

[Résumé of above correspondence re Benton.]

Unofficially represent to Carranza the advisability of ordering Benton’s body exhumed and delivered to relatives or Collector of Customs El Paso at once. The body will furnish best possible proof of what occurred and a failure to deliver body is being used as basis for charge that court martial was held after Benton’s death. We are doing everything in our power to ascertain the facts and British Government is relying on us to do so. Rush telegraphic reply.

Bryan.

Consul Edwards to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/113.

[Document 1495]

Consul Edwards to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Ciudad Juarez, February 24, 1914.

Department’s telegram February 23. Have called upon authorities here relative to the body of William Benton. All officials now at Juarez, being new men, strangers to all border people, to take witness with me would not bring results. They are afraid of the newspapers and the influence refugees and federal sympathizers on American side. The said new officials seem anxious to assist in the matter but say that Villa had taken with him to Chihauhua all his staff and guards who were acquainted with the Benton affair but that they were confident that the body had been buried as the law only admitted twenty-four hours before interment. They promised that Villa would be immediately communicated with as to the location of the grave. It is my opinion that the body was not embalmed and that no undertaker attended but that the body was buried in a few hours after death by the guards and during the later hours of the night. If Villa will allow the soldiers who know the spot to give the information, I will request Zach Cobb and others to accompany me to view the place and mark the same, if permission is refused by Villa to disinter.

Edwards.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/114.

[Document 1496]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Chihuahua, February 24, 1914.

Department’s February 23, 1 p.m. General Villa declines to deliver body of Benton but states that he will permit his widow or relatives to visit the cemetery in company with any representative who may be designated by our Government and that for their benefit he will order exhumation of body which will then be reinterred in the same place where it now lies.

Letcher.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.41/114.

[Document 1497]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 24, 1914.

Your February 24. We are very much gratified to receive your assurance that widow or relatives will be permitted to visit cemetery in company with representative designated by this Government and that exhumation of body will be permitted. We suppose the cemetery is at Juarez.

Please ask Villa to permit two American representatives and two British subjects to accompany widow or relatives and urge that after proper examination body be delivered to widow. Request that orders be given so examination may be held with least possible delay. Telegraph reply.

Bryan.

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/132.

[Document 1498]

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

British Embassy,
Washington, February 24, 1914.

Dear Mr. Secretary: I have received a telegram from Sir Edward Grey stating that in view of the feeling which has already been aroused in Great Britain by the accounts published in the press of Mr. Benton’s death, and the reports of the disappearance of two other Englishmen, he considers it essential that a British Consular officer should proceed (under adequate securities) to the spot to report to His Majesty’s Government as fully as possible upon the circumstances of these cases. As we have no means of communicating with Villa I am to request whether you would be so good as to instruct your Consular officers at Juarez or Chihuahua, if there be no objection, to inform him of the intentions of His Majesty’s Government and to request assurances from him that the British Consul shall in no way be interfered with or molested.

Meanwhile, I have ordered the British Consul at Galveston to proceed to El Paso which is in his Consular district, where he will converse with British subjects and others from whom information can be obtained and will await further orders.

It would also in Sir E. Grey’s opinion be very satisfactory to popular sentiment in Great Britain if a public enquiry were conducted in United States territory to which foreign witnesses should be admitted and which might be published to all the world. It would appear evident that such a public enquiry conducted under the authority of the United States, whether of an official legal character or not, would usefully supplement the enquiry to be held under your orders by the American Consul at Juarez as it would give an opportunity for the hearing without risk to witnesses of that side of the question in which foreigners are interested more than Mexican officials.

It would of course be a further satisfaction to public opinion abroad if the British Consul, though not taking part in the enquiry, be present to watch it.

Sir E. Grey is very anxious that in making this communication to the United States Government I should make it clear that there is no implication that that Government can be held legally responsible for acts supposed to have been committed in Mexican territory by General Villa. There can of course be no question of such legal responsibility, but Sir Edward Grey is sure you will fully understand the excitement that has been roused in England at what has happened and share Sir Edward Grey’s feelings of sincere and profound regret. He is also sure that you will understand that His Majesty’s Government has no choice but to apply to that of the United States as they alone are in the position to exercise any influence to discover the truth and to provide that justice should be done.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.41/130b.

[Document 1499]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 25, 1914.

Following telegram sent by me to-day to G. C. Carothers, 217 Wyoming Street, El Paso, Texas: As Department has instructed you to stay near Villa, I think it would be well for you to start for Chihuahua to-morrow. Explain to Villa that the killing of Benton has aroused much bitter criticism which nothing can quiet but the fullest and frankest method of dealing with the subject.

Careful examination of the body is very desirable and this can not be made by relatives or by a single American. Examination should be made by two Americans, one of whom would be a medical officer, and there ought to be a representative of the British Government in attendance at the examination so there can be no charge of concealment of such evidence as the examination of the body of Benton will furnish.

It will greatly relieve the situation if the body, after examination, is delivered to the widow.

Impress Villa with the seriousness of the crisis which the killing of Benton “has brought and explain to him our deep interest in having everything done that can be done to satisfy every reasonable demand that foreign governments can make upon us for assistance in the protection of the lives and property of their nationals.

The substance of this telegram has gone to Letcher. In case you find Villa in Chihuahua when you arrive consult with Letcher before interviewing Villa, so that you and Letcher may both have an intelligent understanding of the course to be followed. Bryan.

Bryan.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/126.

[Document 1500]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Chihuahua, February 25, 1914.

Department’s February 21. I regret to inform you that telegraphic report of a statement obtained from Villa was suppressed in telegraph office here. Substance is that the Englishman addressed Villa menacingly and abusively and the latter stepped behind him under the pretext of opening door, felt for and discovered pistol on Benton and then sprang upon him. He declared that he himself ordered execution and said nothing of a court martial. The statement was verbal but a written one was promised but has not been received. Villa manifested much irritation and said that he was tired of being worried about such trifling matters and that he would cut the wires to prevent being so troubled further. I am sure that he does not understand gravity of the case and his advisers can do nothing with him.

Letcher.

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/139.

[Document 1501]

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Nogales, February 26, 1914.

Arrived from Cananea tonight and at nine p.m. called on Señor Ysidro Fabela, Acting Secretary Foreign Relations for Carranza, and explained to him substance of Department’s telegram regarding case of Benton. Fabela immediately went to Carranza’s room telling me to wait at the Consulate; that he would arrange an interview. I waited two hours. At eleven o’clock Fabela came to Consulate and said that Carranza had agreed to receive me some time to-morrow, February 27; but that Carranza wished to point out that representation regarding the Benton case should not be made through an American Consul but through some diplomatic representative of Great Britain; that Carranza also is dissatisfied that communications concerning the Benton case are being addressed to General Villa instead of to him as he and not Villa is in supreme command of the Constitutionalists. Fabela then left promising to notify me to-morrow at what hour I might see General Carranza.

Simpich.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/138.

[Document 1502]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

El Paso, February 26, 1914.

I have just received telegram from Villa as follows: Referring to your telegram of the 23rd, I state to you that inasmuch as I have fears that it would create greater disturbance by delivery of the body of Benton it is not possible for me at this time to have the pleasure of complying with the desires that are expressed through you by the greatly respected Mr. Bryan, Secretary of State of the American Government; but in order to stop the malevolent comments that this refusal might create, I am disposed that a representative of the Government of the United States and another of the English Government as well as the family of Mr. Benton may come to see it in this city of Chihuahua where it is interred. Receive my affectionate salutation.

General-in-Chief,

Francisco Villa.

This has caused me defer departure until receive further instructions. I suggest that I arrange trip for this commission and accompany party to Chihuahua to avoid further complications. I can arrange special train immediately when necessary. Also suggest that American or English representative be an army surgeon. British Consul expected here to-night. Both Cobb and I will be very discreet in dealing with him pending instructions from you.

G. C. Carothers.

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/148.

[Document 1503]

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy,
Washington, February 26, 1914.

Dear Mr. Secretary: I am much obliged to you for your kindness in transmitting to me the translation of what is stated to be the report of a court martial proceeding held at Juarez on February 17, 1914.

This document will be transmitted to my Government together with others bearing on the case.

While reserving all remarks on the statements contained in this document I venture to observe that you have doubtless already taken most serious note of that part of the indictment in which it is alleged as the ground of a capital sentence that Mr. Benton had rendered assistance to the Federals. It is of course obvious that this charge would justify the assassination of every foreigner in any territory formerly occupied by Federals and subsequently conquered by Villa or vice versa. For every foreigner appears to be forced to provide assistance to the party in power. As your Government is alone in possession of the means of communicating with Villa, I am confident that the very serious fact above indicated has been already brought to his attention.

I take this opportunity of enclosing a newspaper extract containing a report of Sir Edward Grey’s statement in the House of Commons of to-day’s date.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice.

[Inclosure.]

[Untitled]

London, February 26, 1914.

Sir Edward Grey, the British Foreign Secretary, in discussing in the House of Commons to-day the inquiry into the killing of William S. Benton, the British ranchman, at Juarez, declared:

“We are satisfied that the Government of the United States is showing as much interest in this case and is doing as much to discover the facts as if Benton had been an American citizen. We can not ourselves do more at the present moment than send a consul to be present at whatever investigations may be made.”

Sir Edward Grey added:

“I will make a considered statement to the House of Commons next week of the view of the British Government as to what can be done further, either to get at the truth, if it is then in doubt, or to secure what justice may require.

“It is scarcely necessary to emphasize what everybody knows—the deep feeling which exists in this House and in the country in the matter, which His Majesty’s Government fully shares and which I hope it is fully recognized is no less deep because the expression of it has been so very restrained.”

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/137.

[Document 1504]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Chihuahua, February 26, 1914.

Have just received from General Villa a reply to my note of yesterday embracing the substance of your telegram of February 24, in which he informs me that he will permit a commission composed of two representatives of our Government, two British subjects, two American physicians, the widow and any other of Benton’s family and such representatives as he may name to witness the exhumation of Benton’s body and its examination to their satisfaction. He finds himself unable, however, to reverse his refusal to permit removal of the remains and insists that body must be reinterred after examination in the same grave in which it now rests. Furthermore General Villa has voluntarily offered to place at my disposal a special train for bringing the commission named from Juarez to Chihuahua and returning them to the first named place. The body is now interred in the principal cemetery of this place. I venture to propose that I be authorized to go to Juarez by this special train to assemble the commission and the relatives of Benton to bring them to Chihuahua under my special charge and otherwise to exercise your authority over the examination until terminated. The plan as suggested, in my opinion, offers most expeditious method. Trip back and forth and necessary arrangement in El Paso can be effected in thirty-six hours. Local commission including physicians would not seem expedient.

Letcher.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.41/137.

[Document 1505]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 27, 1914.

You will please arrange for special train offered by Villa and take charge of same under instructions from Department as to time of starting and other details. Will notify you at Juarez as to names of members of party. In view of your residence there it might embarrass you to inspect body. Do you understand that we can have two officials beside yourself or two including you? The British Consul at Galveston is now in El Paso and will represent the British Government. Please impress upon Villa importance of giving fullest protection to party. It would be unfortunate if any discourtesy was shown to British Consul. Delivery of body is earnestly desired by widow and we still hope that Villa will yield this point.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich. File No. 312.41/139.

[Document 1506]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 27, 1914.

If Carranza complains that we appealed to Villa please explain to him that we have acted in this case as we have in all others whether the question arose in territory under his control or in territory under Huerta. We have made representations to the local authorities first in the hope of securing immediate action and afterwards to the highest authorities. Villa has consented to allow inspection of Benton’s body and assuming that Carranza will approve of this we are arranging trip but would like specific approval from Carranza and assurance of protection of party which will include British Consul. We still hope that body will be delivered to widow. Assure Carranza that we appreciate the efforts he has made to protect life and property of foreigners.

Bryan.

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/149.

[Document 1507]

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy,
Washington, February 27, 1914.

Dear Mr. Secretary: Referring to my letter of yesterday’s date on the subject of the Benton case, I beg to add that I have received a telegram from Sir Edward Grey, His Majesty’s Minister for Foreign Affairs. Sir Edward tells me that although restrained, popular feeling in England is very strong and His Majesty’s Government will be expected to make a fuller statement in Parliament next week. The course adopted by Villa up till now, the details of which you have so kindly communicated to me by word and letter, appears to Sir Edward to raise a very strong presumption of his guilt. If that guilt is established or has to be presumed from the evidence, Sir Edward tells me that he will be obliged to make a statement next week in Parliament to the effect that, although it is not the intention of His Majesty’s Government for obvious reasons to take any action themselves against Villa at the present moment, they will not let the matter rest and will do their best to see that justice is secured at the earliest possible opportunity.

I am not instructed to make any communication to your Government, but I think it right to put you in possession of the views of my Government so that there may not be any misunderstanding.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice.

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/187.

[Document 1508]

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Nogales, February 28, 1914.

Referring to the Department’s telegram of February 24 addressed to me at Cananea. I am now in receipt of a reply from General Carranza, reading as follows: Replying to the unofficial representation which you made to me yesterday in the name of the Department of State of the United States I have to inform you as follows:

I have already on the other occasions informed you, in order that you may communicate it to your Government, that in order to enable the executive power under my charge to attend to representations relative to foreigners residing in this country within the territory under the jurisdiction of Constitutionalist authorities that these presentations must be made by representatives duly authorized by their respective Governments and communicated directly to me as supreme chief of the Constitutionalist army through the Department of Foreign Affairs attached to the executive power. Therefore, in order to be consistent with my policy as above outlined, I wish to inform you that I shall be only too pleased to consider any representations made in the case of the British subject William Benton provided of course that they be made directly to me by a representative of the British Government.

With reference to this case and in order to show the spirit of justice which animates the Constitutional Government, I think it advisable to repeat here what I have already told you and other authorities of the United States and stated publicly through the press: The Constitutionalist Government recognizes the right of all foreigners as provided for by the Decree of May 13, 1913, to claim losses and damages already suffered by them or which they may continue to suffer during the present civil strife; that is, since February 19, 1913, until the restoration of constitutional order in Mexico. The above is evidenced by your honorable Secretary of State, Mr. William Jennings Bryan, who does me justice in his second telegram of yesterday, addressed to you, wherein he appreciates my efforts in endeavoring to protect the lives and property of foreigners inasmuch as I have always respected in my character as supreme chief of the Constitutionalist Army and enforced respect for the life and properties of foreigners living in the republic who have strictly complied with their obligations as neutrals.

I wish, however, to call especially to your attention in order that you may so inform your Government that yours is the first direct representation made to me in the Benton case since all the representations made so far have been made to other authorities of the Constitutionalist Government who of course have felt obliged to treat of the affair although I am the supreme chief of the Constitutionalist Army—according o the Declaration of Guadalupe of March 26, 1913—and it is therefore only to me, as I have repeatedly stated on various occasions, that foreign Governments or their representative should address communications regarding matters of international character.

Although the Secretary of State declares that if in various cases he has addressed the local authorities it has been for the purpose of obtaining an immediate action in these instances I think it appropriate that you make known to your Government that all questions that relate to its nationals ought to be addressed to this Office of the first chief of the Constitutionalist Army who will take up with the subordinate authorities those matters which cause such representations to be made for the purpose of deciding and ordering how they shall proceed.

V. Carranza,

First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army.

I have to inform the Department that at the moment this letter was given me, a copy was also given out for publication by Carranza’s secretary. Original Spanish text will be mailed the Department.

Simpich.

Collector of Customs Cobb to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/150.

[Document 1509]

Collector of Customs Cobb to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

El Paso, March 1, 1914.

After receiving word from Colonel Avila, commander in Juarez, Mexico, that General Villa had authorized commission to proceed to Chihuahua on regular train which had been held, Percival, Hambleton, Manley, Davidson, Thomason, Worsham, commissioners, and Mrs. Benton, accompanied by Mr. Minnehan, went to Juarez to take train at about 11 a.m. We went to office of Colonel Avila where he and Frederico Gonzalez Garza, his legal representative, with their attendants, received British Consul, Percival, Hambleton, Minnehan and me. They confirmed statement that Villa had authorized passage today but stated that Villa must have done so under misapprehension that Carranza had authorized same although Carranza had not done so in fact. Gonzalez Garza said he would wire report to both Carranza and Villa today but that commission could not proceed without first obtaining permission from Carranza.

Z. L. Cobb.

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/162.

[Document 1510]

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Nogales, March 2, 1914.

Reported that Carranza issued orders to Villa today that further investigations of Benton case should cease for present and that Villa refrain from any further discussion of case with either American or British representatives.

Simpich.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.41/159a.

[Document 1511]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 2, 1914.

In view of complications that have arisen you will please await further instructions before doing anything more in regard to the examination of Benton’s body. Show this to Edwards, Cobb and Carothers so they may be likewise informed.

Bryan.

The British Embassy to the Department of State. File No. 312.41/181.

[Document 1512]

The British Embassy to the Department of State.

memorandum.

In Sir E. Grey’s opinion the situation is as follows:

His Majesty’s Government do not ask the United States Government to take any steps to secure justice, though they would welcome any action on their part to that end. His Majesty’s Government make no complaint if the United States Government for reasons of their own take no such step. But His Majesty’s Government wish it to be clearly understood that they will take whatever steps are possible to secure justice being done whenever opportunity occurs.

If General Huerta were in any way responsible for a crime against a British subject, His Majesty’s Government would act in exactly the same manner.

They are aware that they can take no measures against Villa at the present time, but they must reserve their liberty to act when contingencies arise in the future.

British Embassy,
Washington , March 3, 1914.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/170.

[Document 1513]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

El Paso, March 4, 1914.

Committee of three appointed by Carranza to examine into circumstances death of Benton arrived here to-day and received later telegraphic instructions to the effect that they should proceed to investigate case with a view to determining whether a disinterment of the body of Benton is necessary or not. It was reported here this afternoon that the committee would probably go to Chihuahua by train to-morrow.

Letcher.

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/11151.

[Document 1514]

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Douglas, March 11, 1914.

Held personal conference with Carranza to-day explaining contents of Department’s written instructions of March 2136 and after cabinet discussion Carranza made a statement which at my request was reduced to a written memorandum; in order that Department may interpret for itself exact meaning of Carranza’s reply I am transmitting original Spanish text of his communication which was submitted to me unsigned and is as follows: [Translation.]

I acknowledge with many thanks the trouble you have taken in coming hither to show me the letter written you by the Secretary of State, Mr. Bryan, in regard to the international cases growing out of the present civil war. As you know, the Department at Washington has communicated with me through yourself and the American Consul at Hermosillo to make two classes of representation to me, both unofficial, the one concerning American citizens, the other non-American foreigners. As you are aware, I have entertained the representations he saw fit to make when nationals of his country were concerned, but have not entertained the Department of State’s representations made through you when some other class of foreigners is concerned, the said representations however being used by me as information to redress and avoid the wrongs to which they relate. In his letter to you about the injuries suffered at the Desengaño mine at Guanacevi, Secretary Bryan tells you that the countries which have recognized the Huerta Government can not apply to me since every nation can have but one diplomatic corps accredited to one other and that consequently those countries which have recognized Huerta can not make representations to me. This is clearly my understanding and I have never claimed that those Governments accredit diplomatic representatives to me. But those same nations may very well, under international law and diplomatic usage, have unofficial intercourse with me in my capacity of Commander-in-Chief of the Constitutionalist Army which dominates a large part of the Nation. This unofficial manner may be availed of by the aforesaid countries through their representatives accredited in Washington or through their Consuls residing in Mexican territory controlled by the forces under my command, and if there should be no foreign consuls in the territory controlled by the Constitutionalist forces as pointed out by the Honorable Secretary Bryan in connection with the Desengaño mine case, then the Governments concerned may very well authorize other persons, who may well be Consuls of the United States, to present their unofficial representations in the name of those Governments, the power being properly drawn up. As I truly do not see what objection foreign nations can have to that method of communicating with me, all the representations I have received or may receive hereafter dealing with non-American foreigners do and will serve the sole purpose of bringing to my notice, if not already reported by the Mexican authorities, the fact that this or that foreigner has suffered some injury and of my issuing appropriate orders that all individual guarantees be extended to foreigners, punishment, when occasion arises, being inflicted on the responsible parties who, in violation of the law and in disregard of their duty and my orders should ever so slightly molest foreigners, nor would there be any need of waiting for any representation, for it is one of my purposes that justice and the law shall be respected to the utmost in my country. Deeming this a suitable opportunity, I wish further to say to you that if the same foreigners or their relatives will address their personal representations to me and bespeak my protection of their lives and interests, they will be immediately attended to without any need of their Governments officially or unofficially intervening.

Am unofficially and confidentially informed certain Carranza’s influential advisers disagree with his attitude on this question, holding time is inopportune for raising technical objection as to receiving representation from American Consuls on behalf of other than American interests; that present position has been assumed perhaps for political effect it may have on his constituents. Carranza now plan’s start to-morrow, March 12, for march into Chihuahua.

Simpich.

136 See, under Protection of Spanish Interests, p. 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 1363], instruction No. 386, March 2, 1914, to Vice Consul Simpich; and footnote 114.

The Secretary of State to the Italian Ambassador. File No. 812.00/11151.

[Document 1515]

The Secretary of State to the Italian Ambassador. 137

Department of State,
Washington, March 14, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: I take pleasure in enclosing for your information a copy of a communication from General Carranza, received through our Consul at Nogales yesterday.

Assuring you [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

137 The same to the Embassies of Austria-Hungary, France, Germany, Great Britain, Japan and Spain.

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/197.

[Document 1516]

The British Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy,
Washington, March 16, 1914.

Dear Mr. Secretary: I beg to acknowledge with thanks your letter of the 14th instant in which you are good enough to enclose for my information a copy of a communication from General Carranza in reply to your representations on behalf, as you were good enough to inform me, of a Spanish subject. I have lost no time in communicating copy of your letter and its enclosure to my Government. In the meanwhile I note that according to General Carranza’s statement you told him that countries which have recognised the Huerta Government can not apply to him since every nation can have but one diplomatic corps accredited, and that consequently those countries which have recognised Huerta can not make representations to him. He goes on to ask that should Consuls of the United States present unofficial representations to him in the name of foreign Governments they may be provided “with a power properly drawn up.”

I beg to observe that, as you are aware, the object of any such communication is humanity; that is, the immediate protection of life and property. The United States Government has, as I understand, no hesitation in applying to General Huerta with the object of obtaining protection for its citizens. In different parts of the world the British Government, as you are aware, has extended the good offices of its own Consuls to United States citizens when United States citizens were in danger and when there was no United States Consul on the spot. For this purpose no “power properly drawn up “has been considered necessary. With or without request from the United States Government the services of British Consuls have been invoked, and this is in accordance with the general international usage and the law of nations.

There is a British Vice-Consul at Chihuahua through whom representations have been made to General Villa on behalf both of British and Spanish subjects. But there is no other British Consular representative in the districts controlled by the Constitutionalist forces. In accordance with international usage I have appealed with success for the kind intervention of United States Consuls. Should the United States acquiesce in the new practice now demanded by General Carranza I have the honour to request that you will give me timely notice.

In this connection I beg to state that I have received from Mexico several reports based on good authority and worthy of credence. These reports are to the effect that the death of Benton, the refusal to surrender his body and the failure hitherto of the attempts to secure an open and impartial enquiry into the cause of his death—have seriously affected the security of foreign and especially of British subjects in the districts controlled by the Constitutionalist forces. I am also informed, on good authority, that Villa has openly expressed the most hostile sentiments to Great Britain. In view of the serious consequences which may follow I think it my duty to bring the above to the attention of the Government of the United States.

Assuring you [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice.

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador. File No. 312.41/197.

[Document 1517]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, March 18, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: Referring to your note of March 16 and to your interview with the Third Assistant Secretary of State on the 18th instant, with reference to the protection of British subjects in territory in Mexico controlled by Constitutionalists, I beg to inform you that the Department is to-day despatching a telegram to Mr. Carothers, informing him of the alarm that is felt lest Villa may commit or permit harsh treatment of British subjects in northern Mexico. Mr. Carothers is being specifically instructed that, as he will be near Villa, he should bear in mind this danger to British subjects and use his influence with Villa in order to prevent any improper acts on his part or failure to extend to British subjects and other foreigners the protection which Villa and Carranza have repeatedly promised.

As to the question of making representations to Carranza, the Department will be glad to keep you informed regarding developments on the subject. Since nothing has occurred to indicate that “a power properly drawn up “will be required by Carranza, this Government infers that this point will not be insisted upon, and, meanwhile, such representations may be made, as heretofore, through officers of this Government.

With reference to that portion of your note in which you speak of the good offices of British Consular officers in different parts of the world in behalf of citizens of the United States, this Government has always been deeply grateful for the many instances in which such good offices by British Consular and Diplomatic officers have been exercised in behalf of citizens of the United States, and the Department is at all times glad to take advantage of opportunities to show its appreciation by extending like courtesies in behalf of British subjects.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.41/197.

[Document 1518]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 18, 1914.

We have received information to the effect that the incidents connected with the Benton case have increased any prejudice that Villa may have had against British subjects of northern Mexico and alarm is felt lest he may commit or permit harsh treatment of them. As you will be near him please bear this danger in mind and use your influence to prevent any improper acts on Villa’s part or failure to give that protection to British subjects and other foreigners which he and Carranza have repeatedly promised.

It would embarrass us and greatly injure the Constitutionalist cause if anything were done that could arouse abroad additional criticism of Constitutionalist methods.

Bryan.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/254.

[Document 1519]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. 138

[Extract.]

No. 494.] American Consulate,
Chihuahua, June 4, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to report that the British Vice Consul in this city has called my attention privately to the circumstance that General Villa has ordered the sequestration of the Hacienda de los Remedios, the property of the widow of the late William S. Benton, the British subject who was murdered by Villa or his agents at Juarez in February last, and has asked my aid in preventing the consummation of the act now projected. I enclose herewith a copy of Villa’s order in the case.

As I am informed, there is no cloud upon the title to the property in so far as Mrs. Benton is concerned.

I have [etc.]

Marion Letcher.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

[Untitled]

To the Military Commander, Santa Maria de Cuevas: By this letter authorization is given to you in the most ample and effective manner, by the General Headquarters under my charge, to immediately proceed to the distribution of the land of the Hacienda de los Remedios among the neighbors of the town of Santa Maria de las Cuevas, with the purpose that it be cultivated the present year with the understanding that proper ownership of the property will be arranged afterwards. The administrator or person in charge that is managing the property may appear before the General Treasurer of the State to collect the value of the rents of the property referred to.

Francisco Villa.
Chihuahua , April 20, 1914.

138 Communicated to the British Ambassador June 16, 1914.

The British Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/258.

[Document 1520]

The British Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

British Embassy,
Washington, June 18, 1914.

Dear Mr. Secretary: I have received your letter of June 16 in which you are good enough to enclose copy of correspondence which has passed between the American Consul at Chihuahua and the Department of State relative to the order issued by General Villa for the sequestration of the property of the late Mr. William S. Benton.

I am instructing the British Vice-Consul at El Paso to communicate, unofficially as he has done hitherto, with General Carranza and other Constitutionalist authorities, and to remind them of the repeated assurances given by them to him, both in writing and verbally, that the Constitutionalist Government would respect the lives and property of all British subjects in the territory under their control. He is at the same time to call their earnest attention to the reported sequestration in question and to point out to them the gravity with which His Majesty’s Government would look upon such an action if confirmed.

I am sending similar instructions to the British Vice-Consul at Chihuahua.

I would be grateful if you would be so good as to instruct the American Consular Officers at Juarez and Chihuahua to support such representations as their British colleagues may deem advisable to make to prevent the sequestration of Mr. Benton’s estate.

I am [etc.]

Colville Barclay.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.41/258.

[Document 1521]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. 139

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 24, 1914.

At request of British Embassy you are instructed to support appropriate representations of British Vice Consul to prevent sequestration of William S. Benton property.

Bryan.

139 Same to Consul Edwards at Ciudad Juarez.

[Untitled] File No. 312.41/269.

[Document 1522]

[Untitled]

No. 293.] Department of State,
Washington, July 10, 1914.

Sir: Referring to the Department’s telegram of June 24, 1914, instructing you to support appropriate representations of the British Vice Consul at El Paso to prevent the sequestration of the property of the late Mr. William S. Benton, the Department encloses a copy of a note from the British Embassy at Washington, D. C.,140 from which it appears that some of the land has already been apportioned and that others are only awaiting the time to plant their crops to take possession of further land. The British Vice Consul at Chihuahua says that an order from General Carranza countermanding General Villa’s orders will be respected by the authorities at Chihuahua.

The Department requests an expression of your views as to the admissibility of taking the matter up with Carranza.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

140 Not printed.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/288.

[Document 1523]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

No. 524.] American Consulate,
Chihuahua, August 6, 1914.

Sir: Having reference to the Department’s instruction No. 293 of July 10, 1914, relative to the sequestration of the property of the William S. Benton estate by orders of General Villa, I have the honor to report that I addressed a note to Villa on July 20 last in support of a request from British Vice Consul Scobell that the property in reference be delivered to the representative of Mrs. Benton. General Villa replied on July 28 that he had parceled out the lands of the Benton estate to the residents of the village of Santa Maria de Cuevas under the terms of his order of April 20 because the property at that time was abandoned by its owner, but that so soon as the present crop might be harvested the land will be delivered to Mrs. Benton. He also states that Mrs. Benton will be paid the rents accruing from the various parcels of land let to the natives of Santa Maria de Cuevas under his orders.

I am informed by Vice Consul Scobell that the Benton property has never in any sense been abandoned, a native overseer having been continuously in charge since the late William S. Benton went to El Paso last December. For the past several months a British subject, Mr. John Harvey, has been in charge of the place.

Regarding the question of taking the matter up with General Carranza, which is referred to in the second paragraph of the Department’s instruction, I have to state unequivocally that the authority of Carranza is not recognized at the present time in any of the territory dominated by Villa, and to express the opinion that no order by Carranza touching the matter would be respected by Villa.

I have [etc.]

Marion Letcher.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.41/288.

[Document 1524]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[No. 298.] Department of State,
Washington, September 1, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your dispatch No. 524 of August 6, 1914, in regard to the estate of the late Mr. William S. Benton.

You are instructed to call the attention of General Villa to the fact that a representative of the Benton estate has been continuously in charge of the property and that the temporary tenants upon the property should be informed by Villa that they are tenants of the Benton estate and must pay their rents to the estate’s representative.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

The British Embassy to the Department of State. File No. 312.41/300.

[Document 1525]

The British Embassy to the Department of State.

memorandum.

The British Consul at Tampico reported on the 15th instant the existence of a serious state of affairs in that port; communication by railway was interrupted to the west, and active preparations for resisting an attack on the part of Villa were being made. Mr. Wilson stated that although things were quiet up till then he had thought it his duty to confer with the United States Senior Naval Officer and had made arrangements to send women and children afloat in case of real danger.

His Majesty’s Ambassador has the honour, under instructions from Sir Edward Grey, to request the Secretary of State to be so good as to ask the Secretary of the Navy to cause directions to be sent to the United States Senior Naval Officer in Mexican waters to give such protection as may be possible to British lives and interests and to afford refuge to British subjects in the event of danger.

British Embassy,
Washington , November 17, 1914.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy. File No. 312.41/300.

[Document 1526]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy.

Department of State,
Washington, November 19, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a memorandum from the British Ambassador at this capital, dated November 17, 1914, requesting that, in view of a possible attack upon Tampico, the Senior Naval Officer of the United States in Mexican waters be instructed to give such protection as may be possible to the lives and interests of British subjects, and to afford them refuge in the event of danger.

I have the honor to suggest therefore that the Admiral in command in Mexican east coast waters be instructed to extend such protection as may be possible to the lives and properties of Americans, British, and other foreigners at Tampico, and to afford them refuge in the event of danger.

I have [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

The Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/305.

[Document 1527]

The Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State.

Navy Department,
Washington, November 20, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of November 19, enclosing [etc.]

It is noted that you suggest that the Admiral in command in Mexican east coast waters be instructed to extend such protection as may be possible to the lives and properties of Americans, British, and. other foreigners at Tampico, as well as to afford them refuge in the event of danger.

I have the honor to inform you that the Commander in Chief of the Detached Squadron in Mexican waters has been directed accordingly.

Yours very sincerely,

Josephus Daniels.

Protection of French citizens and interests; treatment of religious ordersProtection of French citizens and interests; treatment of religious orders

[1528] The French Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

French Embassy, Washington, June 20, 1914.

File No. 312.51/44.

[1529] The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

Department of State, Washington, June 26, 1914.

File No. 312.51/45a.

[1530] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Monterey, June 27, 1914, 8 a.m.

File No. 312.51/46.

[1531] [Untitled]

Monterey, June 29, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 312.51/48.

[1532] The French Chargé & Affaires to the Secretary of State.

French Embassy, Manchester, July 16, 1914.

File No. 312.51/57.

[1533] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, July 16, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 312.51/57.

[1534] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Saltillo, July 17, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 312.51/58.

[1535] The French Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

French Embassy, Manchester, July 18, 1914.

File No. 312.51/69.

[1536] The Acting Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires.

Department of State, Washington, July 18, 1914.

File No. 312.51/44.

[1537] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Saltillo, July 18, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 312.51/60.

[1538] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova.

Department of State, Washington, July 22, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 312.51/63a.

[1539] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, July 23, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 312.51/64a.

[1540] The French Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

French Embassy, Manchester, July 23, 1914.

File No. 312.51/71.

[1541] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, July 24, 1914, noon.

File No. 312.51/68.

[1542] [Untitled]

Tampico, July 24, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 312.51/67.

[1543] The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, July 25, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 312.51/66a.

[1544] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, July 26, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 812.00/12634.

[1545] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, July 27, 1914.

File No. 812.404/3.

[1546] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Monterey, July 27, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 312.51/73.

[1547] The French Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

French Embassy, Manchester, July 27, 1914.

File No. 312.51/76.

[1548] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova.

Department of State, Washington, July 29, 1914—4 p.m.

File No. 312.51/73.

[1549] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova.

Department of State, Washington, July 31, 1914.

File No. 312.51/71.

[1550] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Monterey, July 31, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 312.51/77.

[1551] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Saltillo, August 1, 1914—10 a.m.

File No. 812.404/2.

[1552] The Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires.

Department of State, Washington, August 1, 1914.

File No. 312.51/71.

[1553] Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

Zacatecas, August 2, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 312.51/80.

[1554] The Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires.

Department of State, Washington, August 3, 1914.

File No. 812.404/2.

[1555] The Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires.

Department of State, Washington, August 3, 1914.

File No. 312.51/76.

[1556] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, August 4, 1914—9 p.m.

File No. 312.51/80.

[1557] The Acting Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires.

Department of State, Washington, August 4, 1914.

File No. 312.51/80.

[1558] The Department of State to the Spanish Embassy.

Department of State, Washington, August 5, 1914.

File No. 312.51/68.

[1559] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Saltillo, August 5, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 312.51/82.

[1560] Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Monterey, August 5, 1914.

File No. 312.51/88.

[1561] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, August 7, 1914.

File No. 312.51/82.

[1562] [Untitled]

Washington, August 28, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 312.51/92.

[1563] Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

Mexico City, August 29, 1914, 5 a.m.

File No. 312.51/93.

[1564] Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Veracruz, September 25, 1914.

File No. 812.404/16.

[1565] The French Ambassador to Counselor Lansing.

French Embassy, Washington, October 17, 1914.

File No. 312.51/96.

[1566] The Acting Secretary of State to the French Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, October 19, 1914.

File No. 312.51/96.

[1567] The French Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

French Embassy, Washington, November 12, 1914.

File No. 312.51/100.

[1568] The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, December 2, 1914.

File No. 312.51/100.

The French Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.51/44.

[Document 1528]

The French Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

French Embassy,
Washington, June 20, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: I received yesterday a letter140 signed by two French priests and a Spanish one in which they give an account of the treatment recently undergone by them at Saltillo. On the same day the two French clergymen, Messrs. Quillere and Lagree, both professors of the School of Theology of that city, called at the Embassy and I had a chance to ask them questions. They used moderate language and struck me as expressing a dispassionate judgment of the conditions of the country from which they have just been expelled under specially hard circumstances.

They told me they did not have a word to change in their letter which is true in every particular and had no objection to my forwarding copies to your excellency and my Government which will send me such instructions as it deems suitable in the case. The parties concerned have filed with me an indemnity claim for the wrong done them but, likewise with their assent, I shall for the present defer taking action on their request.

The facts stated by the signers seem to me to be worthy in every respect of your excellency’s attention. It appears therefrom that while the priests were subjected by the Federal mounted police to very harsh treatment (extortion under threats of death,) that inflicted by General Villa and his lieutenants was still worse. The scene described by the victims as taking place during the night of May 25th and 26th last in the house where the clergymen were confined and where Colonel Fierro simulated the execution of every one of them, called out separately, in order to constrain those who were left to pay a million pesos they did not possess, will certainly be held by your excellency to be barbarous beyond description.

Stripped of all their belongings, my unfortunate countrymen, whose pockets had even been carefully emptied by the officers of the Constitutional power, were finally expelled by the Torreon-El Paso route, partly in cattle cars and in the custody of drunken officers.

As I was offering pertinent suggestions yesterday as to shipping their baggage to New York where they were to take ship this morning for France, they said, for good and sufficient reason, “we have none.”

Your excellency will surely understand the painful impression the account of the expelled men is bound to create in France and the apprehensions that may be aroused in my Government as well as in any other having its nationals in Mexico, the prospect of the Constitutionalist troops occupying other towns. These occurrences have all the greater claim to your excellency’s notice as the complainants were supplied with a certificate in Spanish signed by Messrs. Silliman, Consul of the United States at Saltillo, and MacMillan, British Consul, which stated, in accordance with the facts, that the bearers “of French nationality had never in any way meddled in the political affairs of the country.” General Villa refused to pay any attention to that paper, saying, ironically no doubt, as there seemed to be no foundation for the statement, “that he could not read.” As to the wording of that answer, which the two French priests repeated to me in Spanish, they assured me there could be no doubt.

In view of the very trying crisis now prevailing in Mexico and of the desire so often and so strongly manifested by the President of the United States and your excellency that peace be restored there, it occurs to me that all elements of information supplied by creditable eye-witnesses must be of special value to the American Government. I therefore do not hesitate to let your excellency have these, feeling quite sure that you will take care that it is not used, in any event, to the injury of those who furnished it or of their fellow citizens in Mexico.

Be pleased to accept [etc.]

Jusserand.

140 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna. File No. 312.51/45a.

[Document 1529]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 26, 1914.

Telegraph all available information regarding Brothers of the Christian Schools. Reported nineteen teachers of this school, all foreigners, were imprisoned by Constitutionalists because demand for $500,000 not complied with, but later released and forced to leave the country. Teachers now in Havana desire return. Will authorities permit and give protection? What has become of school property?

Bryan.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.51/46.

[Document 1530]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Consulate General,
Monterey, June 27, 1914, 8 a.m.

Department’s inquiry concerning French Brothers who were forced to leave Monterey and who went to Havana via Brownsville, Texas, I understand that no money was collected from them. I rendered them considerable friendly assistance. I will inquire as to the matter of school property and as to their return and report soon.

Hanna.

[Untitled] File No. 312.51/48.

[Document 1531]

[Untitled]

Monterey, June 29, 1914, 5 p.m.

Referring to Department’s telegraphic instructions dated June 26 and to my June 27, 8 a.m., the French Brothers of the Sacred Heart who went to Havana, Cuba, via Brownsville, Texas, were under arrest at Monterey about two hours. It is understood that 500,000 pesos were demanded from them, but it is not believed anyone expected to collect anything from them but that the demand was more of a scare to get them to leave. They were released from prison on promise of leaving the country. The French Consul and this Consulate General rendered them friendly assistance and advice. They were not required to pay any money as far as is known to us and left without further trouble. I had letters from them and they wrote the French Consul from Havana announcing their safe arrival. The school property which they occupied appears to stand in the name of Leopodo Ruise, who was once Archbishop at Monterey. It was sealed up by the French Consul and so far has not been molested. It may be actually French property but I understand the Archbishop was Mexican. I do not think school property will be molested but I can not recommend their returning to Monterey now nor until peace has fully arrived throughout the whole country and until such time as they would be sure of a welcome as now evidently considerable prejudice exists against priests and especially against foreign clergy of the various orders.

Hanna.

The French Chargé & Affaires to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.51/57.

[Document 1532]

The French Chargé & Affaires to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

French Embassy,
Manchester, July 16, 1914.

I beg to thank your excellency for what the Department of State has already done in regard to French citizens imprisoned at Zacatecas. Pending the moment when the President and yourself will be able to receive me I should be greatly obliged to your excellency if he would prescribe an immediate inquest tending to ascertain the correctness of the information that reached our Legation in Mexico City concerning the murder of two French Christian Brothers, Messrs. Astru and Gilles, shot at Zacatecas on Villa’s order and if he would keep me informed of the result of that inquest.

Clausse.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.51/57.

[Document 1533]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. 141

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 16, 1914, 5 p.m.

We have just learned that two of the Brothers of the Christian School of Zacatecas have been killed and eleven imprisoned. Please bring the matter to the attention of the Constitutionalist authorities at once, and use your influence to secure the release of the Brothers in prison, and secure the punishment of those responsible for the killing of the two killed. Also make inquiry about other religious orders, urging upon the authorities the imperative importance of giving protection to persons and property of those engaged in religious teaching. Please report whether you have any way of assisting those at Zacatecas. American Consul Saltillo has been instructed in same sense.

Bryan.

141 Same telegram to the American Vice Consul at Saltillo.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.51/58.

[Document 1534]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. 142

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Saltillo, July 17, 1914, 7 p.m.

Your July 16, 5 p.m. General Natera, Governor of Zacatecas, at present in Monterey. Will take the matter up with him personally to-morrow. There are twelve French Christian authorities [sic] remaining here. They received rough treatment when Saltillo was occupied but are safe and unmolested. Was assured by local government this afternoon that subject to certain restrictions they will receive full protection.

Silliman.

142 Communicated to the French Chargé d’Affaires July 18, 1914.

The French Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.51/69.

[Document 1535]

The French Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

French Embassy,
Manchester, July 18, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: In reply to the telegram by which I had the honor to ask an audience of President Wilson in regard to the protection of the French in Mexico, your excellency was so good as to inform me that the President was not feeling well at present and would receive me as soon as he could. Your excellency added that the Department of State had taken steps to secure the release of the French citizens imprisoned at Zacatecas at the earliest possible date. With thanks to your excellency for your prompt action in behalf of the French prisoners, I begged you kindly to direct at once an inquiry in the case of two French clergymen, Messrs. Astru and Gilles, Christian Brothers, who, according to a telegram sent to Paris by the Chargé d’Affaires of France in Mexico, had been shot at Zacatecas by Villa’s order.

I am in receipt of the following further particulars about those two crimes, which particulars have also been reported to Paris by our Chargé d’Affaires in Mexico.

The murder of the two Brothers of the French school at Zacatecas was made known in Mexico City by a telegram from two other Brothers of the same school now safe in the United States. Furthermore the news was confirmed by several persons from Zacatecas. It seems that Villa ordered the two Frenchmen shot for giving shelter to Federals but, in reality, because they were not able to pay him the money that had been demanded of them.

The President of the Council, Minister of Foreign Affairs, has asked me immediately to bring to the Federal Government’s notice the heinousness of the double outrage committed by the Constitutionalist leader.

The Government of the Republic indignantly protests against criminal attempts of this character on the person of Frenchmen and reserves to itself the right later to demand all reparations that it may deem necessary.

My Government has instructed me to ask the Federal Government to take energetic action with the Constitutionalists to the end that the lives and property of French residents of Mexico be respected in accordance with the principles of humaneness and of the law of nations.

The murder of the two French clergymen by Villa is made worse by the aggravating circumstance that he had previously subjected two French priests, Messrs. Lagree and Quillere, to barbarous treatment and that the consequences of such proceedings were surely brought to the attention of the Constitutionalist chieftains by the representatives of the Federal Government when Mr. Jusserand applied to your excellency in behalf of those French citizens. (Note of June 20th last.)

Be pleased to accept [etc.]

Clausse.

The Acting Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires. File No. 312.51/44.

[Document 1536]

The Acting Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires.

Department of State,
Washington, July 18, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt, in due course, of the Ambassador’s note of the 20th ultimo, with which was enclosed a copy of a communication addressed to him by two French priests and a Spanish priest, giving an account of the treatment accorded to them by the Mexican authorities at Saltillo and furnishing much information as to general conditions in Mexico.

The Department is extremely grateful to the Ambassador for having furnished it with this information.

Accept [etc.]

William Phillips.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.51/60.

[Document 1537]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Saltillo, July 18, 1914, 7 p.m.

Your July 16, 5 p.m. General Natera, Governor of Zacatecas, at present in Monterey disclaims any knowledge of death and persecution of Christian Brothers. States that Villa would know of the facts in the case. Have made verbal and written representation to Governor Carranza in the matter. Welfare of Christian Brothers at Saltillo reported to Department yesterday.

Silliman.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova. File No. 312.51/63a.

[Document 1538]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova.

[Telegram]

Department of State,
Washington, July 22, 1914, 3 p.m.

Proceed to Zacatecas and exert every energy to secure full information especially regarding reported death of two French priests and imprisonment of eleven others and generally regarding treatment accorded to representatives of all religious orders. Telegraph results. Forward mail description conditions since the attack on and fall of Zacatecas, covering treatment accorded foreigners and their interests.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 312.51/64a.

[Document 1539]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. 143

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 23, 1914, 3 p.m.

The Christian Brothers, who report two of their number killed at Zacatecas and eleven imprisoned, have schools at Saltillo, Acalzinco, Mexico, Mixcoac, Morelia, Puebla, Queretaro and Toluca. Please bring these schools to the attention of Carranza and urge him to give instructions to local authorities to prevent injury to persons or property.

Bryan.

143 Same telegram to Special Agent Carothers.

The French Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.51/71.

[Document 1540]

The French Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

French Embassy,
Manchester, July 23, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: I have the honor to communicate herewith to your excellency a report from the French Consular Agent at El Paso, giving an accurate account of the experiences of the Christian Brothers of the Zacatecas school.144

Contrary to what was at first reported, the responsibility for the murder of Brothers Astru and Gilles seems to lie with General Tomas Urbina, and, for the ill treatment undergone by the other fourteen Brothers, with General Manuel Chao.

It seems that General Villa was not apprized of the facts until later and that he even gave the prisoners a safe conduct.

Be pleased to accept [etc.]

R. Clausse.

144 Not printed.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.51/68.

[Document 1541]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, July 24, 1914, noon.

Referring further to the attitude of the revolutionists toward the Catholic priesthood, especially Jesuits, and also to male teachers in schools of the faith:

They are regarded as having been almost unanimously enemies of the ideals of the revolution and perniciously active in their interference in secular affairs. While it is not intended to go to extremes they may expect stern measures and little consideration from the new democracy. Their property will not be confiscated, but it may be occupied; and being occupied by the revolutionists army it may be held indefinitely for the state. The view taken of the Catholic Church is essentially radical. Reference is frequently made to measures found necessary by other republican governments in dealing with the Jesuits and it is stated that the reform laws of Juarez have been disregarded. It is considered prudent that for the present at least diplomatic representatives of Spain, France, Italy earnestly urge their nationals engaged in religious work in Mexico to retire from the country.

Silliman.

[Untitled] File No. 312.51/67.

[Document 1542]

[Untitled]

Tampico, July 24, 1914, 10 a.m.

Your July 23, 3 p.m. Proper representations were made several days ago regarding the Christian Brothers. At present the Brothers at the other points named are not yet within the jurisdiction of the Carrancistas but attention has been called to them in accordance with the Department’s instructions.

Silliman.

The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.51/66a.

[Document 1543]

The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 25, 1914, 3 p.m.

Department on July 22d telegraphed Canova at Monterey to proceed to Zacatecas to secure information regarding reported death of two French priests and imprisonment of eleven others.

If you think General Villa will desire to give orders to his subordinates at Zacatecas to facilitate the investigation to be made by Canova, Department has no objection to your informing Villa of Canova’s mission.

Phillips.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/12634.

[Document 1544]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, July 26, 1914, 3 p.m.

* * * Attitude of the revolution towards the Eoman Catholic priesthood. It is claimed that the priesthood, in forgetfulness of its spiritual mission, its disregard of the reform laws, has actively concerned itself in the political intrigues and has connived with the aristocrats and property holders to support Huerta against the interests of the people and against their civil and religious liberty, that the tendency of the priesthood has been in various ways to propagate error, to corrupt the people and to injure the State. Though the Department may have been furnished with a copy of the decree of Governor Villareal, of the State of Nuevo Leon, dated July 14, 1914, I have not seen it in print until to-day. I am sending copy by mail and quote here only the conclusions of the edict. The translation is my own.

1. All foreign Catholic priests are expelled and all Jesuits of whatever nationality.

2. Of the Catholic priests who remain all will be required to formally obligate themselves to abstain from taking any part in political questions.

3. The churches will be open every day from six a.m. until one p.m.; only those priests will be allowed to officiate in them who have permission to do so and who have complied with the obligation referred to in the preceding article.

4. Confessions and confirmations are prohibited.

5. The public is not permitted to enter the sacristy.

6. The church bell will not be allowed to ring except on national holidays and for the triumph of the Constitutionalist army.

7. All Catholic schools which do not strictly agree to obey the official regulations and which do not have as a director a professor from the normal schools of this country shall be closed; the director shall be responsible to the Government for any infraction committed.

8. The infraction of any of these orders shall be punished by a fine of from one to five hundred pesos or of imprisonment of from two to four months or both. In case of repetition the establishment where the infraction was committed shall be closed and the one responsible expelled.

In this matter also the revolution desires the United States and the world to let it be judge of what it considers necessary for the best interest of the country as was done in the period of the reform laws in Mexico and following recent precedents in Italy, France and Portugal.

Silliman.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.404/3.

[Document 1545]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate,
Tampico, July 27, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to quote herewith a translation made by myself of the decree of the Governor of the State of Nuevo Leon, Gov. Villareal, regarding the Catholic clergy and the Roman Catholic Church in that State: Decree of the Governor of the State of Nuevo Leon, Antonio I. Villareal, Governor and Military Commander of the State of Nuevo Leon, to the inhabitants thereof, Greeting:

For reasons of public welfare, and complying with the unavoidable dictates of justice and morality, this Government has decided to suppress and punish within the limits of the State of Nuevo Leon the Roman Catholic clergy, taking into account the following considerations: 1. During our whole National life, the clerics of Mexico, have been a pernicious factor of disorganization and discord; for, in forgetfulness of their spiritual mission, the only reason they have for existence under the tolerant spirit of modern society, they have devoted themselves mainly to controlling the direction of public affairs and to the complete domination of the politics of the country. To obtain this object, they have ever sought an alliance with our reactionary and despotic governments and even with foreigners, and when they could not be helping a Bustamente or a Santa Ana, they have called from Europe a Maximilian; on the other hand they have shown themselves the implacable enemy of every liberal and progressive movement from that of our National independence and the Revolution of Ayutla, until the present revolution, and they have fulminated their ridiculous excommunications against the greatest and grandest benefactors of the country: Hidalgo, Juarez, and Lerdo de Tejada.

2. The forceful and clerical dictatorship of Porfirio Diaz and Victoriano Huerta against which the people, in these later years have heroically fought, have had all the sympathy and aid of the Mexican Church which has ever striven that light should not shine upon the darkness of the oppressed, and which has loved to weld the chains of those who suffer. The clergy has had blessings for the crimes and the repugnant corruptions of Huerta and has worked, fortunately without success, to induce the credulous proletariat to rise against the Constitutionalist movement which has come for their redemption.

3. The clergy, on account of its very character and its way of living, in open contradiction with nature, whose laws can not be violated with impunity, tends to corruption, carries in itself the germs of corruption which reaches excess, when, as has happened among us, its power and its privileges are unrestrained. Clerical corruption has come to be a threat against morality in Mexico. The Confessional and the Sacristy are to be feared as anterooms of prostitution. To suppress them is a holy and regenerative work, as is also the closing of Catholic schools and the expulsion of Jesuits and teaching brothers (friars) foreign and Mexican, which this Government will do, excepting only those who can prove that they have not been allied with the men of the uprising at Mexico against Madero. In the Catholic schools the truth is perverted; the pure white soul of childhood, the idealistic burning spirit of youth is deformed, and as an instrument for the ambitions of the clericals there are chosen young spirits which in an environment more honorable and free might have come to be apostles of liberty and progress.

4. It is a supreme national necessity and an obligation which can not be avoided by the Constitutional revolution, to take energetic and effective measures to dig up from the root, and once for all, put an end to the abominable abuses of the Catholic clergy and terminate the grave danger which this institution, more political than religious, has for the future tranquillity and progress of the fatherland.

It is not the intention of this Government to ignore the liberty of conscience or to persecute what is really worship among Catholics while other religionists enjoy guarantees, and for this reason it is agreed that five of the Catholic churches of Monterey may be reopened for public worship, but it being necessary, and this Government being firm in its determination to maintain the Catholic clergy and the Catholic worship within the limit of its spiritual mission, without allowing it any influence, politically, economically, or educationally, has resolved to impose the following orders for the Catholic schools and worship.

The decree consists of eight articles which were wired to the Department in a radiogram yesterday.

I have [etc.]

John E. Silliman.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.51/73.

[Document 1546]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Monterey, July 27, 1914, 10 p.m.

Referring your July 22, 3 p.m., shall I go to Zacatecas? General Natera returns from Tampico to-morrow night and I can make trip with him. Nothing definite can be accomplished at Zacatecas until he returns. Please advise me here. Carranza has already recommended me highly to Natera. Fabela informs me by wire from Tampico that Sanchez de la Vega, acting Governor of Zacatecas, has been instructed to assist me in every possible manner.

Canova.

The French Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.51/76.

[Document 1547]

The French Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

French Embassy,
Manchester, July 27, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: The attention of the Government of the Republic has been drawn to the trying circumstances which in May last, attended the arrest at and expulsion from Monterey, by the Constitutionalist authorities, of 14 French citizens, of the Christian Brothers, teachers at the “Instituto del Sagrado Corazon de Jesus” with 300 pupils, and the “Colegio Guadalupano.”

Arrested on May 12, asked to pay 500,000 pesos for the Constitutionalist cause, they were ordered to leave the next day by the very first train. With great difficulty and after repeated calls, the Consular Agent of the Republic, Mr. Pierre Lambreton with the assistance of the American, Italian and Spanish Consuls, finally secured the release of the prisoners and permission for them to leave in three groups on the 14th, 15th and 16th of May.

My Government directs me to bring the occurrence to your excellency’s knowledge and to ask, on this occasion, that the Federal Government will intervene to protect French interests in North Mexico.

By order of my Government I also have the honor to call your excellency’s attention to the fact that the Government of the Republic reserves to itself the right to claim hereafter such indemnity as it may deem commensurate to the wrong done to French interests by the Constitutionalist authorities.

Be pleased to accept [etc.]

Clausse.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova. File No. 312.51/73.

[Document 1548]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 29, 1914—4 p.m.

Department desires you proceed Zacatecas in accordance with its July 22, 3 p.m. You will avail yourself of every opportunity to secure information as to opinion of Constitutionalist leaders regarding the effect the decree of July 14th of General Villareal against the church has produced.

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova. File No. 312.51/71.

[Document 1549]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Canova. 145

Department of State,
Washington, July 31, 1914.

Sir: There is enclosed herewith, for your information in connection with future representations that the Department may direct you to take in regard to the situation of the French priests at Zacatecas, a copy of the report from the French Consular Agent at El Paso, Texas, covering the experiences of the Christian Brothers of the Zacatecas School, which was transmitted to the Department in a note, dated July 23d, from the French Embassy.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

145 Same to Special Agent Carothers, Chihuahua.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.51/77.

[Document 1550]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate General,
Monterey, July 31, 1914, 1 p.m.

Referring to case of French priests at Zacatecas: Secretary Foreign Relations Fabela just stated at Consulate this morning that Carranza had official report that no French priests were killed or imprisoned at Zacatecas but that they were deported from the country.

Hanna.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.404/2.

[Document 1551]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Saltillo, August 1, 1914—10 a.m.

Referring to previous correspondence regarding Church question. Governor of Nuevo Leon said to me yesterday that his decree was a revolutionary measure necessitated by the present exigencies of the case and that when normal conditions again prevail the decree will be subject to the action of the State legislature. The Governor of Tamaulipas told me yesterday that he had not closed a single Catholic church in the State but that he had expelled every Catholic priest from the State.

Silliman.

The Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires. File No. 312.51/71.

[Document 1552]

The Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires.

No. 1361.] Department of State,
Washington, August 1, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of July 23d, with which you enclose a copy of a report, dated July 15th, from the French Consular Agent at El Paso, Texas, covering the treatment of the Christian Brothers of the Zacatecas School, at the hands of the Constitutionalists.

In reply you are informed that the Department has sent copies of this report to its special representatives in Mexico, for their information in connection with future representations they may be called upon to make in behalf of the Christian Brothers.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.51/80.

[Document 1553]

Special Agent Canova to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Zacatecas, August 2, 1914, 9 p.m.

Many atrocities have been committed here by the Constitutionalists. Three Christian Brothers, the President, Adrien Astruc, Professor Adolphus Giles, both of them French, and Father Vega, Mexican, shot June 24, 4 p.m. by order of General Chao. Fourteen others banished, and now at Santa Fe, New Mexico, having been forced to make a payment of $5,000 ransom. By order of the same General, 22 priests Zacatecas threatened death unless they paid $100,000; and upon payment they were arrested and banished, were sent to El Paso. Constitutionalists’ conduct here deplorable because of multiplicity of crimes.

Canova.

The Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires. File No. 812.404/2.

[Document 1554]

The Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires. 146

Department of State,
Washington, August 3, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Chargé d’affaires: Referring to previous correspondence in regard to the treatment of religious orders in Mexico by the Constitutionalists, I beg to inform you that the Department is in receipt of a telegram from the American Vice Consul at Saltillo, Mexico, dated August 1st, in which he states that the Governor of Nuevo Leon, on July 31st, told him that the decree with reference to religious orders was a revolutionary measure necessitated by the exigencies of present conditions, and that, when normal conditions again prevailed, the decree would be subject to the action of the State legislature. The Vice Consul adds that the Governor of Tamaulipas stated to him, on the same day, that he had not closed a single Catholic church in the State, but that he had expelled every Catholic priest therefrom.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

146 Same to the Spanish Ambassador.

The Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires. File No. 312.51/76.

[Document 1555]

The Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires.

No. 1365.] Department of State,
Washington, August 3, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of July 27th, in regard to the expulsion from Monterey, Mexico, of fourteen Christian Brothers, teachers at the “Instituto del Sagrado Corazón de Jesús” and the “Colegio Guadalupano.” You ask this Government to interpose its good offices in behalf of French interests in northern Mexico.

In reply I have the honor to inform you that the Consul-General at Monterey has very broad instructions covering the protection of persons and properties belonging to religious orders, including those that are French, and it is thought that the Consul-General will not fail to advise the Constitutionalist authorities at Monterey to be just and moderate in their treatment of French citizens and their properties.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 312.51/80.

[Document 1556]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 4, 1914—9 p.m.

We are informed three Christian Brothers, the President, Adrien Astruc, Professor Adolphus Giles, both of them French, and Father Vega, Mexican, were shot June 24, 4 p.m., by order of General Chao. Fourteen others banished, and now at Santa Fe, New Mexico, having been forced to make a payment of $5,000 ransom. By order of the same General, 22 priests Zacatecas threatened death unless they paid hundred thousand dollars, and upon payment they were arrested and banished, and sent to El Paso.

Lay the above before General Carranza and again impress upon him the seriousness of these acts and urgently insist that the parties guilty be adequately punished.

Bryan.

The Acting Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires. File No. 312.51/80.

[Document 1557]

The Acting Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires.

Department of State,
Washington, August 4, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Chargé d’Affaires: Referring again to the situation of the Christian Brothers at Zacatecas, I beg to inform you that the Department is now in receipt of information which it considers reliable to the effect that three Christian Brothers, Messrs. Adrian Astruc and Adolph Giles, French, and Father Vega, Mexican, were shot on June 24, 4 p.m., by order of General Chao; that 14 others were banished, and are now at Santa Fé, New Mexico, having been forced to make a payment of $5,000 ransom; that, by order of the same General, 22 priests at Zacatecas were threatened with death unless they paid a hundred thousand dollars; and that, upon payment, they were arrested and subsequently banished. These latter priests were sent to El Paso, Texas.

The Department is to-day telegraphing the above information to the American Ambassador at Paris and to the American Vice Consul at Saltillo, with instructions to the latter to impress again upon General Carranza the seriousness of these outrages, and to insist urgently that the parties guilty of these acts be adequately punished.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

The Department of State to the Spanish Embassy. File No. 312.51/68.

[Document 1558]

The Department of State to the Spanish Embassy. 147

Department of State,
Washington, August 5, 1914.

memorandum.

The American Vice Consul at Saltillo recently telegraphed the Department from Tampico in connection with the treatment of persons and property belonging to religious orders and suggested that the Government of Spain, as a measure of precaution for the safety of Spanish priests, might consider it prudent to urge her nationals engaged in religious work in Mexico to retire from that country for the present. The above is communicated merely for your information and for such action as you may desire to take in connection therewith.

147 Mutatis mutandis to French and Italian Embassies.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.51/82.

[Document 1559]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Saltillo, August 5, 1914, 10 a.m.

Department’s August 4, 9 p.m. Can the Department fully confirm the entire information given in this telegram? It is stated here that Chao himself was executed prior to June 27, 7 p.m.

Silliman.

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.51/88.

[Document 1560]

Consul General Hanna to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General,
Monterey, August 5, 1914.

Sir: Referring to telegraphic instructions from the Department and my telegraphic reply thereto, I now have the honor to quote the English translation of a reply from the Minister of Foreign Relations of the Constitutionalist Government relative to the reported execution of two Christian Brothers and the imprisonment of eleven others. Secretary Fabela in his reply says: Your courteous note of the 21st ult. was read with much interest by the First Chief of the Constitutionalist Army. In reply, I beg to advise that according to reports made by General Villa he did not order the execution of the two Christian Brothers in Zacatecas, nor the imprisonment of eleven others as reported, but he did order their expulsion.

I repeat the assurances of my distinguished consideration, etc.

Isiueo Fabela.

I have [etc.]

Philip C. Hanna.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 312.51/82.

[Document 1561]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 7, 1914.

Your August 5, 10 a.m. Department has most reliable information from two sources Astruc and Giles were shot June 24th.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 312.51/92.

[Document 1562]

[Untitled]

Washington, August 28, 1914, 5 p.m.

Discreetly inquire of General Carranza what his future attitude will be toward the Brothers of the Christian Schools in Mexico. Department understands that all these schools are now closed and orders issued for expulsion of the Brothers. Ascertain if order of expulsion will be revoked and schools permitted to reopen.

Bryan.

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.51/93.

[Document 1563]

Vice Consul Silliman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Mexico City, August 29, 1914, 5 a.m.

Department’s August 28, 5 p.m. The attitude of the present Governmental organization in Mexico is decidedly unfriendly towards all Catholic schools. While there may not be so much expulsion as heretofore it is not expected that schools will be permitted to reopen at any time in the near future.

Silliman.

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.404/16.

[Document 1564]

Consul Canada to the Secretary of State.

No. 1041.] American Consulate,
Veracruz, September 25, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit inclosed herewith an order from the Governor of the State of Veracruz to the Military Authorities relative to the clergy.

I have [etc.]

Wm. W. Canada.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

[Untitled]

[From Official Gazette of September 19, 1914.]

Decree concerning clergy.

Office of the Secretary of the Constitutionalist Government of the Free and Sovereign State of Veracruz.

In order to explain the resolution made by the Governor and Military Commander of the State, General Candido Aguilar, relative to the clergy, I hereby make known that he has ordered the definite expulsion of the foreign clergymen, permitting the nationals to exercise their functions, in the following proportions.

In towns: of 500 to 10,000 inhabitants, one priest; of 10,000 to 30,000 inhabitants, two priests; from 30,000 upwards, up to four priests as a maximum.

Jalapa, 11th of September, 1914. Government Secretary, Heriberto Jara.

The French Ambassador to Counselor Lansing. File No. 312.51/96.

[Document 1565]

The French Ambassador to Counselor Lansing.

French Embassy,
Washington, October 17, 1914.

Dear Mr. Counselor: I have received from the Boleo Company a telegram stating that serious troubles have apparently begun once more at Santa Rosalia, the Mexican garrison having, it is reported, revolted and the life of the employees of the company being threatened.

If it were possible for the American Government to ascertain how the matter stands and to supply such protection as may be needed, I should be very much obliged. The same has been done before and my Government has highly appreciated the usefulness of your intervention. I hope it will be possible to act again as was previously done.

Believe me [etc.]

Jusserand.

The Acting Secretary of State to the French Ambassador. File No. 312.51/96.

[Document 1566]

The Acting Secretary of State to the French Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, October 19, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your note of October 17th, in which you state that you have received a telegram from the Boleo Company, reporting that the Mexican garrison at Santa Rosalia, Mexico, had revolted and that the lives of the employees of the Boleo Company were being threatened.

In reply I am glad to inform you that the Boleo Company reported this information to Admiral Howard on October 7th, at which time the U.S. S. Albany was stationed at Santa Rosalia, On October 14th Admiral Howard telegraphed to the Navy Department that the U. S. S. West Virginia was at Santa Rosalia and that quiet prevailed there.

The Admiral added in his telegram that the commanding officers on the west coast of Mexico had been instructed to give all practicable protection to foreigners at every port.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

The French Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.51/100.

[Document 1567]

The French Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

French Embassy,
Washington, November 12, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: Referring to the oral indications furnished by me of late to the Department of State, I have the honor to confirm to your excellency that my Government’s attention has been drawn to the trying situation in which the National Bank of Mexico is now placed by the inimical policy toward it adopted by the new Mexican Government which seems to aim at the eventual suppression or liquidation of that bank.

Established in 1882 with the cooperation of a group of Frenchmen of finance, the National Bank was granted important privileges by a law of the Mexican Congress. So this is not the case of a bank governed by the general law of Mexico, but that of an institution which, having been granted a charter, occupies a position that is entitled to respect more than any other. Now among the unfriendly acts of the Mexican authorities certain Custom Houses have notably been ordered to stop • depositing customs receipts with the Bank, although the Congress, by laws regularly passed, entrusted that establishment with the collection of the duties of that class that are set apart for the service of the loans of 1899, 5%, of 1910, 4%, and the Treasury Bonds of 1913, 6%.

A large quantity of the stock of the National Bank capitalized at 32,000,000 pesos and whose shares of a face value of 100 pesos were never quoted at less than 900 francs from 1905 until 1911 and some times were considerably higher than that figure is owned by French holders. That is why I am asked by the Government of the Republic to bring to your excellency’s notice the trying position in which the institution has been placed and to ask of you to support the protests which the Chargé d’Affaires of the Republic in Mexico has been directed to lodge with General Carranza’s Government. Be pleased [etc.]

Jusserand.

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador. File No. 312.51/100.

[Document 1568]

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador.

No. 1412.] Department of State,
Washington, December 2, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s note of November 12, 1914, requesting the Department to make representations in behalf of the French stockholders of the National Bank of Mexico at Mexico City.

In reply I have the honor to inform your excellency that it has been the practice of this Government, in dealing with Mexican affairs, to make representations in behalf of the nationals of other governments in localities where such governments were not represented; but in view of the fact that the French Government has a diplomatic representative at Mexico City, and in further view of the fact that no American citizens appear to be interested in the National Bank of Mexico, it is not thought that it would be advisable for this Government to make representations to the Mexican authorities in the sense indicated.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

Protection of German subjects and interestsProtection of German subjects and interests

[1569] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, January 9, 1914, 12 noon.

File No. 312.62/40.

[1570] The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, January 10, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 312.62/40.

[1571] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, January 29, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 312.62/42.

[1572] The Secretary of State to Consul Hostetter

Department of State, Washington, January 31, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 312.62/42.

[1573] Consul Hostetter to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Hermosillo, February 1, 1914.

File No. 312.62/43.

[1574] The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, February 14, 1914.

File No. 312.62/44.

[1575] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, February 14, 1914.

File No. 312.41/90.

[1576] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, April 13, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 312.62/50.

[1577] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, April 14, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 312.62/50.

[1578] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihtiahua, April 15, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 312.62/52.

[1579] The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, April 17, 1914.

File No. 312.62/52.

[1580] The German Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

German Embassy, Washington, May 27, 1914.

File No. 312.62/62.

[1581] The Secretary of State to Consul Hamm.

Department of State, Washington, May 29, 1914.

File No. 312.62/64.

[1582] The German Embassy to the Department of State.

Imperial German Embassy, Washington , June 1, 1914.

File No. 312.62/73.

[1583] The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, June 1, 1914.

File No. 312.62/73.

[1584] The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, June 2, 1914.

File No. 312.62/62.

[1585] The Department of State to the German Embassy.

Department of State, Washington , June 10, 1914.

File No. 312.62/70.

[1586] The German Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Imperial German Embassy, Washington, June 16, 1914.

File No. 312.62/75.

[1587] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan.

Department of State, Washington, June 18, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 312.62/75.

[1588] The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

Department of State, Washington, June 18, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 312.62/75.

[1589] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

El Paso, June 19, 1914, 10.30 a.m.

File No. 312.62/77.

[1590] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State

American Consulate, Tampico, August 2, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 312.62/94.

[1591] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan.

Department of State, Washington, August 3, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 312.62/94.

[1592] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, August 4, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 312.62/94.

[1593] The German Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

Imperial German Embassy, Newport, August 4, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 312.62/95.

[1594] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

Department of State, Washington, August 4, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 312.62/94.

[1595] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, August 4, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 312.62/97.

[1596] [Untitled]

Tampico, August 6, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 312.62/99.

[1597] Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, August 6th, 1914.

File No. 312.62/102.

[1598] The Secretary of State to the German Chargé d’Affaires.

Department of State, Washington, August 8, 1914.

File No. 312.62/95.

[1599] The German Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

Imperial German Embassy, Newport, August 8, 1914.

File No. 312.62/100.

[1600] The German-Embassy to the Department of State.

undated

File No. 312.62/107.

[1601] The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

Department of State, Washington, November 7, 1914.

File No. 312.62/107.

[1602] Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

Aguascalientes, November 11, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 812.00/13745.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.62/40.

[Document 1569]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, January 9, 1914, 12 noon.

720. The German Minister has just called and stated that he has received a telegram from his Consul in the city of Tepic stating that all foreigners anticipate serious trouble and possible capture of that city by so-called revolutionists. The Minister inquires if it is not possible for our Government to take some measures looking to the protection of the foreign colony in that city. His only vessel on the west coast is now at Guaymas where trouble is also anticipated. There are about thirty Americans in Tepic and it is thought that the presence of a war vessel at San Bias would afford adequate protection to the foreigners in that section.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 312.62/40.

[Document 1570]

The Acting Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 10, 1914, 7 p.m.

Your 720, January 9th. Navy Department has sent appropriate instructions to Admiral Cowles regarding situation at Tepic.

Moore.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.62/42.

[Document 1571]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, January 29, 1914, 2 p.m.

748. The German Minister complains that a great many German subjects, resident in the territory of Tepic, have suffered a great many depredations from the rebels and that the rebels have stated that they are in connection with Carranza and that he has given orders that as the United States has not recognized Huerta, the property of Americans is to be spared and those of all other nations to be treated without respect. I have informed the German Minister that I would bring this matter to your earnest attention, to the end that Carranza be informed of this state of affairs.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

The Secretary of State to Consul Hostetter File No. 312.62/42.

[Document 1572]

The Secretary of State to Consul Hostetter

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 31, 1914, 7 p.m.

Embassy, Mexico City, telegraphs as follows: German subjects, according to German Minister, have suffered in Territory of Tepic from depredations by Constitutionalists. German Minister states Constitutionalists have said that they are in connection with Carranza; that he has given orders that property of Americans should be respected because of the nonrecognition by the United States of the Huerta Government, but that the property of other nations is to be treated without respect.

Bring foregoing to attention of proper Constitutionalist authorities with earnest recommendation that they take immediate steps to remedy this situation.

Bryan.

Consul Hostetter to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.62/43.

[Document 1573]

Consul Hostetter to the Secretary of State. 148

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Hermosillo, February 1, 1914.

Department’s January 31,7 p, m. Carranza claims German Minister’s charges are absurd as no such orders were ever issued. Orders have been issued to respect life and property of all foreigners, all nationalities included. Some foreigners have mixed in politics and these may have suffered some inconvenience but none are molested who remain neutral. He has asked for information and will advise as soon as received.

Hostetter.

148 Communicated to the American Chargé d’Affaires at Mexico City February 2, 1914.

The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.62/44.

[Document 1574]

The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 14, 1914.

The German Ambassador called to-day at the Department and made inquiry as to treatment which might be expected for German subjects at Torreon. Ask Villa for proper assurances on this matter which may be communicated to the Ambassador.

J. B. Moore.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.41/90.

[Document 1575]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. 149

[Telegram—Extract.]

El Paso, February 14, 1914.

Have interviewed Villa. Assure German Ambassador every protection will be given German subjects at Torreon. Report by letter to-morrow.

G. C. Carothers.

149 Communicated to the German Ambassador February 16, 1914.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.62/50.

[Document 1576]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, April 13, 1914, 2 p.m.

849. The German Minister informs me that a German subject named Radke has been kidnapped by rebel forces near Guaymas, Sonora, and requests me to bring the matter to your attention and to request you to make representations to the rebel authorities to the end that Radke be liberated immediately and permitted to follow his lawful occupation. He further asked me to request President to impress upon the rebel authorities in question that German subjects within their jurisdiction must be treated with the same respect and consideration as are other foreigners and be allowed to follow their lawful occupations.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.62/50.

[Document 1577]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. 150

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 14, 1914, 5 p.m.

Upon request of diplomatic representative of Germany you will bring to attention of Carranza reported kidnapping by Constitutionalist forces near Guaymas, Sonora, of German subject named Radke and informally request that he be liberated and allowed to return to his lawful occupation. You will add that German representative further requests this Government to ask that Constitutionalist forces give adequate protection to German subjects within their jurisdiction.

Bryan.

150 Mutatis mutandis to the American Consul at Hermosillo. The American Chargé d’Affaires at Mexico City advised of contents of the telegram April 14, 1914.

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.62/52.

[Document 1578]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Chihtiahua, April 15, 1914, 1 p.m.

Department’s April 14, 5 p.m. Constitutionalist Secretary Foreign Affairs Fabela has replied verbally that consistently with principles already enunciated his government can not accept our mediation in Radke’s case because of the fact that there is at Chihuahua German Consular Officer through whom such representations should be made to Carranza. He calls attention in this connection to notes already sent to the Department through Carothers and Simpich.151 Fabela states, however, that he accepts the information and will act upon it as in any case brought to attention by private parties.

Letcher.

151 See, under Protection of Spanish subjects, Mr. Simpich’s No. 289 of Feb. 19; Mr. Carothers’s Apr. 9, 7 p.m.; Apr. 11, 7 p.m.: Apr. 12, and Apr. 14; under Protection of British subjects, Mr. Simpich’s Feb. 26, Feb. 28, and Mar. 11.

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador. File No. 312.62/52.

[Document 1579]

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, April 17, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: I enclose, for your information, a paraphrase of a telegram dated April 15, 1 p.m. from the American Consul at Chihuahua, regarding the procedure in the matter of making representations to the Constitutionalists in the case of the German subject Radke.

In this connection, I beg to invite your attention to a note the Department is to-day addressing you on the subject of representations to General Venustiano Carranza in behalf of the nationals of all foreign governments.152

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

152 See Protection of Spanish Interests, p. 807 [Pg. 807 includes portions of Doc. 1390, Doc. 1391, and Doc. 1392].

The German Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.62/62.

[Document 1580]

The German Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

German Embassy,
Washington, May 27, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: H. M. S. Nürnberg has been ordered from the West Coast of Mexico to Panama for the purpose of exchanging its personnel. By direction of the Imperial Government, I have the honor to request your kind intervention that the Government of the United States may direct the American naval vessels to assume the protection of German interests on the Mexican west coast during the absence of H. M. S. Nürnberg.

Kurt von Lersner.

The Secretary of State to Consul Hamm. File No. 312.62/64.

[Document 1581]

The Secretary of State to Consul Hamm.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 29, 1914.

State to General Carranza that at request of German Embassy, this city, Department has instructed you to ask him to order release to owner, of hardware store in San Pedro de Las Colonias, Coahuila, and ranch twelve or fifteen miles east of city, both belonging to Mrs. Helena Pfeiffer, a German subject, and seized by Constitutionalists, including quantity of wheat and cotton on ranch. Store said to be in charge of Colonel C. Benavides.

Bryan.

The German Embassy to the Department of State. File No. 312.62/73.

[Document 1582]

The German Embassy to the Department of State.

[Memorandum—Translation.]

German subjects at Guadalajara, Mexico, who expect that city to be captured by the Constitutionalists, have applied to the Imperial Government for assistance in saving their lives and property.

The Imperial Government would be especially obliged to the Government of the United States if through the latter’s good offices such protection could be granted.

Imperial German Embassy,
Washington , June 1, 1914.

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.62/73.

[Document 1583]

The Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 1, 1914.

The German Ambassador informed this Department that his Government would be especially grateful if through its good offices this Government could secure ample protection for the lives and properties of German subjects during the approaching struggle about Guadalajara.

Represent to Carranza that the keenest interest is apparent among the diplomatic representatives of foreign Governments regarding the manner in which the Constitutionalists will be able to protect foreign interests and administer justice during and after the attack on Guadalajara.

It is hoped that General Carranza will give orders to the end that the lives and properties of all foreigners shall receive special protection and consideration.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador. File No. 312.62/62.

[Document 1584]

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador.

No. 1013.] Department of State,
Washington, June 2, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Embassy’s note of May 27th, in which it is requested that the American naval vessels in Mexican west coast waters be directed to assume the protection of German interests during the absence of H. M. S. Nümberg.

In reply I have the honor to inform your excellency that the Secretary of the Navy informed this Department in a letter under date of May 29, 1914, that the Commander in Chief of the Pacific Fleet has been given instructions in the sense above indicated.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The Department of State to the German Embassy. File No. 312.62/70.

[Document 1585]

The Department of State to the German Embassy.

memorandum.

Referring to the Imperial German Embassy’s memorandum of the 1st instant, seeking the good offices of the Government of the United States to the end that proper protection may be accorded to the lives and property of German subjects in the vicinity of Guadalajara, Mexico, the Department of State has the honor to inform the Imperial German Embassy that, in compliance with the request of the Department of State made to the Secretary of the Navy that Admiral Howard be instructed to lend his good offices looking to the protection of German subjects along the west coast of Mexico, the Secretary of the Navy, on June 1 last, sent telegraphic instructions in the above sense to the Commander-in-Chief of the Atlantic [Pacific] Fleet, with special reference to the expected attack upon Guadalajara by Constitutionalists.

Department of State,
Washington , June 10, 1914.

The German Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.62/75.

[Document 1586]

The German Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Imperial German Embassy,
Washington, June 16, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: The Imperial Government has heard from Mexico that the Constitutionalist Government has appropriated to itself the warehouse of the German firm of Eversbusch with goods worth 100,000 pesos at Tampico. The Imperial Consulate at Tampico has received no reply to his protest to the said Government. Furthermore, German subjects and commercial houses are still opposed to having contributions levied upon them.

I am therefore instructed most respectfully to ask your excellency that the Government of the United States will bring its influence to bear on the Constitutionalist Government in Mexico for the protection of German subjects and firms from injustice and imposition and for the release of their property.

Looking forward to your excellency’s obliging answer,

I avail [etc.]

For the Imperial Ambassador:
Kurt von Lersner.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan. File No. 312.62/75.

[Document 1587]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 18, 1914, 6 p.m.

German Embassy transmits report that Constitutionalists have confiscated warehouse and goods of German firm Eversbusch at Tampico.

Investigate and if report correct, use good offices to secure release of property.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna. File No. 312.62/75.

[Document 1588]

The Secretary of State to Consul General Hanna.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 18, 1914, 5 p.m.

German Embassy transmits report that Constitutionalists have confiscated warehouse and goods of German firm Eversbusch at Tampico, and that Germans are subject to forced contributions.

Stating that this is done at request of German Embassy, ask Carranza to order restoration of Eversbusch’s property and that Germans be not subjected to forced contributions.

Bryan.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.62/77.

[Document 1589]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. 153

[Telegram.]

El Paso, June 19, 1914, 10.30 a.m.

Carranza says you may inform his excellency, the German Ambassador, that General Obregon has received strict orders to give ample protection to all foreigners and their property during and after the coming attack on Guadalajara.

Carothers.

153 Communicated to the German Ambassador June 20, 1914.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State File No. 312.62/94.

[Document 1590]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, August 2, 1914, 9 p.m.

This afternoon German consular representative requested assistance of Admiral Mayo and of this office to prevent local authorities from boarding the steamship Antonina of Hamburg-American line in transit Europe and taking off Mexican accused of homicide. Captain believes that accusation is mere pretext and man is wanted on political charges and refused authorities permission to board ship. Authorities have placed a guard of soldiers on the wharf with artillery and machine guns threaten to sink ship if she attempts to leave the pier. This office has taken no action in the matter and will not unless directed by Department.

Bevan.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan. File No. 312.62/94.

[Document 1591]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Bevan.

[Telegrams.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 3, 1914, 6 p.m.

Your August 2, 9 p.m. Earnestly advise local authorities to proceed with extreme caution and to use moderation in their dealings with German steamship’s officials.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 312.62/94.

[Document 1592]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, August 4, 1914, 6 p.m.

Your August 2, 9 p.m. Department is to-day telegraphing Vice Consul Silliman at Saltillo to advise General Carranza to exercise clemency in the case of the two Mexican refugees on board Antonina.

Bryan.

The German Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.62/95.

[Document 1593]

The German Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Translation.]

Imperial German Embassy,
Newport, August 4, 1914, 6 p.m.

By order of the Imperial Government I have the honor to pray your excellency most kindly to arrange that the protection of German life and property in the Republic of Mexico be formally assumed by the American land forces and war vessels.

Von Haniel.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman. File No. 312.62/94.

[Document 1594]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Silliman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 4, 1914, 7 p.m.

Department has been informed that Constitutionalists at Tampico are forcibly detaining steamship Antonina of Hamburg-American Line in transit to Europe and insist on searching steamer for two political refugees who embarked at Puerto Mexico, Doctor Villanueva and Senor Pazas, and that these men will probably be forcibly removed from vessel and possibly executed. Under present conditions the effect of removal of political refugees from neutral steamer by Constitutionalists will be very bad, and produce unfortunate complications.

Lay this matter before General Carranza and advise him to issue the necessary orders for the release of the Antonina without removal of Villanueva and Pazas and to exercise clemency in the case of these men in order to relieve his administration from the grave consequences which might result from acts of violence, such as the taking from a foreign ship of retired military or political enemies and permitting their execution.

The inexpediency and folly of General Carranza’s permitting summary executions or acts of revenge that might vitally affect the question of recognition is apparent.

Bryan.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.62/97.

[Document 1595]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, August 4, 1914, 9 p.m.

Your August 3, 6 p.m. Constitutionalist authorities sent armed force on board the German Antonina this afternoon at six o’clock and searched ship. Captain was called to custom house and while there put under arrest, force having been sent on board in his absence. German Consul was also detained on board until after search was completed. This office requested that both the master of the ship and the Consul be released and request was granted but not until after search was made. The alleged criminals, Dr. Virgilio Villanueva, surgeon in Federal Army, and Manuel Pazas were not found. Captain informed me that several Mexicans left the ship in Vera Cruz after learning that it was bound for Tampico and were still on the passenger list. Dr. Villanueva, he belieyes, escaped over the side as soon as the boarding doctor advised him that he would be executed if he came ashore. Captain will be required to make statement to-morrow regarding disappearance of Villanueva.

Bevan.

[Untitled] File No. 312.62/99.

[Document 1596]

[Untitled]

Tampico, August 6, 1914, 9 p.m.

Referring my August 2, 9 p.m. Steamship Antonina was released at five o’clock this afternoon.

Bevan.

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.62/102.

[Document 1597]

Vice Consul Bevan to the Secretary of State.

No. 1171.] American Consulate,
Tampico, August 6th, 1914.

Sir: Referring my August 2, 9 p.m., August 4, 6 p.m., and August 6, 9 p.m., I have the honor to advise the Department that on the afternoon of August 2d, the German Consular representative called on this office and requested its assistance in preventing the local authorities from boarding the German S. S. Antonina, of the Hamburg-American Line, and making a search for Dr. Virgilio Villanueva and Manuel P. Pazas, alleged criminals. It was maintained by the Constitutionalist authorities that Dr. Villanueva was implicated in the assassination of late President Madero, and that Señor Pazas was Chief of Police in Mexico City. The Captain protested that the accusations were mere pretexts and refused to allow the authorities permission to search the ship. The military authorities then ordered their cannon and machine guns placed on the end of the Fiscal wharf, where the ship was lying, and gave the officer in charge orders to sink the vessel if it attempted to leave the clock.

On the morning of the 4th the German Consular representative again came to this office and advised that an order for releasing the ship had arrived, and the ship was at complete liberty, and no further search for the alleged criminals would be made. Within an hour he returned again and advised that the Collector of Customs, had issued a new order to have the ship searched for the prisoners. In the meantime I had received the Department’s August 3, 6 p.m. requesting this office to advise local authorities to proceed with extreme caution and to use moderation in their dealings with the German steamship officials.

I immediately called on the Collector of Customs and advised him of the above instruction. At that time an armed force was on board the ship making the search, and the Captain was under arrest in the custom house. The German Consular representative was also detained on the ship while the search was in progress. The Captain was ordered to the custom house to sign some papers and while he was there the arrest was made, and the force was sent on board. I protested against the arrest of the Captain and the detention of the Consul, and the Collector promised me that they would be released as soon as the search had been completed. The search continued for about two hours at the termination of which the Consul and the Captain were both released. Although they were unable to find the alleged criminals, they still insisted that they were on the ship, and that the Captain was aiding and abetting them in their attempt to escape. On the same night after Mrs. Villanueva had retired the officers entered her room without knocking at her door and tried to force her in many ways to tell where her husband was hiding. On one occasion she fainted when they entered the room, and not before several hours could the doctor bring her to. The German Consular representative advised me in writing about this incident. They remained on board all day Thursday, the 6th, and about 4 o’clock in the afternoon advised the German Consulate that the ship would be thoroughly fumigated, the engine room and every space on the ship. Without the slightest provocation, and not a half an hour after the notice regarding the fumigation, a communication was received by the German Consulate from the Collector of Customs that all proceedings against the ship had terminated, and that the ship had been released.

The ship was immediately shifted to mid stream and no further action has been taken in regard to the alleged criminals. Owing to the state of war existing in Germany the Antonina will remain in this port indefinitely.

The general belief is that Dr. Virgilio Villanueva escaped over the side of the Antonina and boarded the Waters Pierce tanker Mexicano and sailed immediately for Texas City, Texas. Mr. Manuel P. Pazas left the Antonina in Vera Cruz as soon as he discovered that the Antonina was going to call at Tampico.

I have [etc.]

Thos. H. Bevan.

The Secretary of State to the German Chargé d’Affaires. File No. 312.62/95.

[Document 1598]

The Secretary of State to the German Chargé d’Affaires.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 8, 1914.

Your telegram August 4th. This Government will continue to use its good offices as it has done in the past.

W. J. Bryan.

The German Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.62/100.

[Document 1599]

The German Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Imperial German Embassy,
Newport, August 8, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: A telegraphic report from the Imperial Consulate at Guadalajara, which did not reach Berlin until the end of July, says that when the Constitutionalist forces took that city on the 8th of last month they respected the interests of German residents.

I am instructed to express to the Government of the United States the Imperial Government’s thanks for the friendly readiness with which the threatened German interests were again looked after in this case in a specially effective manner.

In having the honor thus to comply with the aforesaid instructions, I have reference to your excellency’s obliging note verbale of June 20th last on the subject.153

Accept [etc.]

Haniel.

153 Communicated to the German Ambassador, June 20, 1914.

The German-Embassy to the Department of State. File No. 312.62/107.

[Document 1600]

The German-Embassy to the Department of State.

undated

memorandum.

The German Legation at Mexico reports under October 28th: The German Vice Consul at Guanajuato is proprietor of a valuable estate [“hacienda “] named Santiago in the State of Zacatecas, County [“Partido.”] of Villanueva. After seizure of this estate by the Mexicon Constitutionalists the restitution was reclaimed without any result. By order of Francisco Villa the estate has now been confiscated according to the enclosed order. The restitution has been reclaimed at Mexico again on October 23rd.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

Constitutionalist Army,
Division of the North.

Col. Miguel Hernandez, in a telephone message to-day tells me: General Francisco Villa orders me: Inform the ranches “Encarnacion,” “Tayanua,” “Salto,” “Santiago “and any others along that route which are confiscated, that from this moment they are absolutely prohibited from taking away corn, stock, or anything, even though they may have an order of the Department of Agriculture, until a new order has been given. Please convey as quickly as possible this order to the managers of these properties. This I communicate to you for your information and due performance.

Villanueva , October 13, 1914 .
First Captain, Chief of Arms,
R. S. Garay.
German Embassy,
Washington , November 7, 1914.

The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. File No. 312.62/107.

[Document 1601]

The Acting Secretary of State to Special Agent Carothers. 154

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 7, 1914.

Department informed that German Vice Consul at Guanajuato is proprietor of Hacienda Santiago in Villanueva, Zacatecas, and that this property has been seized by R. S. Garay, Jefe de Armas, who claims to be acting under orders from General Villa.

At request of German Embassy this capital, please bring to attention of General Villa and use your best efforts to have this property restored to rightful owner.

Robert Lansing.

154 Communicated to the German Embassy November 9, 1914.

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State. File No. 812.00/13745.

[Document 1602]

Special Agent Carothers to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Aguascalientes, November 11, 1914, 11 p.m.

Referring to property in Zacatecas belonging to German Vice Consul at Guanajuato General Villa has ordered investigated and return of property to owners.

Carothers.

Protection of Chinese; admission of refugees to the United StatesProtection of Chinese; admission of refugees to the United States155

155 Continued from For. Rel. 1913, pp. 916–928.

[1603] Vice Consul Guyant to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Ensenada, December 29, 1913.

File No. 312.93/59.

[1604] Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Tampico, Mexico, January 5, 1914.

File No. 312.93/58.

[1605] [Untitled]

American Consulate, Tampico, January 6, 1914.

File No. 812.00/10457.

[1606] The Secretary of State to Consul Johnson.

Department of State, Washington, January 12, 1914.

File No. 312.93/57.

[1607] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Guyant.

Department of State, Washington, February 3, 1914.

File No. 312.93/59.

[1608] Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Nogales, February 24, 1914.

File No. 312.93/61.

[1609] The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich.

Department of State, Washington, February 24, 1914.

File No. 312.93/61.

[1610] Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

Cananea, February 26, 1914.

File No. 312.93/62.

[1611] Consul Hamm to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Durango, April 24, 1914.

File No. 312.93/71.

[1612] Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Peking, April 25, 1914.

File No. 312.93/70.

[1613] Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Chihuahua, April 30, 1914.

File No. 312.93/73.

[1614] The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

Department of State, Washington, May 1, 1914.

File No. 312.93/70.

[1615] The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

Department of State, Washington, May 5, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 312.93/76.

Vice Consul Guyant to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.93/59.

[Document 1603]

Vice Consul Guyant to the Secretary of State.

No. 289.] American Consulate,
Ensenada, December 29, 1913.

Sir: With reference to the general subject of assistance to Chinese in Mexico by American Consular officers, I have the honor to transmit herewith a list of the Chinese firms in Ensenada showing a close estimate of the present value of stocks of merchandise on hand expressed in Mexican currency.156

From this statement it will be noted that the Chinese have merchandise here to the value of about $100,000, American money. This estimate does not include cash on hand.

The general fear among local merchants that the Governor will soon commence making forced loans of money and supplies for the soldiers has led the Chinese merchants to make a formal request for the protection of this Consulate.

I have [etc.]

Claude E. Guyant.

156 Not printed.

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.93/58.

[Document 1604]

Consul Miller to the Secretary of State.

No. 986.] American Consulate,
Tampico, Mexico, January 5, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to quote herewith the telegram received from the Chinese Legation in Mexico City thanking this office for assistance rendered to Chinese subjects during the recent attack on Tampico: Please accept thanks this Legation for assistance afforded and protection offered Chinese during recent bombardment Tampico.

Wo Chung Yen.

I have [etc.]

Clarence A. Miller.

[Untitled] File No. 812.00/10457.

[Document 1605]

[Untitled]

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Consulate,
Tampico, January 6, 1914.

General Zaragoza is investigating report maltreatment by Federal soldiers at American ranch at Colonia of American named Fisher also other complaints of American citizens. It is believed rebels will, execute Chinese cook on same ranch, taken prisoner by them at same time.

Miller.

The Secretary of State to Consul Johnson. File No. 312.93/57.

[Document 1606]

The Secretary of State to Consul Johnson.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 12, 1914.

Consul, Tampico, reports his belief that revolutionists will execute Chinese cook recently captured by them on ranch at Colonia of American named Fisher.

Informally but urgently protest to appropriate authorities at Victoria against such execution.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Guyant. File No. 312.93/59.

[Document 1607]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Guyant.

No. 182.] Department of State,
Washington, February 3, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your despatch No. 289 of December 29, 1913, transmitting a list of the Chinese firms in Ensenada showing a close estimate of the present value of stocks of merchandise on hand expressed in Mexican currency. You say that the general fear among local merchants that the Governor will soon commence making forced loans of money on supplies for the soldiers has led the Chinese merchants to make a formal request for the protection of your Consulate.

You are instructed to extend protection to the lives and property of Chinese in your consular district in accordance with previous general instructions regarding the extension of protection to foreigners.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr.

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.93/61.

[Document 1608]

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Nogales, February 24, 1914.

Following received from Agent, Cananea, to-day: Manifestation against all foreigners in general but particularly against Chinese, now in progress in Cananea being agitated by President Womans Union. Manifestation commenced at 12.15 is still on. At 1 p.m. great crowds in front of my office, woman speaker calling for forcible expulsion of Chinese from Cananea and threaten to undertake to act herself requesting crowds to back her up. I have made formal protest to Mayor but I don’t believe local authorities capable of preventing continuance of manifestation. If continues there may be serious trouble.

Montague.

Later Montague telephoned through American postmaster at Naco, Arizona, that mob was driving Chinese from streets and had also dispersed police. Montague telegraphed Governor at Hermosillo asking for troops to restore order. I am repeating Montague’s request to Governor and leaving this evening for Cananea.

Simpich.

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich. File No. 312.93/61.

[Document 1609]

The Secretary of State to Vice Consul Simpich.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 24, 1914.

Exert every possible influence to prevent hostile action against Chinese or any other foreigners. Ask Carranza to furnish necessary force to restrain mob. Give asylum to any foreigners whose lives are in danger. If necessary conduct them to American side and hold them and care for them until you receive further instructions.

Bryan.

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.93/62.

[Document 1610]

Vice Consul Simpich to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Cananea, February 26, 1914.

Situation in Canaea temporarily relieved, soldiers having been allowed and order restored, though feeling against Chinese is still intense. On 24th one Chinese laundry was looted and two Chinese stoned and slightly injured by mob. Governor Maytorena, in reply to Consular Agent Montague’s demand has telegraphed assurances that orders have been given to Cananea authorities for the protection of foreign lives and property but the attitude of the municipal officials towards Chinese in particular is such that full dependence could not be placed in their promises should the situation become critical.

Simpich.

Consul Hamm to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.93/71.

[Document 1611]

Consul Hamm to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Durango, April 24, 1914.

Chinese this city fearful and desire leave. Is it prohibitory grant them temporary asylum in the United States and will Chinese Legation Washington reimburse me for money advanced for transportation of deserving Chinese?

Hamm.

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.93/70.

[Document 1612]

Minister Reinsch to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Peking, April 25, 1914.

Chinese Chargé d’Affaires in Mexico has cabled Foreign Office expressing fears as to safety of 30,000 Chinese residing in Mexico, 20,000 of whom live in Mexico City, and has asked what protective measures should be taken on the appeals of his fellow citizens. As United States has hitherto exercised good offices for the protection of Chinese subjects in Mexico, Chinese Government desires to consult Department in the premises. Foreign Office fears that if rioting should occur Chinese would suffer greatly as Mexicans are not friendly towards them. Removal of so many people to place of safety appears to be out of the question because of the heavy expense involved.

While the Legation on the general principles involved in the situation could hold out no expectation that the American Government could assist in protection outside areas actually occupied by it, the matter is referred to the Department for such suggestions as it may desire to bring to notice of Chinese Government.

[Unsigned.]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State. File No. 312.93/73.

[Document 1613]

Consul Letcher to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Chihuahua, April 30, 1914.

Newspaper report that some modification of ordinary restriction against entrance of Japanese and Chinese is now in force. Information is requested, principally in interest of Chinese.

Letcher.

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch. File No. 312.93/70.

[Document 1614]

The Secretary of State to Minister Reinsch.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 1, 1914.

Your April 25. Conditions in Mexico appear to be much improved and it is not believed that Chinese or other foreigners are in danger. No Chinese have been molested so far as Department is able to learn. Do not believe they will be in any danger in Mexico City. You may say to Chinese Government that this Government will do everything within its power to protect Chinese in Mexico. Department has been conferring with Chinese Legation here relative to giving temporary asylum in United States to Chinese at Durango and Ensenada in case it should become necessary.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher. File No. 312.93/76.

[Document 1615]

The Secretary of State to Consul Letcher.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 5, 1914, 7 p.m.

Secretary of Labor states that newspaper reports of intention to modify regulations for admission of Chinese without foundation, but that “Whenever it becomes necessary in the interest of humanity and to save the lives of refugees to give them temporary asylum that course is being followed.”

Bryan.

Kidnapping of Samuel Cantú, a Mexican citizen, on American territory by Mexican officersKidnapping of Samuel Cantú, a Mexican citizen, on American territory by Mexican officers

[1616] Consul Garrett to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Nuevo Laredo, January 26, 1914.

File No. 811.0144.

[1617] The Secretary of State to Consul Garrett.

Department of State, Washington, January 27, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 811.0144.

[1618] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, January 27, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 811.0144.

[1619] Consul Garrett to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Nuevo Laredo, January 27, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 811.0144/7.

[1620] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, January 28, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 811.0144/7.

[1621] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, January 29, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 811.0144/9.

[1622] The Secretary of State to Consul Garrett.

Department of State, Washington, January 29, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 811.0144/9.

[1623] Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Mexico City, January 30, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 811.0144/12.

[1624] [Untitled]

American Embassy, Mexico City, January 31, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 811.0144/14.

[1625] Consul Garrett to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Nuevo Laredo, February 1, 1914.

File No. 811.0144/15.

[1626] Consul Garrett to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Nuevo Laredo, February 2, 1914.

File No. 811.0144/20.

[1627] The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

Department of State, Washington, February 12, 1914.

File No. 811.0144/20.

Consul Garrett to the Secretary of State. File No. 811.0144.

[Document 1616]

Consul Garrett to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Nuevo Laredo, January 26, 1914.

One hour ago Samuel Cantu, former Mayor of Lampasos, Mexico, was enticed to the middle of the international bridge, seized on the American side of the boundary by two Mexican officers, dragged across the boundary and thrown into prison. It is said that he will be shot to-morrow morning. I have already made a protest to the General.

Garrett.

The Secretary of State to Consul Garrett. File No. 811.0144.

[Document 1617]

The Secretary of State to Consul Garrett.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 27, 1914, 4 p.m.

Your January 26. In event Cantu not already killed and assuming the certainty of the circumstances as stated by you that he was kidnapped on American side of boundary, say to appropriate authorities that United States Government demands his immediate release and return to American side of border.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 811.0144.

[Document 1618]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 27, 1914, 6 p.m.

Consul, Nuevo Laredo, and several citizens of Laredo, Texas, report to Department that at nine o’clock last night Samuel Cantú, Mexican citizen, was kidnapped on American side of international bridge between above two places, dragged across boundary and thrown into prison and it is said that he is to be shot to-day.

Say to appropriate authorities that, if facts are as stated, United States Government demands immediate release of Cantu and his return to American side of border.

W. J. Bryan.

Consul Garrett to the Secretary of State. File No. 811.0144/7.

[Document 1619]

Consul Garrett to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Nuevo Laredo, January 27, 1914, 9 p.m.

Demand delivered at six o’clock this evening and General Quintana replied that he has already reported the arrest of Cantú to General Téllez, Chief of Division at Monterey, who is his superior officer, and is unable to accede to demands without orders from him. There is no doubt about Cantu being enticed to middle of bridge and kidnapped on American side of boundary and forced to cross boundary. Department should press demand through Embassy.

Garrett.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 811.0144/7.

[Document 1620]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 28, 1914, 6 p.m.

629. Consul, Nuevo Laredo, reports that General Quintana states that he has reported arrest of Cantú to General Tellez, Chief of Division at Monterey, and is unable to release Cantú without orders from Tellez. Consul adds there is no doubt about kidnapping.

Bring to attention of appropriate authorities and renew demand for release of Cantú.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 811.0144/9.

[Document 1621]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 29, 1914, 5 p.m.

632. Consul, Nuevo Laredo, reports that he considers General Quintana’s reply to demand for release of Cantú to be a diplomatic refusal and that he is informed that one of the Generals has stated it was not only intended to hold Cantú, but to execute him.

Bring to the attention of the appropriate authorities with renewed demand for release of Cantú and intimate that unless this demand is immediately complied with, this Government will find it necessary to consider drastic measures in the premises.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Consul Garrett. File No. 811.0144/9.

[Document 1622]

The Secretary of State to Consul Garrett.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 29, 1914, 6 p.m.

Renew to appropriate authorities demand for release of Cantu and intimate that unless this demand is immediately complied with, this Government will find it necessary to consider drastic measures in the premises.

Bryan.

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State. File No. 811.0144/12.

[Document 1623]

Chargé O’Shaughnessy to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, January 30, 1914, 8 p.m.

753. Referring to your 632, January 29, 5 p.m. I this morning verbally delivered to the Sub-Secretary of Foreign Relations, the Minister being absent, the contents of your cable and endeavored to impress upon him the seriousness of the situation. The Minister of War telegraphed between one and two o’clock to-day to General Quintana in the premises but I do not know the contents of the telegram. My former representations have been in the form of notes to the Foreign Office. The Sub-Secretary of Foreign Relations promised to inform me to-night if the Minister of War receives a reply from General Quintana. I shall at all events be able to report to you in the morning. I fear, however, that in this case as in almost all others I shall have to go to the President to procure action.

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

[Untitled] File No. 811.0144/14.

[Document 1624]

[Untitled]

American Embassy,
Mexico City, January 31, 1914, 9 p.m.

756. I transmit herewith a translation of the note addressed to the Minister for Foreign Affairs by the Minister of War and Marine: In reply to your note No. 549 of to-day requesting that orders be given to the end that Samuel Cantu be set at liberty I have the honor to inform you that telegraphic orders were to-day sent to General Quintana to direct that Samuel Cantu be immediately set absolutely at liberty and to report that this order has been complied with without any excuse or pretext whatsoever. I have the honor to transmit this to you for your information and such action as may be deemed appropriate. I avail myself of this occasion [etc.]

Nelson O’Shaughnessy.

Consul Garrett to the Secretary of State. File No. 811.0144/15.

[Document 1625]

Consul Garrett to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Nuevo Laredo, February 1, 1914.

Samuel Cantú released and brought to Laredo, Texas, by myself at eleven o’clock to-day.

Garrett.

Consul Garrett to the Secretary of State. File No. 811.0144/20.

[Document 1626]

Consul Garrett to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 235.] American Consulate,
Nuevo Laredo, February 2, 1914.

Sir: Referring to my telegram of yesterday, stating that Samuel Cantú had been released and conveyed to American territory, I have the honor to report that further investigation fully confirms my contention that Mr. Cantu was kidnapped on American territory, and taken across the boundary line by force. It is further disclosed that this outrage against the Government of the United States was perpetrated by Mexican officers, under the direct orders of General Gustavo Guardiola y Aguirre, the commander of the federal forces in Nuevo Laredo, Mexico, and carried out in utter defiance of international law or the rights and dignity of the American Government.

The Mexican Generals, when they received the order from Mexico City to release him, offered him his release on condition that he would pledge himself to immediately go to Lampazos, of which city he was formerly Mayor. The object of this was to prevent him from giving the press the true story of the dastardly outrage which was perpetrated upon him and the American Government in being forcibly taken from American territory by a captain and major of the Mexican army, assisted by a soldier, a customs guard and one of their detectives.

As Mr. Cantú was not aware that a demand had been made by the American Government, he readily agreed to this, as he despaired of securing his release by other means. But I objected to this arrangement to whitewash their actions, and insisted on him being returned to American territory, from whence he was forcibly abducted. General Guardiola invited me to leave their office, giving as his reason that if they gave him a pass to cross the river, they wanted it understood that it was not on account of any influence that myself or the American Government had with them, and both he and General Quintana stated that they wanted me to understand and so state to the press that they “were not delivering Mr. Cantú to me as the representative of the Government of the United States, nor oh account of any demand by the United States, but were simply giving him his liberty because they chose to do so.” I politely refused to leave until the matter was settled, unless peremptorily ordered to do so, in which event I assured them I would immediately report the facts to my Government by telegraph for such action as they deemed necessary, at which point General Quintana invited me to remain. They told me further that they were in command at this port, and the man was a Mexican citizen, and had elected to go to his former home at Lampazos, Mexico, and I had no right to interfere. I replied that Mr. Cantu had been forcibly abducted from American territory and my Government had the right to demand that he be returned to the boundary line, and that I, as the representative of my Government, insisted that he be so returned, and added that until such action was taken, the incident would not be closed, and my Government would reserve the right to take such action as it deemed proper to preserve its rights and dignity in the premises.

General Quintana finally said that if Mr. Cantú wanted to go, he would give orders at the bridge to allow me to take him over, which he did.

General Guardiola y Aguirre is the same man who executed Laurel in defiance of my protest, and it seems to me that the American Government can not afford to pass this second outrage by without making a vigorous protest to the Mexican Government, especially as I am informed that he has boasted since this case came up that he will avoid trouble with me in the future by having Americans executed before knowledge of the case comes to me.

I would respectfully suggest that in my opinion these two outrages would justify the American Government in demanding his removal as commander at this place. Such removal would certainly redound greatly to the security of Americans, and would, I believe, be welcomed by the leading Mexican citizens, as his arbitrary and oppressive rulings are destroying the prosperity of the city and driving many of the best and most influential residents to seek asylum elsewhere.

I have [etc.]

Alonzo B. Garrett.

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy. File No. 811.0144/20.

[Document 1627]

The Secretary of State to Chargé O’Shaughnessy.

No. 1501.] Department of State,
Washington, February 12, 1914.

Sir: I enclose herewith a copy of a despatch from the Consul at Nuevo Laredo, in regard to the kidnapping of Samuel Cantu on American territory by Mexican federal officers. You will bring to the attention of the appropriate authorities the abuses committed by the military leaders in Nuevo Laredo and request that immediate action be taken to put a stop thereto.

You will add that the lawless disposition of the commander at Nuevo Laredo, as shown by his disregard of international rights and obligations, appears to suggest the propriety of his removal from his present position of command adjacent to the borders of the United States, where his acts have already tended to create grave international complications.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
J. B. Moore.

Morocco:Morocco:

Contents

French Protectorate in Morocco. Relinquishment of extraterritorial jurisdiction by certain foreign powers. Attitude of the United States (Documents 1628-1639)

French Protectorate in Morocco. Relinquishment of extraterritorial jurisdiction by certain foreign powers. Attitude of the United StatesFrench Protectorate in Morocco. Relinquishment of extraterritorial jurisdiction by certain foreign powers. Attitude of the United States

[1628] The French Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

French Embassy, Washington, January 8, 1913.

File No. 881.00/531.

[1629] The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, January 22, 1913.

File No. 881.00/531.

[1630] The French Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

French Embassy, Washington, October 7, 1913.

File No. 881.041.

[1631] The Acting Secretary of State to the French Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, February 13, 1914.

File No. 881.00/574a.

[1632] The French Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

French Embassy, Washington, April 22, 1914.

File No. 881.00/576.

[1633] The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, April 30, 1914.

File No. 881.00/578.

[1634] The French Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

French Embassy, Washington, June 10, 1914.

File No. 881.00/582.

[1635] The French Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

French Embassy, Washington, July 16, 1914.

File No. 881.00/585.

[1636] The French Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

French Embassy, Washington, July 16, 1914.

File No. 881.00/586.

[1637] The Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires.

Department of State, Washington, July 24, 1914.

File No. 881.00/586.

[1638] The French Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

French Embassy, Washington, November 4, 1914.

File No. 881.00/588.

[1639] Chargé Blake to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Tangier, December 20, 1914.

File No. 881.00/592.

The French Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 881.00/531.

[Document 1628]

The French Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

French Embassy,
Washington, January 8, 1913.

Mr. Secretary of State: By order of my Government, I have the honor to communicate herewith to your excellency the text of the Franco-Moroccan Protectorate Treaty that was signed at Fez on March 30, 1912.1

The assurances your excellency was pleased to give me heretofore as to the establishment of the French protectorate in Morocco lead me to hope that the Federal Government will see no objection to giving its adhesion to that instrument. The French Government would be glad to be so assured.

Your excellency will note that under article 6 of the aforesaid treaty “the diplomatic and consular officers of France will be in charge of the representation and protection of Moroccan subjects and interests abroad.”

A limitation, however, was put upon the provision by the Franco-Spanish treaty of November 27 last of which I had the honor to communicate to the Department of State on the 29th of the same month. Article 23 of that treaty provides that “The Moroccan subjects belonging in the zone of Spanish influence shall be placed abroad under the protection of the diplomatic and consular officers of Spain.”

Be pleased [etc.]

Jusserand.

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador. File No. 881.00/531.

[Document 1629]

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, January 22, 1913.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s note of the 8th instant transmitting the text of the Franco-Moroccan Protectorate Treaty, signed at Fez on March 30, 1912, and asking the adhesion of the Government of the United States thereto.

Following the traditional American foreign policy, which forbids participation by the United States in the settlement of political questions which are entirely European in their scope, the Government must refrain from any expression of opinion for or against such part or parts of the Franco-Moroccan Protectorate Treaty as may be deemed of a political nature.

Paragraph I of Article I of this treaty provides that “the Government of the French Republic and His Majesty the Sultan mutually agree to establish in Morocco such administrative, judicial, educational, economical, financial and military reforms as the French Government may deem it desirable to introduce in Moroccan territory”, and further, paragraph II, Article V, provides that “the French Commissioner Resident shall be the sole intermediary of the Sultan in all foreign relations.” By the terms of article I the Government of the French Republic practically assumes all the powers of government in Morocco, and as a natural corollary thereto it assumes also the obligations of the Moroccan Government in its relations with foreign Governments insofar as existing treaty rights between Morocco and foreign Governments are concerned. As your excellency is aware, adhesion on the part of the Government of the United States to any treaty, under our Constitution, can only be given by and with the advice and consent of the United States Senate, and, after careful consideration of the Franco-Moroccan Protectorate Treaty, this Government is of the opinion that it is not sufficiently detailed and concrete in its provisions to permit of submission to this country’s treaty making power.

Provided, however, the Government of the French Republic is willing to give its assurance that American interests and rights in Morocco, as are at present safe-guarded by existing treaties, shall continue to receive the same consideration in the future as they have been entitled to and have enjoyed in the past, on such an understanding the Government of the United States would be inclined to view with favor the reforms which the French protectorate contemplate introducing into Morocco as provided for in the treaty in question. Accept [etc.]

P. C. Knox.

The French Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State. File No. 881.041.

[Document 1630]

The French Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

French Embassy,
Washington, October 7, 1913.

Mr. Secretary of State: By order of my Government I have the honor to forward herewith to your excellency two copies of the Official Bulletin of the Morocco Protectorate promulgating the new judiciary system in the French zone of the Shereefian Empire,1 together with a copy of the Journal Officiel of the French Republic of September 9, 1913, which also contains the decree relating to that organization.1

The new judiciary system, instituted by virtue of the provisions in paragraph 2 of article 9 of the Franco-German treaty of November 4, 1911, is intended to supersede the French Consular Courts on and after October 15, 1913.

In accordance with the provisions of the aforesaid article, I have been instructed to ask the Federal Government to place its citizens under the new jurisdiction. I shall hasten to forward to my Government the reply your excellency will be so good as to return to me on the subject.

Accept [etc.]

E. de Peretti de la Rocca.

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed

The Acting Secretary of State to the French Ambassador. File No. 881.00/574a.

[Document 1631]

The Acting Secretary of State to the French Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, February 13, 1914.

Excellency: The Department has the honor to make reply to the Embassy’s notes of August 29,1 September 14,1 October 7, and January 7,1 last, relative to the establishment of the French protectorate in Morocco and the revision of the lists of American proteges in that country.

In the first note above mentioned the Department is informed, in relation to the establishment of the French protectorate, that, owing to the inadequacy of the means theretofore employed to prevent the smuggling of arms and munitions of war into Morocco, General Lyautey had decided “to declare martial law within the zone of French influence in Morocco in the matter of contraband of arms.” In the informal note of September 14, Mr. Peretti, who was then acting as Chargé d’Affaires ad interim, made known the wish of his Government that this Government would give instructions to its representative at Tangier looking to the designation of “a delegate to assist in the revision of the protection lists of people lying under the American jurisdiction.” Mr. Peretti added that it was not possible to “accept the reserve (of the United States) relative to the right of foreign representatives to act in the last resort upon the decision of the Maghzen” in regard to the natives who should enjoy the protection of a foreign government.

With his note of October 7, Mr. Peretti transmitted to the Department copies of the official bulletin of the Morocco protectorate “promulgating the new judiciary system in the French zone of the Shereefian Empire.” Mr. Peretti called attention to the fact that the new judiciary system was “intended to supersede the French consular courts on and after October 15, 1913,” and, under instructions, asked this Government “to place its citizens under the new jurisdiction.”

Finally, with your note of the 7th of January last, you transmitted to the Department a list of errata in the “Bulletin Officiel”2 and requested that “the new French courts in Morocco be recognized at the earliest possible date.”

Turning first to the subject of the revision of the protégé lists, mentioned in Mr. Peretti’s note of September 14, it is proper to state that the protection of native Moors in Morocco by this Government rests upon its treaty with Morocco of 1836 and the Madrid convention of 1880. The relevant part of the treaty of 1836 is found in article 15, which reads as follows: Merchants of both countries shall employ only such interpreters and such other persons to assist them in their business as they shall think proper.

The convention of 1880 declares, in article 1, that the protection of native Moors is based on the British and Spanish treaties with Morocco and on the convention of 1863 between France, Morocco, and other Powers, “with the modifications introduced by the present convention,” and stipulates, in article 16, that “the authorities of Morocco will recognize no protection of any kind whatever save such as is expressly provided for in this convention.”

After a careful examination of the several articles of the Madrid convention relative to the protection of American protégés, the Department is unable to reach the conclusion that the Moorish Government enjoys the right ultimately to decide upon the persons who may become proteges of this Government. On the contrary, article 2 of the convention provides that “foreign representatives at the head of a legation may select their interpreters and employees from among the subjects of Morocco or others”; and article 3 provides that consular officers “shall be allowed to select “their employees. By article 5 of the same convention, “the Government of Morocco recognizes the right of ministers, charges d’affaires, and other representatives, which is granted to them by treaties, to select the persons whom they employ.” In regard to the lists of protected persons, the convention is equally precise, as appears by articles 7 and 8, which read as follows: Article 7.

Foreign representatives shall inform the Sultan’s Minister of Foreign Affairs, in writing, of any selections of any employee made by them.

They shall furnish annually to the said minister a list of the names of the persons protected by them or by their agents throughout the States of the Sultan of Morocco.

This list shall be transmitted to the local authorities, who shall consider as persons enjoying protection only those whose names are contained therein.

Article 8.

Consular officers shall transmit each year to the authorities of the district in which they reside a list, bearing their seal, of the persons protected by them. These authorities shall transmit it to the Minister of Foreign Affairs, to the end that, if it be not conformable to the regulations, the representatives at Tangier may be informed of the fact.

A consular officer shall be required to give immediate information of any changes that may have taken place among the persons protected by his consulate.

Regarding the appointment of protégés for “signal services,” the convention provides (article 16) that the “Minister of Foreign Affairs at Tangier shall be previously informed of the nature of the services, and notified of the intention to award them, in order that he may, if need be, present his observations thereon; yet the final decision shall be reserved for the government to which the service shall have been rendered.”

Concerning the protection of the native employees of private persons, the treaty of 1836 appears to contain no stipulation; but in article 9 and 10 of the convention of 1880, there are found the following provisions: Article 9.

Servants, farmers, and other native employees of native secretaries and interpreters shall not enjoy protection. The same shall be the case with Moorish employees or servants of foreign subjects.

Nevertheless, the local authorities shall not arrest an employee or servant of a native officer in the service of a legation or consulate, or of a foreign subject or protected person, without having notified the authority upon which he is dependent.

If a subject of Morocco in the service of a foreign subject shall kill or wound any person, or violate his domicile, he shall be arrested immediately, but the diplomatic or consular authority under which he is shall be notified without delay.

Article 10.

Nothing is changed with regard to the situation of brokers, as established by the treaties and by the convention of 1863, except what is stipulated, relative to taxes, in the following articles.

Inasmuch as the Madrid convention refers, in article 1, to the “convention of 1863 between France, Morocco, and other Powers “regarding the protection of native Moors, and to the British and Spanish treaties with Morocco on the same subject, it is appropriate to examine the provisions of these treaties on the subject.

The provisions of the convention of 1863 appear to be substantially the same as the “regulations relative to protection adopted by common consent by the Legation of France and the Government of Morocco, August 19, 1863,” reprinted, in “Treaties in Force, 1904,” at the end of the Madrid convention. The regulations are in part as follows: Protected persons are divided into two classes.

The first class comprises natives employed by the legation and by the various French consular officers.

The second class consists of native factors, brokers, or agents employed by French merchants for their business affairs.* * *

French protection is not extended to natives employed by French citizens in agricultural occupations.* * *

It is, moreover, understood that agricultural laborers, herdsmen, or other native peasants in the service of French citizens shall not be legally prosecuted without immediate information thereof being communicated to the competent consular officer in order that the latter may protect the interests of his countrymen.

The list of all protected persons shall be delivered by the proper consulate to the competent magistrate of the place, who shall likewise be informed of any changes that may subsequently be made in the said list.

Each protected person shall be furnished with a card, in French and in Arabic, mentioning his name and stating the services which secure this privilege to him.

All these cards shall be issued by the Legation of France at Tangier.

The British and Spanish treaties mentioned in Article I of the Madrid convention are presumably the general treaty of December 9, 1856, between Great Britain and Morocco, and the treaty of commerce and navigation of November 20, 1861, between Spain and Morocco. In the British treaty it is specifically provided that the charge d’affaires and the consular officers of Great Britain “shall be at liberty to choose “their own employees and that British subjects “shall be free “to commit their affairs “to the management of any persons whom they may appoint as their broker, factor, or agent; nor,” says the treaty, “shall such British subjects be restrained in their choice of persons to act in such capacities.” The Spanish treaty provides that “the charge d’affaires or consul-general may choose his interpreters and servants from amongst the Mussulman subjects or amongst those of any other country”; that other consular officers “may name” employees “either Mussulmans or subjects of another country,” and that Spanish merchants may put their affairs “into the hands of brokers or agents appointed by themselves and they shall not be interfered with, nor shall obstacles be raised to the free choice of the persons to fulfill this charge.”

It would, therefore, seem that the choice of the proteges of the United States in Morocco rests, by right of treaty, ultimately with this Government. Such appears to be the view which this Department has always taken of the convention of 1880, and which has been the basis of its action in carrying out the provisions of that convention. The question of the choice of proteges is, however, in the view of this Government, but a phase of the larger question involved in the establishment of French and Spanish control over separate portions of Morocco.

On the subject of the French protectorate this Government has heretofore expressed itself as being in favor of the reforms which France contemplated introducing into Morocco in accordance with the stipulations of the Franco-Moroccan treaty of March 30, 1912, on the understanding that provision be made for the preservation of American interests and rights in Morocco, commercial or otherwise, which are at present safeguarded by existing treaties with that country. The more important of those interests and rights it is proper now to enumerate.

In the first place, attention may be drawn to the right of aliens to hold land in the Shereefian Empire. This right appears now to be based upon the provisions of the Madrid convention and the Algeciras Act. With a view to carry out article 60 of the Algeciras Act, the Sultan’s Foreign Minister on December 5, 1912, sent to the Diplomatic Corps at Tangier a set of regulations classifying the public domain of the empire and defining “inalienable property” and “alienable property.” These regulations also laid down certain rules to govern the sale of the latter class of property to foreigners.

It is understood that these regulations are not entirely consistent with the provisions on the subject of land ownership in the act of Algeciras and the convention of Madrid. Under article 11 of the Madrid convention the right of “all foreigners “to “hold property “anywhere within the Empire is recognized, but “the purchase of property must take place with the previous consent of the Government.” By article 60 of the Algeciras Act this right was confirmed, and it was further provided that within a radius of 10 kilometers around the open ports and within 2 kilometers around certain other towns, land might be acquired by foreigners without the previous consent of the Moorish Government.

The proposed regulations define “inalienable property” to include “Guish” lands, the seashores, “Habous” or mosque properties, tribal lands, forest land, desert, uncultivated or ownerless lands, ore-bearing land, and escheated property. The Department is advised that practically all of the land within the 10–kilometer zones, especially at Tangier, is either “Guish” land or seashore. Consequently, there would appear to be little or no land lying within the 10–kilometer zones which may be subject to private ownership without the consent of the Moorish Government.

Moreover, while in one paragraph the regulations recognize the fact that under article 60 of the act of Algeciras no authorization is necessary for the sale of lands within certain zones, in the next paragraph the regulations provide that “the Cadi will approve no sale made to a foreigner unless the authorization according to the regulations has been granted by the Maghzen.”

It would seem, therefore, that, if the regulations are correctly understood, an interpretation has been given to article 60 which its terms would not ordinarily bear.

By the same regulations the Moroccan Government reserves the right “to annul or to revise” any deeds of so-called “inalienable property” which may have been given prior to the date of the regulations. The Department is advised that much of the Guish and seashore property, as well as other lands, situated within the zones above mentioned, has long been held by private individuals under deeds legally obtained with the authorization of the responsible agents of the Maghzen.

In view of this circumstance, it is difficult to believe that it is the intention of the Moroccan Government to consider these regulations as retroactive in their operation and as thereby divesting or giving opportunity to divest rights in land legally acquired and officially confirmed by the Maghzen’s agents.

The proposed regulations, as understood by the Department, further provide in effect that no transfer of land will be authorized until the different Moorish intermediaries have stated that no Government rights are infringed. This provision probably has in view the carrying out of that part of article 60 of the Algeciras Act which stipulates that “before authorizing the execution of deeds transferring property the Cadi will have to satisfy himself of the validity of the title in conformity to the Mohammedan law.” The Department is, however, advised that the records of land titles in Morocco are very incomplete, and that this provision of the regulations may be used to delay indefinitely transfers of property in which the Moorish Government has in fact no legal or equitable rights.

As a further restriction upon the right of land ownership, it is reported that, notwithstanding the provisions of article 60 of the Algeciras Act respecting the acquisition of land within stated zones around the open ports and certain other towns, the Sultan about a year ago issued two decrees imposing military servitudes upon land situated within a radius of 250 meters around towns and fortified quarters within certain enumerated districts.

It appears that certain “habous” or mosque properties are alleged to have been irregularly disposed of in the past to persons subject to foreign jurisdiction, who hold these properties either without regular title thereto or by virtue of doubtful contracts. The Algeciras conference took formal note of this situation, and by article 63 of the Algeciras Act, charged the diplomatic body at Tangier to “solve these questions equitably, in accord with the special commissioner whom His Shereefian Majesty may be pleased to designate to that effect.” This stipulation does not appear to have been carried out. On the contrary, the Department is informed that the Sultan has communicated to the Diplomatic Corps a circular proposing measures for the recovery of such properties.

In these circumstances it would seem that titles to land already acquired and the right to make acquisitions in the future are being called into question and placed on an uncertain basis. This Government is therefore desirous of some assurance that the vested rights of its citizens and protégés in property in Morocco will be respected, and to that end will be promptly confirmed by the Moroccan Government, and that exsting treaty rights respecting the purchase and sale of land within the Empire will be protected and preserved.

In the second place the Department ventures to mention the subject of trade discriminations practiced by the authorities in Morocco. Complaints, apparently well founded, have reached this Government that customs duties have been imposed arbitrarily and without uniformity; that unreasonable export duties or surcharges have been collected, and that free and open competition in bidding for the construction of public works or the furnishing of supplies for the Government have been denied. It is reported that customs duties on the imports of the Vacuum Oil Co. vary for different ports of entry and for different countries of origin, thus in practical effect working a discrimination between importers at the same or different ports. For example, it is stated that in the recent past the customs duty has varied from 5.50 francs to 6.50 or 7 francs per case. The Department is also informed that in 1911 exporters of olive oil in barrels from Mogador, Morocco, to New York were arbitrarily made to pay 14 pesetas surcharge as tare on the barrels, regardless of the offer and desire of the exporter or his agent to empty a sample barrel for the purpose of determining the exact tare for the shipment.

It is understood that articles 105 to 110, inclusive, of the Algeciras Act require free and open competition “without preference of nationality” in bidding on proposals for public works and supplies for the Moroccan Government. The Department is advised, however, that specific proposals are not always prepared, so that real competition is possible. It is stated, for example, that the specifications do not always disclose the rate of duty on materials, machinery, and tools, so that distant bidders, unacquainted with local conditions, are placed at a great disadvantage in formulating bids. It is understood also that the opportunity of foreign contractors to take part in competitive bidding is minimized by the method of dividing large Government contracts into allotments too small to attract any but nearby contractors.

As the main purpose of the United States in participating in the Algeciras conference and in the adoption of the act resulting therefrom was to preserve and increase its commerce in Morocco, this Government desires equal opportunities for American commercial interests not only to maintain their present standing in Morocco but also to share in the country’s commercial development.

In the third place, the Department is advised that a commission composed entirely of French nationals has been appointed for the liquidation of outstanding claims against the Maghzen. Notice of this commission and of the date for presentation of claims has been communicated to this Government and to American citizens and protégés in Morocco. The Department is not at present advised as to the exact amount of the claims so far presented, but it is believed that the sum approximates $150,000.

It is also understood that certain awards made by the Claims Commission which sat in 1910 for the purpose of considering the claims of aliens against the Maghzen, have not as yet been fully paid.

This Government, therefore, is desirous that the awards of the commission of 1910 be duly paid to the American claimants and that some assurance be given that the awards of the present commission will be paid within a certain reasonable period.

Finally, it is perhaps proper to mention the case of Jacob Benatuil, an American citizen, who has for some years been engaged in litigation before the Moorish courts, in the manner provided in the treaty of Madrid, in an effort to secure the restoration of a strip of land said to have been arbitrarily taken and used for a highway. It appears that the property of Benatuil bordered on a roadway, and that certain persons of foreign nationality, including Frenchmen and Spaniards, who own land on the opposite side of the road, erected buildings beyond their property lines and thereby caused the roadway to encroach upon the land owned by Benatuil. In the course of the litigation Benatuil obtained a judgment in his favor by the Shraa, which on appeal, as provided by treaty, was confirmed by the Sultan’s Foreign Minister. Thereupon the Consul General of the United States, according to custom, requested the Moorish authorities to enforce the judgment, but they never acceded to the request. The only legal course then open to the American claimant was for him to sue upon the judgment in the Consular Courts of France, Spain, and the other countries whose nationals were concerned. It is doubtful whether such a course would have proved effective, inasmuch as it is understood that the defendants would, in the event of a decision adverse to themselves, have had the right to appeal to the superior home courts of their respective countries. As the expense involved in such proceedings was prohibitive to the American claimant, the Department has long desired that this case, which has been a source of misunderstanding and diplomatic correspondence for many years, should be disposed of by a settlement between the two Governments.

The foregoing statement covers the more important matters under discussion between this Government and that of Morocco. There are other matters which have given rise to diplomatic correspondence, but they may be reserved for future discussion, if need be. The present review embraces matters that touch the maintenance of American commercial interests in Morocco and the protection of the liberty and property of American citizens and protégés in that country, and it is for the purpose of removing any points of controversy in these particulars and bringing about an adjustment of them, that this Government, animated with a favorable disposition toward the reforms which the French protectorate is designed to assure, has addressed itself to an exposition of the questions as to which it desires to reach a definite understanding and settlement, as a preliminary to or incident of the recognition, in due and proper form, of the fundamental change involved in the establishment of a foreign governmental regime in the Shereefian Empire.

In conclusion, it may be proper to call attention to the situation of the American missionaries in Morocco. These missionaries have for years labored in this field, including the districts inhabited by the Berber tribes, and, as the Department is advised, have maintained and continue to maintain friendly and mutually satisfactory relations with the authorities of the country. They have expressed themselves as most appreciative of the courteous and kind treatment accorded to them by the French officials in Morocco. This Government therefore ventures to express the earnest hope that, in any reorganization of the Government of the Empire which may be contemplated or in progress, the rights and privileges of these missionaries may be carefully safeguarded and every facility be granted them for the prosecution of their worthy and benevolent task.

Accept [etc.]

J. B. Moore.

1 Not printed

1 Not printed

1 Not printed

2 Necessary corrections made in inclosure (not printed) to note of October 7.

The French Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 881.00/576.

[Document 1632]

The French Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

French Embassy,
Washington, April 22, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: Referring to the oral communications by which I made known to the Department of State the views of my Government in respect to the remarks contained in your excellency’s note of February 13, last, about Morocco, I have the honor, in compliance with instructions I have received, to remind you of the high value we should attach to the United States Government’s relinquishing, together with its consular courts, its extraterritorial privileges in the French Zone of the Shereefian Empire.

Your excellency’s note above mentioned held out the prospect that the United States would accede to our request and record its accession in due and proper form but pointed out a certain number of topics as to which favorable assurances were requested.

As to the matter of form, my Government wishes me to submit to your excellency the enclosed draft of declaration which in its opinion fits the situation that is to be cleared. I am told that the declaration has already been signed by the Russian and Spanish Governments and that other adhesions are forthcoming.

As to the several points mentioned in your excellency’s note I may, as I have already done by word of mouth, assure you that the Government of the Republic is quite ready to settle in the most friendly spirit the questions of interest to the United States in Morocco that may still be pending.

Among these, that of the protégés naturally ceases to be of any practical importance to the Powers that agree to recognize our new courts, the tertib tax being, besides, already paid by foreigners.

As to the right of aliens to own real estate, it has not been restricted by any Shereefian regulations. All that has been done was to take a few urgent measures having relation to strategy or prompted by the necessity of checking speculation in land intended for public use.

The complaint of the “Vacuum Oil Co.” against the customs treatment accorded to its products had not been brought by the party concerned or the representative of its country to the notice of my Government, which deems it its duty in this respect to recall that the treaties in force guarantee equal fiscal treatment to all the Powers and that they may be sure that nothing will be overlooked to let their nationals enjoy the full benefit of those advantages.

My Government indulges the hope that under the conditions I have just brought to mind and in view of its firm intention to examine and settle in an entirely friendly way the few questions yet unsettled in which American citizens are interested, your excellency will kindly coincide in the views I have just had the honor to submit to you. Your acceptance of these propositions would be particularly gratifying to the Government of the Republic, which would take it as fresh evidence of the traditional friendship existing between our two countries.

Be pleased to accept [etc.]

Jusserand.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

declaration.

The undersigned, duly authorized by their respective Governments, make in common accord the following declaration:

Taking into consideration the guarantees of juridical equality offered to foreigners by the French Courts of the Protectorate, the Government of the United States relinquish all claims for its Consuls, persons subject to its jurisdiction, and its establishments to any right or privilege derived from the regime of the Capitulations.

The treaties and conventions of every nature in force between France and the United States cover, as of right, unless otherwise stipulated, the French Zone in the Shereefian Empire.

This declaration will go into effect ten clays after its date.

Done in duplicate at__this___.

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador. File No. 881.00/578.

[Document 1633]

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador.

No. 1315.] Department of State,
Washington, April 30, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to inform your excellency that the Department is in receipt of a telegram from the American Chargé d’Affaires at Tangier, stating that the French Diplomatic Agent in that city in the name of the French Resident General had requested of him a memorandum of pending and unsettled claims, understanding that this Government would not be favorably inclined to recognize the French protectorate until those cases were satisfactorily disposed of.

The American Legation at Tangier has been instructed to submit to the proper French authorities a memorandum of all pending American claims in Morocco and I beg to assure your excellency that a satisfactory solution of these cases would greatly aid this Government in replying to your note of January 8, 1913, containing the request of your Government for the formal recognition of the French protectorate in Morocco.

Accept, [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The French Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 881.00/582.

[Document 1634]

The French Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

French Embassy,
Washington, June 10, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: My Government, to which I did not fail to forward the contents of your excellency’s notes of February 13 and April 30 last, about the doing away with the extraterritorial rights in the French Zone of Morocco and about certain claims of American citizens, has just affirmed to me that it had promptly taken steps to bring about, under the most equitable conditions, a settlement of those claims.

In regard to one of them, that of the Vacuum Oil Company, my Government, which had never heard of it, wrote to Morocco to inquire about the grievances the concern might have to state as to the customs treatment it receives. General Lautey accordingly called upon the agent of the company for explanations. The answer was “that he had not the slightest ground for complaint against the customs authorities.”

As for the other claims, the instructions sent by your excellency to the representative of the United States at Tangier, have no doubt brought to your knowledge Avith all the needful explanations the facts from which those claims may have arisen.

I beg leave in this connection to refer to the note I had the honor to address to your excellency on the 22nd ultimo [April] in which while answering the main points mentioned in your note of February 13, I laid stress on the importance attached by my Government to the Government of the United States’ earliest possible accession to the request I had laid before you. I am informed by my Government that Russia, Spain and Norway have already renounced their extraterritorial rights by signing a declaration like that enclosed in my above mentioned note. Other accessions are momentarily expected.

Be pleased [etc.]

Jusserand.

The French Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State. File No. 881.00/585.

[Document 1635]

The French Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

French Embassy,
Washington, July 16, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: In the course of the negotiations for the suppression of consular courts and the extinction of extraterritorial rights in the French Zone of the Shereefian Empire, it was occasionally objected to the representative of the Republic that it was not possible for the Powers to take any further responsibility in the fate of their Moorish protégés.

There would seem to be some foundation for that feeling. In fact under the provisions of Article 12 of the Franco-German agreement of, November 4, 1911, whose full scope is given in the explanatory letter, the Government of the Republic would certainly have the right after the discontinuance of the consular courts, to ask that protection be done away with, the strict legal effect of this would be to place under native jurisdiction the protégés who, under the present system, are enjoying consular jurisdiction.

But, with a view to obviating the hardships that might thereby be brought upon the Moorish subjects thus deprived of protection, the Government of the Republic is ready to declare them to be, as long as they live, under the jurisdiction of the French courts set up in the protectorate. This would place them, in this respect, on an equal footing with the persons subject to the jurisdiction of the former protecting power and not with the natives.

My Government authorizes me to make its intentions as to this known to the Federal Government, being convinced that they are likely to remove any apprehension concerning its proteges, if, after availing itself of the rights conferred upon it by the existing provisions, the Government of the Republic should procure the abolition.

I avail myself of this opportunity to enclose three copies of Louis Renault’s preface to the codes and laws in force in the French protectorate in Morocco which brings forth the value and importance of the legislative work of the protectorate.3 Showing as it does the guarantees extended to all foreigners in Morocco, that paper ought to expedite adhesion to the new system on the part of the few powers that have not yet relinquished the exercise of consular jurisdiction.

Be pleased, [etc.]

R. Clausse.

3 Not printed.

The French Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State. File No. 881.00/586.

[Document 1636]

The French Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

French Embassy,
Washington, July 16, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: By a letter dated February 13 last, Mr. Bassett Moore made known to the Embassy the Federal Government’s intention respecting the acceptance of the jurisdiction of the new courts instituted by us in Morocco for persons subject to American jurisdiction.

At the same time Mr. Bassett Moore expressed a strong desire to arrive at settlement of various questions affecting American interests in the Shereefian Empire.

The Resident Commissioner General of the French Republic, to whom the State Department’s note was forwarded by the Minister of Foreign Affairs has returned to Mr. Viviani an answer the substance of which I have the honor to communicate to you.

With the exception of two clearly defined cases (Vacuum Oil Company and the Benatuil case), which will be fully explained hereinafter, the Federal Government formulates, but does not specify, reservations or demands of a purely general character against the Protectorate Government.

There is no question about the Federal Government being, as much as any other, warranted in watching over the economic rights and interests of Morocco, which, as put by Mr. Bassett Moore, are safeguarded by the treaties concluded between the Foreign Powers and the Shereefian Empire. But it is equally true that the Protectorate Government is bent on respecting to the fullest extent, in favor of Americans as well as all other foreign citizens or subjects, the principle of economic equality.

The principle being once more evoked, the reservations or claims put forth by the Federal Government are so general in their character that, from the fact that the importance of American interests and the number of persons lying under American jurisdiction appear to be out of proportion to the set of reservations and objections offered, the question arises whether Mr. Bassett Moore’s letter of February 13, 1914, is not aiming, after all, and while the Federal Government expresses itself in favor of the reforms, to reopen the question of the very principle of the Protectorate regulation powers.

As a matter of fact, it does not seem possible to maintain the protests that have been made against the Protectorate Government, upon careful examination of every one of the questions presented.

1. As regards the contemplated martial law in cases of contraband of arms, the matter having been settled by dropping the subject need not be brought up anew.

2. The Federal Government’s statement about protection leads one to believe that the meaning and scope of the Protectorate’s intentions have been misunderstood.

Indeed it never was heretofore our intention to do away with protection, but we meant merely to stop its improper use through a revision of the lists jointly with a delegate of every legation concerned. Provision, furthermore, for such a revision was made in the Franco-German treaty to which the Government of the United States gave its adhesion.

It is important, however, to take notice of Mr. Bassett Moore’s assertion that “the choice of the American protégés rests ultimately with the Government of the United States,” for the right to choose can only be exercised within the limits wherein it conforms to the treaties of the provisions of which the Maghzen may remind the Powers concerned, in order to obtain a return to the enforcement of those conventions.

If the Powers would forego, in principle, their consular jurisdiction, we might, per contra, take up such an enforcement in as liberal a spirit as possible and, to that end, come back to a bilateral revision as provided in the Franco-German treaty.

3. The remarks offered in regard to the original circular of November 1, 1912, laying down rules for the purchase of land appear to have been prompted by an incomplete study of the subject on the part of the Washington Government.

On the one hand, the consent of the Government, referred to in Article 11 of the Madrid Convention, in Article 60 of the Act of Algeciras and again mentioned in the regulations of November 1, 1912, does not, of course, apply to any but those parts where such consent is requisite, that is to say without the ten kilometre zone around the ports and the two kilometre zone allotted to Azemmour.

On the other hand the circular of November 1, 1912, cannot apply to the Tangier territory specifically referred to in the American memorandum, since Tangier and its purlieus do not come under the regulations decreed in the Protectorate.

As to the “habous” or Government land, the Guish lands, the circular of November, 1912, merely repeated in their respect preexisting principles that are in force in every State, that is to say, the principles that some land is public domain and inalienable. In again bringing forward that principle, the Resident General merely availed himself of the power to issue regulations granted by the Franco-German treaty.

In answer to the fault found with servitude zones, we are justified in holding that all purchases of land are permitted by the Act of Algeciras (Art. 60), subject to the obligation placed on the purchaser to conform to the laws and usages of the country. Now the Shereefian decrees creating zones of military servitude are precisely to be numbered among “local laws,” as the aforesaid Act of Algeciras could not presume to prevent on every subject whatsoever, laws and usages, or include in that phrase only those that existed in 1906.

Mr. Bassett Moore’s letter further on asserts that the “records of land titles,” which must furnish the Cadis with the means of verifying the validity of the contemplated transactions, are very incomplete. The conclusion drawn by Mr. Moore from this purely gratuitous assertion would, if accepted, have but one result; a perpetuation of wrongs based on those previously committed. Furthermore, when looking into the lawfulness of pending transactions, the local authorities do not confine their investigation to an inspection of the said records.

5. As regards Article 63 of the Act of Algeciras, the Protectorate Government never showed any intention to evade its operation and still more unfounded is the assertion that the Sultan gave notice to the diplomatic corps of measures aimed at the recovery of property of the class referred to in the aforesaid Article. Such a notice never was served. The only measures taken had for their sole object the prevention, for the future, of the wrongs the settlement of which for the past, must be effected in accordance with the procedure directed by the Act of Algeciras.

6. As for the customs grievances formulated by the American Government, the Protectorate Government is quite ready to give them full consideration when they are specified.

The only case presented in the memorandum of February 13, has been investigated at Casablanca by our Consul there.

He reports that the agent of the “Vacuum Oil Company” at Casablanca told him “he had not the slightest ground for complaint against the customs authorities.” But the memorandum of the Chargé d’Affaires of the United States at Tangier, hereinafter discussed, having explained that the difficulties under consideration had occurred at Safi and not at Casablanca, General Lautey referred the question to the office of the Comptroller of the Debt of Tangier which will furnish all the data with which the settlement of this customs difficulty may be taken up at the earliest possible date.

7. As regards the American claims against the Maghzen, the Government of the United States may be assured that they will be examined in the same light as all the claims of persons under foreign jurisdiction. Those already passed upon by the Commission of 1910 will be paid in toto to the beneficiaries out of the funds of the loan that has just been voted.

8. As for the Benatuil case, our agency at Tangier gives me the following information confirmed by Mr. Filipp, our Consul at Tangier. It agrees with the information, supplied by the Washington Government. Jacob Benatuil, an American semsar, having obtained a judgment from the Shraa, about eight years ago, in a real estate suit against several foreigners, of whom one Mr. Fries was French, did not choose to apply to our Consular Court for an exequatur of the Cadi’s judgment. The Legations of France and America tried but failed to bring about a friendly settlement of the Cadi’s award by a payment by Mr. Fries, the loser, of an indemnity to be determined by umpires, but our fellow citizen, arguing that the judgment against him had been obtained by fraud, would not listen to any settlement.

Inasmuch, however, as the land in dispute lies within the Tangier zone, the American Government can not condition the relinquishment of its extraterritorial rights upon a settlement of this case which by reason of its situs, does not lie under the jurisdiction of the Protectorate authorities.

In order to arrive at a more precise knowledge, if possible, of what is asked of us, our agency at Tangier has been instructed to apply to the Chargé d’Affaires of the United States for such information as he possesses about the American claims the Government of the United States wished to have settled before recognizing our courts in Morocco.

Mr. Blake’s memorandum under date of May 7, sent in reply to our Chargé d’Affaires comprises 14 claims. But seven of these may be even now stricken out; the first five (including the Benatuil case) belong in Tangier and the other two in El Ksar and Larach. They therefore do not come, by reason of their situs, under the jurisdiction of the Protectorate and can not be brought into a discussion of the relinquishing of extraterritorial rights in the French zone.

As to the other seven claims, they are all routine cases and most of them of a judicial nature, they do not offer, either in their character or their importance, a class of litigation which may afford ground to the United States for further postponing the relinquishment of its extraterritorial jurisdiction and privileges.

The Resident General is, at any rate, even now making it his duty to set on foot an examination of those cases and investigations by the Protectorate local authorities respectively concerned therein. But these cases apparently are not such as to warrant opposition, as a matter of principle, to relinquishing the American extraterritorial rights since the Resident General is even now ready to examine and settle those cases in the most conciliatory manner.

I deemed it expedient to relate hereinabove the explanations furnished by the Commissioner of the Republic which answer every point in Mr. Bassett Moore’s memorandum. These explanations meet every claim and objection of the Federal Government, both in satisfying inquiries bearing on specific points and in carrying promises as to minor points that could not yet but will be settled. Finally the report throws as full a light as may be desired on some other topics that do not seem to have been correctly understood or interpreted.

The willingness of the Federal Government to recognize the Protectorate’s regulation powers cannot be doubted by the Embassy or by the French Government. I am convinced that your excellency will find in the foregoing explanations all the palliations you may wish for, and I have no doubt that you will, as has already been done by most of the other Powers, agree to forego the benefits of extraterritoriality in the French Zone of the Shereefian Empire and accept to place persons subject to American jurisdiction under that of our Courts.

Aware of the friendly and reciprocal good will which always presides over the settlement of such questions between our two countries, I cannot but remind once more, in conclusion, your excellency (as Mr. Jusserand did before this in his notes of May [April] 22 and June 10 last) of the high value my Government would attach to the Federal Government’s early accession to our request laid before it on August 29, 1913.

Be pleased [etc.]

Clausse.

The Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires. File No. 881.00/586.

[Document 1637]

The Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires.

No. 1358.] Department of State,
Washington, July 24, 1914.

Sir: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your note of July 16 in reply to that of the Department under date of February 13, 1914, relative to the recognition by the Government of the United States of the French protectorate in Morocco and the desire of this Government for the settlement of certain questions affecting American citizens and American protégés and their rights in that country.

The American Government has assured the Government of the French Republic of its favorable disposition towards the reform which the French protectorate proposes and will give the remarks contained in your note referred to above careful consideration.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
William Phillips.

The French Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 881.00/588.

[Document 1638]

The French Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

French Embassy,
Washington, November 4, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: In continuation of previous communications, the last being the letter of July 16 last from the Chargé d’Affaires of France, relative to the claims in Morocco preferred by the Federal Government which it thought had better be settled before extraterritorial rights were relinquished, I have the honor to inform your excellency that the result of the latest inquiries prescribed by my Government concerning those claims has just been made known to me and I deem it my duty to impart it to you as follows:

First, in regard to the Werschkul case, it appears from the investigation that the claim formulated in his memorandum of May 7 last by the representative of the United States at Tangier that it was settled as early as the following month of June. The deeds of sale were straightened out at that time.

On the other hand, as to Mr. Werschkul’s being given possession by his common law native vendor, the case is one that involves Mr. Werschkul and his vendor on one side and the German agent on the other. Until lately it was for the native from whom Mr. Werschkul held his rights to sue for the execution of the judgment rendered against his opponent the German agent before the Consular Court of that nationality at Casablanca and the Protectorate authorities were quite ready to facilitate when the time came, the formalities required to enable the vendor provided of course that he had previously secured an exequatur of the appellate judgment to give possession to Mr. Werschkul.

The war declared by Germany on France having brought German protégés under the operation of the common law, the execution of the judgment is now a matter for the local authority alone to which the party concerned need only apply for a prompt and final settlement of his case.

Second, in regard to the Vacuum Oil Company’s claim touching some land it purchased from one Ben Sauda and which it is said the Moorish authorities will not allow to be sold because of the land being Habou property, the Legation of the United States declared in a memorandum on the case that it could not consider any settlement bearing on Habou property to be applicable to its citizens and proteges before the forms required by Article 63 of the Act of Algeciras had been complied with.

But in the opinion of the Government of the Republic the treaties of 1880 and 1906 could not bar the Shereefian Government from amending or perfecting thereafter the laws and regulations existing at the time of the signature of those treaties. Article 63 cited by the Legation of the United States can hardly be invoked in this particular case since it deals with the examination of titles to Habou property occupied under certain conditions by foreigners in 1906 and the present case is that of land purchased in 1913 by the Vacuum Oil Company upon which there seems to lie certain Habou rights.

It can hardly be doubted under the circumstances that the case in dispute is that of a land transaction which if it does partially or wholly, concern the Habou administration, must be settled with proper regard to the existing regulations governing Habou cases.

The Protectorate Government has nevertheless asked the Habou Department to institute a thorough investigation of the case and the Legation of the United States has been so informed.

As to the various other questions, most of them of very little account (loss of an ox in 1911, the Benatuil case which can only be settled in accordance with the existing law; theft, the existence of which is not admitted, supposed to have been committed to the detriment of an American citizen, a money changer by trade, bearing the name of Mohamed ben Ali, bags of sugar, ten in number, lost at Larrash, that is to say in the Spanish zone, etc.) the Acting Agent and Consul General of France at Tangier has opened negotiations with the representative of the United States in that city with a view to reaching the earliest possible friendly settlement of these few questions.

The Government of the Republic would fain believe that on the strength of the foregoing statements which, added to those previously submitted, are sufficient proof of the sincere readiness of the French authorities to bring without delay all these cases to a legitimate termination, the Government of the United States will kindly as it has repeatedly and lastly on July 24 last intimated to the Embassy, make a favorable answer to the requests I have had the honor to present as early as last year, and to the effect that the Government of the United States agrees, as has already been done by several European Governments, to the abrogation so far as it is concerned, of the Capitulations in Morocco wherever the Government of the Republic has organized French courts.

Be pleased [etc.]

Jusserand.

Chargé Blake to the Secretary of State. File No. 881.00/592.

[Document 1639]

Chargé Blake to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Tangier, December 20, 1914.

British Chargé d’Affaires informs me that owing to Turkish intervention in European war, British Government has proclaimed a protectorate over Egypt. A full agreement having been rapidly reached between France, Spain and Great Britain concerning the international regime of Tangier, Great Britain consents to recognize the French protectorate in Morocco, in exchange for recognition of British protectorate in Egypt. British Legation here will be immediately suppressed and the British Chargé will be appointed Diplomatic Agent and Consul General.

The question of the suppression of the Capitulations in the two countries is reserved for ulterior discussion and forms no part of the present understanding. Italian, Spanish and our own are the only Legations remaining.

It is possible that the international statutes of Tangier may shortly be presented for the consideration of the Powers but their application will likely be deferred until the ending of the war as otherwise the international character of the community would entitle the expelled representatives of Germany and Austria-Hungary to recognize technicalities.

In exchange for compensations elsewhere, all the Powers with exception of the United States have now recognized the French protectorate. I see no reason why we should depart from our position that recognition of the French protectorate and the suppression of the American Legation must be deferred until the settlement of our outstanding cases has been discussed. This point of view is well understood and seems to be admitted by the French local authorities as being both logical and reasonable.

Blake.

Netherlands:Netherlands:

Contents

Second International Opium Conference: final protocol. Third International Opium Conference: report of the American delegates; final protocol; protocol for putting into effect the International Opium ConventionSecond International Opium Conference: final protocol. Third International Opium Conference: report of the American delegates; final protocol; protocol for putting into effect the International Opium Convention1

1 Continued from For. Rel. 1913, pp. 215–283.

[1640] The Chargé d’Affaires of the Netherlands to the Secretary of State.

Legation of the Netherlands, Bar Harbor, September 22, 1913.

File No. 511.4A1/1429.

[1641] The Minister of the Netherlands to the Secretary of State.

Legation of the Netherlands, Washington, January 19, 1914.

File No. 511.4A1/1443.

[1642] [Untitled]

Legation of the Netherlands, Washington, January 27, 1914.

File No. 511.4A1/1447.

[1643] The Secretary of State to the Minister of the Netherlands.

Department of State, Washington, April 18, 1914.

File No. 511.4A1/1447.

[1644] The Minister of the Netherlands to the Secretary of State.

Legation of the Netherlands, Washington, April 27, 1914.

File No. 511.4A1/1460.

[1645] [Untitled]

Legation of the Netherlands, Washington, May 12, 1914.

File No. 511.4A1/1469.

[1646] [Untitled]

Legation of the Netherlands, Washington, May 22, 1914.

File No. 511.4A1/1470.

[1647] The Secretary of State to the American Delegates.

Department of State, Washington, June 5, 1914.

File No. 511.4Al/1471a.

[1648] Delegate Van Dyke to the Secretary of State.

The Hague, June 20, 1914.

File No. 511.4A1/1480.

[1649] The Secretary of State to Delegate Van Dyke.

Department of State, Washington, June 22, 1914.

File No. 511.4A1/1480.

[1650] Delegate Van Dyke to the Secretary of State.

The Hague, June 23, 1914.

File No. 511.4A1/1481.

[1651] The Secretary of State to Delegate Van Dyke.

Department of State, Washington, June 24, 1914.

File No. 511.4A1/1481.

[1652] The American Delegates to the Secretary of State.

The Hague, June 26, 1914.

File No. 511.4A1/1489.

[1653] Minister Williams to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Athens, July 10, 1914.

File No. 511.4A1/1488.

[1654] The Minister of the Netherlands to the Secretary of State.

Legation of the Netherlands, Washington, December 17, 1914.

File No. 511.4A1/1499.

The Chargé d’Affaires of the Netherlands to the Secretary of State. File No. 511.4A1/1429.

[Document 1640]

The Chargé d’Affaires of the Netherlands to the Secretary of State. 2

[Translation.]

Legation of the Netherlands,
Bar Harbor, September 22, 1913.

Mr. Secretary of State: * * * I have the honor to transmit herewith to your excellency a certified copy of the Final Protocol of the Second International Opium Conference, 1913.

I have [etc.]

F. M. Schmolck.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

Final Protocol of the Second International Opium Conference, 1913.

The Second International Opium Conference, convoked by the Government of the Netherlands by virtue of Article 23 of the International Opium Convention,3 met at The Hague, in the Palace of the Counts, July 1, 1913.

The Governments enumerated below took part in the Conference, for which they had designated the following-named delegates:

[Here follow names of Governments and delegates.]

In a series of meetings held from the 1st to the 9th the conference after examination of the question put before it by paragraph 2 of Article 23 of the International Opium Convention of January 23, 1912—

I. Decided that ratifications may be deposited from this moment.

II. Unanimously adopted the following resolution: resolution.

Desirous of following up in the path opened by the international commission of Shanghai of 1909 and the first conference of 1912 at The Hague, the progressive suppression of the abuse of opium, morphine, cocaine, as well as of drugs prepared with or derived from those substances, and deeming it more than ever necessary and mutually advantageous to have an international agreement on that point, the Second International Conference—

1. Utters a wish that the Government of the Netherlands be pleased to call to the attention of the Governments of Austria-Hungary, Norway, and Sweden the fact that the signature, ratification, drawing up of legislative measures, and putting the convention into force constitute four distinct stages which permit of those powers giving their supplemental signatures even now.

Indeed, it is seen from articles 23 and 24 that a period of six months is allowed to run between the going into effect of the convention and the drawing up of the bills, regulations, and other measures contemplated in the convention. Furthermore, the third paragraph of article 24 gives the contracting powers the liberty to reach an agreement, after ratification, upon the date on which the said legislative measures shall go into effect. Besides we can not refrain from remarking that the difficulties foreseen by Austria-Hungary, Norway, and Sweden with respect to their legislation were not unknown to the delegates of the signatory powers and were subjected to thorough consideration on the part of the twelve contracting powers. Nearly all the signatory powers are in the same situation as the above-mentioned Governments and have not yet elaborated all the bills contemplated by the convention.

2. Utters the wish that the Government of the Netherlands be pleased to communicate to the Governments of Bulgaria, Greece, Montenegro, Peru, Roumania, Servia, Turkey, and Uruguay the following resolution:

“The conference regrets that some Governments have refused or neglected to sign the convention as yet. The conference is of opinion that the abstention of those powers would prove a most serious obstruction to the humane purposes aimed at by the convention. The conference expresses its firm hope that those powers will desist from their negative or dilatory attitude.”

3. Utters the wish that the Government of the Netherlands be pleased to point out to the Helvetic Government its error in deeming its cooperation to be of hardly any value. Contrary to what is said in the Federal Council’s letter of October 25, 1912, the conference holds that Switzerland’s cooperation would be most serviceable in its effect, whereas her abstention would jeopardize the results of the convention. As to the question raised by the Federal Council concerning the respective powers of the Federal and Canton Legislatures, it is to be noted that similar difficulties were already considered by the first conference, which took them into account in wording the convention.

4. Requests the signatory Governments to instruct their representatives abroad to uphold the above-indicated action of their Netherland colleagues.

III. Utters the wish that in case the signature of all the powers invited by virtue of paragraph 1 of article 23 shall not have been secured by the 31st of December, 1913. the Government of the Netherlands will immediately invite the signatory powers on that date to designate delegates to take up the question whether it is possible to put the International Opium Convention of January 23, 1912, into operation.4

In faith whereof the delegates have affixed their signatures to the present protocol.

Done at The Hague, the ninth of July, one thousand nine hundred and thirteen, in one copy that shall remain deposited in the archives of the Government of the Netherlands and certified copies of which shall be delivered through the diplomatic channel to all the powers, whether or not signatory.

[Here follows signatures.]

2  Id., 282, next to last paragraph.

3  For. Rel. 1912, p. 202.

4 This section III was originally section 5 of the Resolution as first presented; see For. Rel. 1913, p. 232.

The Minister of the Netherlands to the Secretary of State. File No. 511.4A1/1443.

[Document 1641]

The Minister of the Netherlands to the Secretary of State.

No. 1688.] Legation of the Netherlands,
Washington, January 19, 1914.

[Shows that the powers not yet signatories of the Convention of January 23, 1912, were, on December 31, 1913: Austria-Hungary, Bulgaria, Greece, Serbia, Turkey and Uruguay.]

[Untitled] File No. 511.4A1/1447.

[Document 1642]

[Untitled]

[Translation.]

No. 1740.] Legation of the Netherlands,
Washington, January 27, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: It appears from the list enclosed in my note of the 19th instant, No. 1688, that up to the 31st of December, 1913, the Opium Convention had been signed by all the Powers but six: Bulgaria, Greece, Uruguay, Austria-Hungary, Serbia and Turkey.

The first three of these have promised to sign; Austria-Hungary will probably sign; Serbia has declared that she would provisionally withhold her signature; and Turkey persists in refusing to sign.

In accordance with the recommendation made in section 3 of the Final Protocol of the Second Opium Conference, I have been instructed and I hereby have the honor to ask your excellency kindly to take such steps as may be necessary to have the Government of the United States represented at the Conference that will be held at The Hague in May next to consider whether the aforesaid Convention can be put into operation.

Begging your excellency kindly to let me know how this request is received, I avail [etc.]

W. L. F. C. de Rappard.

The Secretary of State to the Minister of the Netherlands. File No. 511.4A1/1447.

[Document 1643]

The Secretary of State to the Minister of the Netherlands.

Department of State,
Washington, April 18, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of January 27th last by which you inform me that the International Opium Convention has been signed by all the Governments but six and that, in accordance with the recommendation made in section 3 of the Final Protocol of the Second Opium Conference, you have been instructed by your Government to ask the Government of the United States to take such steps as may be necessary to be represented at the Third Conference to be held at The Hague in May next to consider whether the Convention can be put into operation.

In reply I have the pleasure to inform you that the Government of the United States will be represented in this Conference. The Government of the United States would, however, for reasons of preparation, prefer that the Conference should not meet on a day earlier than June 15 next, and the Minister of the United States at The Hague has been requested to ascertain informally whether it may not be feasible and agreeable to postpone the meeting of the Conference until that time.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The Minister of the Netherlands to the Secretary of State. File No. 511.4A1/1460.

[Document 1644]

The Minister of the Netherlands to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

No. 2324.] Legation of the Netherlands,
Washington, April 27, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: In continuation of my note No. 1740 of January 27 last and forwarding to your excellency herewith 4 copies of a list giving the names of the Powers that have signed the Opium Convention, I have the honor to inform you that the Convention has been signed: 1. By Great Britain for the Leeward Islands January 30, 1914; for British Guiana and British Honduras February 11, 1914; for the Government of the South African Union March 11, 1914; for Zanzibar, North Rhodesia, and North Basutoland, the protectorate of Bechuanaland and Swasiland March 28, 1914; for the colony of Barbados April 4, 1914; and for Mauritius and its dependencies April 8, 1914.

2. By Bulgaria, March 2, 1914.

3. By Uruguay, March 9, 1914.

The Convention has been ratified by China. I embrace this opportunity to renew [etc.]

W. L. F. C. de Rappard.

[Untitled] File No. 511.4A1/1469.

[Document 1645]

[Untitled]

No. 2424.] Legation of the Netherlands,
Washington, May 12, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: Referring to your communication of the 19th [18th] of April last, I have the honor of bringing to your attention the fact that it appears from a telegram which I have just received from my Government that the Opium Conference will meet at The Hague on the 15th of next June.

Accept [etc.]

W. L. F. C. de Rappard.

[Untitled] File No. 511.4A1/1470.

[Document 1646]

[Untitled]

[Translation.]

No. 2494.] Legation of the Netherlands,
Washington, May 22, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: Referring to my note No. 2424 of the 12th instant, by which I took leave to announce to your excellency that the Opium Conference would open on June 15 next, I have the honor to inform you that it appears from a communication which I have just received from my Government that the Austro-Hungarian Government which for formal reasons has not yet been able to sign the Convention has declared its adhesion to the contents of the Convention and its readiness to enforce its provisions if the other Governments decide that the Convention may be put into operation.

Be pleased to accept [etc.]

W. L. F. C. de Rappard.

The Secretary of State to the American Delegates. File No. 511.4Al/1471a.

[Document 1647]

The Secretary of State to the American Delegates.

Department of State,
Washington, June 5, 1914.

Gentlemen: I take pleasure in informing you that the President has appointed you to be Delegates Plenipotentiary to represent the United States of America at the final International Opium Conference which, at the instance of the Netherlands Government, is to meet at The Hague on the 15th of the present month.

A brief review of the various steps leading up to the convocation of this Conference may be helpful. In February, 1909, an International Opium Commission, upon the invitation of this Government, met at Shanghai, China, where the opium problem was thoroughly examined and certain unanimous conclusions arrived at which in substance condemned the evils associated with the overproduction and use of opium and morphine, and certain recommendations as to the measures to be taken by the nations represented to bring such evils to an end.5 As the International Commission was not empowered to negotiate a Convention binding the participating Powers, it was deemed necessary that an International Conference composed of delegates with full powers should be convoked, not only to conventionalize the conclusions agreed upon by the Commission, but to provide rules under which opium and other narcotic drugs should be produced and the international traffic therein conducted, as well as national laws by which such drugs should be confined to strictly, medicinal purposes in the territories of the different countries.6

Accordingly, on the proposal of the United States, and on the invitation of the Netherlands Government, the First International Opium Conference met at The Hague on December 1, 1911,7 and on January 23, 1912, the Delegates thereto signed a Convention8 containing stipulations as to the production and the international and national traffic in opium, morphine and cocaine. As it was found that the question dealt with by the Commission and the First Conference affected the economic interests not only of the Powers having treaty relations with the Orient, but also of most of the other nations of the world, the Conference concluded that to make its Convention effective it was necessary to secure adherence thereto by all the nations if that were possible. Therefore the Convention was so formulated that it was not to become operative until the nations named in Article 22 of the Convention should add their signatures to the instrument.

The necessary supplementary signatures were to be secured by December 31, 1912. In the event of failure to secure all the supplementary signatures, the Netherlands Government engaged to call a second conference of all the original signatory Powers and of those Powers which had adhered, to examine the possibility of proceeding none the less to the ratification of the Convention. Since a few of the supplementary signatures were not subscribed, the second conference became necessary, which the Netherlands Government called.

The Second Conference assembled at The Hague on July 1st of last year, at the invitation of the Netherlands Government.9 Upon its organization the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands Government laid before the Conference certain documents which showed that all the Powers of the World had signed the Convention of January 23, 1912, except Austria-Hungary, Bulgaria, Greece, Montenegro, Norway, Peru, Roumania, Servia, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and Uruguay.

On the opening of the Conference the Delegates Plenipotentiary representing the signatory Powers desired to proceed at once to the question of the deposit of the ratifications of the International Opium Convention. But on the plea of the Chairman of the American Delegation, an adjournment was taken to enable all the Delegates to informally consult on a plan of procedure by which the above-mentioned nonsignatory Powers might be made to adhere to the Convention.

Such an adjournment was taken. Then, on the invitation of the American Delegation there met in the American office the representatives of the American, German, French, British, Netherlands and Russian Governments. These representatives constituted themselves an informal committee of six, and drew up a Statement and a Resolution which later on was presented to the Conference and became its Protocole de Clôture.10

The general plan of this Protocol was to the effect that by direction of the Conference the Netherlands Government, inspired by the desire of all the signatory Powers to clarify the difficulties which had prevented the non-signatory Powers from signing the Convention, was to lay before those Powers the views of the Conference as contained in its Protocol, the representatives of the Netherlands Government at the Capitals of the non-signatory Powers to be supported in any action which they might be directed to take by the Ministers of the States signatory to the Convention.

The Conference further decided in its Protocol that in the event of the above-mentioned non-signatory Powers not having adhered to the Convention by the 31st of December, 1913, the Government of the Netherlands was immediately to invite all the Powers which had signed the Convention up to that date to designate delegates to assemble at The Hague and consider the question whether it was not possible to put the International Opium Convention into effect. During the sittings of the Conference, through the joint efforts of the American and the Netherlands Governments, Peru and Uruguay determined to sign the Convention, and all the Powers represented except Great Britain and Germany agreed to ratify the instrument. The Protocole de Cloture of the second Conference was signed on July 9th last, and the Conference was adjourned sine die.

Since the adjournment of the Conference of last July the American and the Netherlands Governments have made a united effort to secure for the Convention the signatures of the remaining non-signatory Powers, and have been successful except in the case of Austria-Hungary, Greece, Servia and Turkey.

It is assumed by the Department that the discussions and conclusions of the prospective Conference will, except by general consent of the interested Governments, be confined to the purpose of the Protocol signed at The Hague on July 9th last. Therefore, it is unnecessary to give you detailed instructions on this question. Should, however, other questions arise resulting from the anti-opium movement with its bearing on the treaties, you will be guided by the tenor of the Department’s instruction of October 18, 1911, to the American Delegates to the International Opium Conference which met at The Hague on December 1st of that year.11

You may agree to put the International Opium Convention into force on behalf of the Government of the United States.

One thing I wish you to bear in mind, namely, that while the International Opium Convention does not require the signatory Powers to at once put into force domestic legislation to carry out its pledges, nevertheless, this Government has proceeded to put such legislation on the statute books in the hope that its action may be an Incentive to the other Governments not to wait upon the exact terms of the Convention. I desire that you lay before the Conference a proper statement as to what the Federal Government has done in the way of legislation in accordance with the terms of the International Opium Convention, and if possible to use the action of this Government to secure similar action in the near future on the part of the other Governments.

Should occasion arise during the course of the deliberations of the Conference for special instructions, you will communicate concisely with the Department by telegraph.

Throughout the deliberations of the Conference you should bear in mind that the international movement for the suppression of the opium evil was initiated by this Government, with the primary object of protecting the Philippine Islands from the opium evil, and of assisting China in her energetic and so far successful effort in that direction.

As to the great benefit which has accrued to this Government from the sincere cooperation of the other nations with it for the suppression of the evils associated with the opium and allied traffics, you should consult my letter of ----- to the Secretary of War congratulating him upon the practical suppression of the narcotic evil in the Philippine Islands.

I may assure you that it is the President’s earnest desire, one in which I warmly join, that the Conference which you are about to attend through harmonious consideration will accomplish the great purpose for which it is convened and mark the successful termination of this Government’s eight years effort to bring to an end an odious economic evil.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

[Inclosure.]

[Untitled]

Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, to all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting: Know ye, That reposing special trust and confidence in the integrity, prudence and ability of Henry van Dyke, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States to the Netherlands and Luxemburg, and Charles Denby, Consul-General of the United States at Vienna, Austria, Delegates of the United States to the Third International Opium Conference to be held at The Hague, June 15, 1914, I have invested them jointly and severally with full and all manner of power and authority for and in the name of the United States to meet and confer with any persons duly authorized by the Governments of the States represented at the said International Conference, being invested with like power and authority, and with them to negotiate, conclude and sign any Acts adopted by the said International Conference, the same to be transmitted to the President of the United States for his ratification, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have caused the seal of the United States to be hereunto affixed.

Given under my hand at the City of Washington this fourth day of June in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-eighth.

[seal.] Woodrow Wilson.

By the President:
W. J. Bryan,
Secretary of State.

5  For. Rel. 1909, pp. 95–115.

6  For. Rel. 1910, pp. 292–328.

7  For. Rel. 1911, pp. 54–56.

8  For. Rel. 1912, pp. 196–204.

9  For. Rel. 1913, pp. 215–283.

10  Id., pp. 230–232, 233. See the text of the protocol, ante, inclosure with Mr. Schmolck’s September 22, 1913.

11  For. Rel. 1912, pp. 188–193.

Delegate Van Dyke to the Secretary of State. File No. 511.4A1/1480.

[Document 1648]

Delegate Van Dyke to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

The Hague, June 20, 1914.

Germany and Portugal decline to put the Convention into effect until Turkey, Greece and Serbia come in; Great Britain will wait for Germany. Yesterday’s meeting adjourned till Monday. May we agree to put the Convention into effect with a limited number of Powers?

Van Dyke.

The Secretary of State to Delegate Van Dyke. File No. 511.4A1/1480.

[Document 1649]

The Secretary of State to Delegate Van Dyke.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 22, 1914.

Your June 20. The Department does not believe that the situation will be improved by putting the Convention into effect among a limited number of powers. If it seems advisable, you may endeavor to adjourn Conference, letting the Conference request the Governments of the United States and the Netherlands to use their best efforts in the meanwhile to secure the signatures of Turkey, Greece and Serbia, on the understanding that the Conference will reassemble on August 15.

The hesitation of the Conference to put the Convention into effect is seriously embarrassing the passage of the fourth and final anti-narcotic bill, now in the Senate, which was designed to carry out the terms of the Opium Convention.

Bryan.

Delegate Van Dyke to the Secretary of State. File No. 511.4A1/1481.

[Document 1650]

Delegate Van Dyke to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

The Hague, June 23, 1914.

Your June 22. We are confident adjournment to a definite date this summer would not be accepted by the Conference nor tend to promote unanimity. Turkey is immovable. The Netherlands Government declined to approach Turkey again. A disposition to put into effect the Convention now, is strong among certain powers including all American, principal Asiatic powers, Netherlands, Belgium and probably others—in our opinion a forward step and the best way to ultimately bring in the other nations. Otherwise we think the Conference will adjourn without date and thus lose the advance made. Netherlands Delegation will propose to put into effect the Convention by a group of powers. Will you consent? If conditionally, state conditions.

Van Dyke.

The Secretary of State to Delegate Van Dyke. File No. 511.4A1/1481.

[Document 1651]

The Secretary of State to Delegate Van Dyke.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 24, 1914.

Your June 23. You may inform Dr. Loudon, Minister for Foreign Affairs, that if it is not possible to secure the agreement of all the powers to put the Convention into effect, it would seem to this Government to be especially desirable that, in view of Chapter Four of the International Opium Convention, all those powers having treaty relations with China should agree to put the Convention into effect. If in your opinion and in the opinion of the Netherlands Government the Convention is likely to become abortive, you may concur in the proposal of the Netherlands Delegation to put into effect the Convention among as many powers as are disposed to assent to it, but in any case it should be made effective by all the powers that have signed. You may inform the Conference of the attitude of this Government and at the same time express this Government’s hope that the dissenting powers will in due course express their willingness to cooperate with the signatory powers by ratifying the Convention, and provision should be made for subsequent ratifications as they may occur.

Bryan.

The American Delegates to the Secretary of State. File No. 511.4A1/1489.

[Document 1652]

The American Delegates to the Secretary of State.

No. 103.] The Hague, June 26, 1914.

Sir: The Third International Opium Conference closed its sessions on June 25th at 11 a.m. We have the honor to submit the following report in regard to it.

It is important to keep clearly in mind the distinction between “Invited Powers,” “Signatory Powers “and “Ratifying Powers.”

At the opening of the Conference the position of the Powers was as follows. Forty-three “Invited Powers” had signed the Convention of 1912, or intimated their intention of signing. Twelve “Signatory Powers” had ratified it. Turkey and Servia had refused to sign. Greece had intimated willingness to sign for herself, but not for her colonies. (She has since signed for all.) The problem before the Conference, as defined by the Protocol of July 9, 1913, was “the examination of the possibility of putting into effect the Convention of 1912” while two of the Invited Powers were still not Signatory Powers. On this question the opinions were divided as follows.

A number of countries were apathetic, their subjects having no connection with the opium traffic either as traders or as consumers. Others, while approving the movement on humanitarian grounds, could not at once ratify the Convention because of constitutional difficulties in carrying out its provisions. Germany, however, was candidly unwilling to surrender her trade in narcotics and instruments for the administration thereof, unless the Convention could be approved by all Invited Powers, especially Turkey, which otherwise might continue to supply the market. Great Britain, while in favor of the Convention and its enforcement, showed unwillingness to put it into force unless all Signatory Powers (Germany especially) should concur. France and Russia apparently sympathized with this view.

The delegations which strongly supported the idea of putting the Convention into force, even if Turkey should continue obstinate, were those of the United States, the Netherlands, Italy, Belgium, Denmark, China, Japan, Siam, Persia, the South and Central American Republics.

It was evident that, as Turkey could not be induced to sign, either the Convention must fail altogether, or the provision which made the execution of the Convention dependent on unanimity of all Invited Powers must be modified, and the execution thereof made dependent on the consent of the Signatory Powers, disregarding the non-signers. If the assent of Germany could have been secured to this plan, the Convention could have been ratified and put into execution without great delay by all Powers except Turkey and Servia, which would thus have been forced eventually to join.

This was the position taken by the American delegation in the resolution offered by their first delegate in the first session of the Conference, as follows: Resolved, That the Signatory Powers pledge themselves to ratify as soon as possible the Convention of 1912, and to put it into effect from the first of December, 1914.

This was intended to mark the attitude of the United States in favor of the prompt mise en vigueur of the Convention, as indicated in the Department’s instruction of June 5, especially the paragraph: “You may agree to put the International Opium Convention into force on behalf of the Government of the United States.” Although this resolution was referred to the Editing Committee and so disappeared in its original form, the principle of voluntary agreement of Signatory Powers in spite of the abstention of Turkey and Servia, became the link which held the Conference together.

At the fourth session of the Conference the second delegate of the United States, in pursuance of the Department’s instructions, made a clear and full statement of the legislation which our Government has enacted by way of carrying out the Anti-Opium Convention of 1912. A copy of this statement is enclosed. It impressed the Conference, and a sentiment disclosed itself among other delegates to have their countries do likewise. It became therefore a matter of great importance to act while this sentiment prevailed.

In order at least to retain the progress made in this Conference, namely the possibility of executing the Convention at once by such Powers as were prepared to do so, and to leave the door open to future adherents, the delegation of the Netherlands proposed to push this plan to a conclusion.

The delegation of the United States, while seeking to secure unanimity of the Powers, and while prepared to propose (under your telegraphic instructions) an adjournment of the Conference until later in the summer in order to give time to secure such unanimity, became convinced after consultation and consideration that such a proposal would certainly fail. It was also the judgment of your delegation that such adjournment, even if carried, would not tend to secure unanimity, but would rather dishearten Powers now prepared to act. These views were expressed to you in our telegram of June 23.

The policy pursued by the delegation of the United States has been based on the determination in difficult circumstances to have the action of the Third Opium Conference mark a step forward if possible, but in any case to have it secure an open door for the future. This policy, which has been consistently maintained, was outlined in the opening address of the first American delegate, delivered in the course of the second session of the Conference on the 16th of June, in which he said “We want to go forward with you. We want to have the Convention ratified and put into force as soon as possible, with as many signatory and adhering Powers as possible, but in any event put into force with as few or as many in America and Asia and Europe as will agree to make the adventure.”

This wish has been more fully realized than seemed at first possible. The resolutions and avis brought forward by the Conference’s Editing Committee were adopted by a unanimous vote. Copies thereof are enclosed, with translation.

With the adoption of a Protocol of Cloture subsequently signed by all delegates present, and expressly approved by telegrams from those who were not present, the Conference came to a close.

The delegation of the United States, the activity and influence of which had largely helped to, bring about the unanimity in the adoption of the Protocol of Cloture, signed the same with satisfaction, feeling that this was a decided step towards the aim of all the Opium Conferences.

The speech of the first American delegate at the close of the Conference (a copy of which is herewith enclosed) endeavored to state clearly the position of the United States as we have understood it from your instructions, as including: 1. An earnest desire to make the Anti-Opium Convention of 1912 effective soon;

2. A sincere wish that all nations shall join;

3. A willingness to put it into force between a limited number of Powers under proper conditions;

4. A definite intention to do this only in such a form as will not foster nor permit a profitable monopoly in opium for the abstaining Powers.

In our opinion the conclusions reached by the Third Opium Conference open the way to such a result. Diplomatic conversations with Great Britain and the Netherlands, the largest Colonial Powers in the East, and with China, Japan and Siam, will be necessary. The strongest efforts should be made to unite all these Powers in a plan for suppressing the trade in opium as an intoxicant, and limiting the commerce in it as a medicine to those nations which agree to this suppression.

We are convinced that this method is the one most likely to lead to an ultimate unanimity of all the other Powers in the campaign against the opium evil. You will observe that full provision has been made for subsequent ratifications of the Convention as they occur.

Our action as delegates has not in any way committed the United States to this plan, but has merely made sure that the way should remain open if our Government should wish to follow it.

We have [etc.]

Henry van Dyke.

Chas. Denby.

[Inclosure No. 1.]

Statement made by American Delegate Denby.

Mr. President and Gentlemen: I beg to call your attention to the legislation for the control of opium and narcotics in the United States.

In 1909 the United States had already on her statute books a law excluding from the United States opium except for medicinal purposes. In accordance with the proposed convention which we now have under discussion, this law has been during this year radically amended. These amendments provide: 1. For absolute prohibition to have smoking-opium in possession or to transport the same; further, for the punishment of any person who having knowledge of opium being held or transported shall fail to advise the authorities thereof.

2. That no opium for smoking shall be admitted into the United States for transportation into another country.

3. That no opium or derivatives thereof shall be exported from the United States to any country which regulates their entry, unless in conformity with the regulations of such country.

4. That penalties for violations of above provisions shall be not more than $5,000 fine or two years imprisonment.

The law is drastic in its terms; possession of opium will be sufficient evidence to convict.

Other domestic laws of the United States are:

An act which became effective January 1, 1910, and which empowered the Postmaster General to close the United States mails to cocaine and other drugs; and further, laws and projects of laws which regulate the production, distribution and manufacture of habit-forming drugs.

As to opium in the Philippine Islands, a law controlling the import and use of opium in the Philippine Islands came into force March 1, 1908.

The effect has been immediate and convincing as to the efficacy of prohibitory legislation; in 1905 the amount imported in kilogrammes was 121,600; in 1906, 68,100; in 1907, 77,000; in 1908, 23,000; in 1909, 52 kilogrammes.

Prior to the above legislation the sum of $300,000 per annum was derived from duties. In 1909 only $274 were derived from this source. The increased value of the drug has been an incentive to smuggling; but, to show how effective has been the control, it is to be pointed out that in 1909 only 1,388 kilogrammes were seized in attempts at illegal importation. If all smuggled opium were not seized and if we assume that twice as much more came in undetected, we have only about 4,000 kilogrammes per annum unlawfully admitted as compared with ten, twenty, or thirty times that amount lawfully admitted in previous years.

It is fairly to be presumed that with a worldwide control of the traffic under the terms of the Convention which is under consideration even this small extent of smuggling could be stopped. The laws of the United States as to the Philippines leave little to be desired in control of the opium and drug traffic; but to make those laws perfectly effective the United States Government does depend on the cooperation of the other powers.

Turning to legislation as to American extraterritorial jurisdiction in China, I am able to inform you that projects of law now before the Congress of the United States ready for enactment and partly enacted, carry out fully the provisions of the Convention as to the control which the United States exercises over American citizens in China. One bill controls American pharmacies in American consular districts in China and regulates the administering of morphine and other drugs.

Long before the first opium conference in Shanghai in 1909, namely in 1880, the United States had by treaty with China debarred the opium trade in China to American citizens. It was made unlawful for an American citizen to buy or sell ship or handle opium in China and in fact for decades the flag of the United States has covered no part of this traffic. The Convention which we now discuss provides for certain legislation as to Foreign Concessions in China. The United States has no concessions there. The Convention further provides for control of Foreign Post Offices in China as to receiving opium and drugs. The United States has but one post office in China, that at Shanghai, and that is effectively covered by the powers given to the Postmaster General of the United States by the law which became effective on January 1, 1910.

It can not be made too clear that in urging the other Signatory Powers to put the Opium Convention into effect, we are urging something which the United States has already done. The provisions of the Convention are to a great extent the law of the United States to-day, and they will certainly be entirely enacted into law, and we hope that all other parties to the Convention will do likewise. Only by your cooperation can world-wide control be established and only by your cooperation can our legislation be entirely effective, even within our own borders.

[Inclosure No. 2.]

Resolution of the Convention Regarding Ratification.

avis.

I. That it is possible to put the International Opium Convention of the 23rd of January, 1912, into effect notwithstanding the fact that some of the Powers invited according to paragraph 1 of Article 23 have not yet signed the Convention.

II. That the Convention shall be put into effect between all the Powers when the Powers which have signed it and those which have expressed their intention to adhere to it shall have ratified it. The date at which the Convention shall be put into effect shall be that fixed by paragraph 1 of Article 24.

III. That if on a date to be determined by the Conference all the Signatory Powers have not yet deposited their ratifications, the Signatory Powers whose ratifications at that date have been deposited shall have the right to put the Convention into effect. The same right shall be left to the Signatory Powers as they successively deposit their ratifications subsequent to that date.

IV. That the date referred to in clause III shall be the 31st of December, 1914.

V. That the possibility of acceding to the Convention remains open to the Powers which have not yet signed it.

decisions.

That a protocol shall be opened at The Hague, whereby the signatory Powers disposed to avail themselves of the right embraced in clause III may declare their intention to put the Convention into effect.

His excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, in compliance with the wish unanimously expressed by the Conference, consents to prepare this protocol, which shall remain open for signatures.

resolution adopted unanimously.

The Conference invites his excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, in the name of the Conference, to urgently and respectfully approach the Signatory Powers which have not yet ratified the Convention nor expressed their intention to do so, with a view to inducing them to declare that they are prepared within a very brief period to deposit their ratifications in order that the Convention may be put into effect as early as possible.

[Inclosure No. 3.]

Statement of Delegate van Dyke before the Conference.

[Translation.]

In seconding the proposal of thanks made by the honorable Delegate of Switzerland, I wish to add a few words on behalf of the United States of America. As the initiator of the Shanghai Opium Commission, our country feels great satisfaction in the progress which has been made in the peaceful war against the opium-abuse. Each stage of the campaign has been marked by new victories won and new ground gained. Within the present year many nations have signed the Convention or intimated their intention of doing so. Encouraged by the good news of ratifications which have come in while we have been in session, this Third Conference has approved, by a large majority, the principle that the Convention may be put into effect by consenting Powers without waiting for unanimous agreement.

In all this advance the firm and sympathetic attitude of the Government of Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands has been of immense advantage. His excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs, our Honorary President, has rendered great service to the cause, not only in our sessions but also by his steady and consistent action through diplomatic channels. The President, the Honorable Mr. Cremer, has presided in the spirit of hope. The Chairman of the Redaction Committee, Mr. van Deventer, has earned the high gratitude of the Conference by his patient labors in search of “formules acceptables.”

It is true that numerous and serious objections to the mise en vigueur of the Convention have been raised by certain of the honored delegates. They suggest reflection. The Government of the United States has already ratified the Convention and gone farther than any other nation in passing anti-opium legislation. But naturally it has no desire to give its legislation a form which would favor or permit the creation by any other power or powers of a monopoly in the opium traffic.

But this point does not in any way condition our devotion to the cause. We have already given clear and practical proof of it. We shall continue our relations of cordial cooperation with those Powers of Europe, Asia, and America, which are already actively and practically committed to the campaign against the opium evil. We shall hope that all the civilized nations of the world will soon come into this movement completely and heartily, and join themselves in a world-wide union for protection, not only of their own citizens but of the whole human race, against the curse of the opium evil.

Minister Williams to the Secretary of State. File No. 511.4A1/1488.

[Document 1653]

Minister Williams to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Athens, July 10, 1914.

Greek Government accepts without reservation Opium Convention. Congratulations.

Williams.

The Minister of the Netherlands to the Secretary of State. File No. 511.4A1/1499.

[Document 1654]

The Minister of the Netherlands to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

No. 3717.] Legation of the Netherlands,
Washington, December 17, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: By order of my Government I have the honor to inform your excellency that the Third International Opium Conference, which met at The Hague in June last, decided in its Final Protocol that the Powers that ratified the Opium Convention might declare their intention to put it into operation by signing a protocol to be opened for the purpose at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs at The Hague.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs at The Hague deems it his duty to act upon the decision of the Opium Conference by informing the States that have ratified the convention that a protocol, drawn up in accordance with the opinion rendered by the Conference, has been opened at the Department of Foreign Affairs at The Hague.

Your excellency will please find herewith a proof of the protocol, together with a copy of the Final Protocol of the Third International Opium Conference.

Accept [etc.]

W. L. F. C. De Rappard.

[Inclosure 1—Translation.]

Final Protocol of the Third International Opium Conference, 1914.

The Third International Opium Conference, convoked by the Government of the Netherlands in accordance with the third provision of the Final Protocol of the Second Conference, met at The Hague, in the Hall of the Knights, on June 15, 1914.

The Governments hereinafter enumerated took part in the Conference, for which they had appointed the following delegates:

[Here follow the names of the Governments and their delegates.] At a series of meetings held from the 15th to the 25th of June, 1914, the Conference, having examined the question submitted to it under the third provision of the Final Protocol of the Second Conference—

A. Expressed the following opinions:

I. That it is possible to put the International Opium Convention of January 23, 1912, into operation, notwithstanding the fact that certain Powers invited in pursuance of paragraph 1 of article 23 have not yet signed the convention.

II. That the convention shall go into effect among the Signatory Powers as soon as the Powers that have signed it and those that have expressed their intention of adhering thereto have ratified it. The date upon which the convention will go into effect shall be that fixed by paragraph 1 of article 24.

III. That if at a date to be determined by the Conference all the Signatory Powers have not yet deposited their ratifications it shall be allowable for those Signatory Powers whose ratifications have at that date been deposited to put the convention into effect. The same provision is made for those Signatory Powers that successively deposit their ratifications after that date.

IV. That the date contemplated by III shall be December 31, 1914.

V. That the power of acceding to the convention do remain open to the Powers that have not yet signed it.

B. Decided:

That a protocol shall be opened at The Hague by which the Signatory Powers disposed to avail themselves of the provision made by III may declare their intention of putting the convention into effect.

His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, satisfying the desire unanimously expressed by the Conference, has consented to draw up this protocol, which will remain open for signature.

C. Unanimously adopted the following resolution: The Conference invites His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands to make, in the name of the Conference, urgent and respectful representation to those Signatory Powers that have neither ratified the convention nor expressed their intention of so doing, with a view to induce them to declare themselves ready at an early date to deposit their ratifications, in order that the convention may go into effect as soon as possible.

In witness whereof the delegates have affixed their signatures to this protocol.

Done at The Hague June 25, 1914, in a single instrument, which shall be deposited in the archives of the Government of the Netherlands, and copies of which, duly certified, shall be forwarded through diplomatic channels to all the Powers, whether Signatory or not Signatory.
[Signatures.]

[Inclosure 2—Translation.]

Protocol relative to putting into effect the International Opium Convention.

The undersigned, having been authorized by their respective Governments in pursuance of the provision in III of the Final Protocol of the Third International Opium Conference, declare that their Governments, having ratified the International Opium Convention of January 23, 1912, intend to put it into effect.

For the Powers that sign the protocol before December 31, 1914, the convention will go into effect on that date; for the Powers that sign the Protocol after Decembr 31, 1914, the convention will go into effect on the day of signature.

Agreement between the United States and the Netherlands in relation to oil interests in Mexico.Agreement between the United States and the Netherlands in relation to oil interests in Mexico.

(See Mexico: Protection of American oil interests, etc.)

Nicaragua:Nicaragua:

Contents

Political affairs: Attack on the barracks at Bluefields and other insurrections implicating American citizens; asylum sought at American Consulate; attitude of the United StatesPolitical affairs: Attack on the barracks at Bluefields and other insurrections implicating American citizens; asylum sought at American Consulate; attitude of the United States

[1655] The President of Nicaragua to the Minister of Nicaragua.

Managua, July 6, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2325.

[1656] The Secretary of State to Consul Clare.

Department of State, Washington, July 7, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2325.

[1657] Consul Clare to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate, Bluefields, July 9, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2327.

[1658] The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson.

Department of State, Washington, July 14, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2327.

[1659] Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Managua, August 19, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2347.

[1660] Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Managua, August 24, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2342.

[1661] [Untitled]

American Legation, Managua, August 30, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2350.

[1662] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson.

Department of State, Washington, September 18, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2347.

[1663] Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Managua, November 10, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2364.

[1664] The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson.

Department of State, Washington, November 14, 1914.

File No. 817.00/2364.

The President of Nicaragua to the Minister of Nicaragua. File No. 817.00/2325.

[Document 1655]

The President of Nicaragua to the Minister of Nicaragua. 1

[Telegram—Translation.]

Managua, July 6, 1914.

The Intendant of Bluefields has informed me that last night at twelve o’clock the main barracks were attacked by Clifford D. Sands who has been absent from the country. For this reason and in view of other information it is believed that this movement is the work of the enemies of the Convention in order to prevent its approval. The attacking party repelled, Sands took refuge in the American Consulate. Four wounded on our side. Among papers captured there was found a proclamation for the independence of the Coast. All quiet.

Díaz.

1 Handed by the Minister to the Department on July 6, 1914. The convention referred to is the canal treaty of Feb. 8, 1913; see For. Rel. 1913, pp. 1021–1022 (footnote).

The Secretary of State to Consul Clare. File No. 817.00/2325.

[Document 1656]

The Secretary of State to Consul Clare.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 7, 1914.

Department informed that barracks at Bluefields were attacked July 5 by party headed by Clifford D. Sands, who, it is reported, has taken refuge in your Consulate. If careful investigation convinces you that report of attack is true, Sands should not be sheltered in Consulate. Report by cable.

Bryan.

Consul Clare to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.00/2327.

[Document 1657]

Consul Clare to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Consulate,
Bluefields, July 9, 1914.

Your telegram July 7. Sands badly wounded and was brought to this Consulate about 1 a.m., 6th; consent given to keep him at the Consulate a few days; delivered to the authorities yesterday and sent hospital.

Clare.

The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson. File No. 817.00/2327.

[Document 1658]

The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson.

No. 35.] Department of State,
Washington, July 14, 1914.

Sir: Upon request of the Minister of Nicaragua at Washington, who had received a telegram from his Government to the effect that Clifford D. Sands had led an unsuccessful attack on the barracks at Bluefields, the Consul at that place was instructed by a telegram dated July 7 to report regarding the matter, and replied in a telegram dated July 9 that Sands was brought into the Consulate at 1 o’clock a.m., July 6, badly wounded, and was delivered to the authorities and sent to a hospital on July 8.

A copy of a memorandum2 from the Minister of Nicaragua at Washington, in relation to the matter, is enclosed herewith for your information.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
[Not signed.]

2 Not printed.

Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.00/2347.

[Document 1659]

Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State.

No. 109.] American Legation,
Managua, August 19, 1914.

Sir: Referring to the Department’s instruction No. 35 of July 14, 1914, and enclosure, relative to an unsuccessful attack on the barracks at Bluefields on or about July 6, 1914, and the alleged participation of one Clifford D. Sands in connection therewith, I have the honor to transmit copies of telegrams that passed between this Legation and the American Consul at Bluefields as well as a copy of the “Declaration of Independence” 2 signed by Clifford D. Sands and said to have been circulated by Sands on the Atlantic coast.

I have seen the President in person several times with regard to this matter and at my first visit ascertained that there was no cause for alarm and that all was quiet on the coast under his absolute control. The necessity of awaiting a full and substantial report of the incident from the Consul at Bluefields accounts for my delay in being able to advise the Department intelligently concerning the entire affair.

During my conversation with President Diaz relative to the arrest made, he informed me that he had decided it was advisable to have Sands and others connected with the plot brought to Managua for trial, thus obviating any complications or difficulties that might possibly arise from holding the trial on the Atlantic coast.

Upon the receipt of the Department’s instruction I telegraphed the Consul for a detailed account of the incident, together with a full report upon the landing of the marines from the Tacoma, and on receipt of his reply shall inform the Department fully concerning the matter and the ultimate disposal of Sands.

I have [etc.]

Benjamin L. Jefferson.

[Inclosure 1—Telegram.]

Consul Clare to Minister Jefferson.

American Consulate,
Bluefields, July 6, 1914.

At one o’clock this morning an attempt was made to capture the police barracks in which it is said that two Americans took part. One of the two was wounded and was brought to this Consulate by two men. Nothing has been heard of the other. The Governor asked me to surrender to him the wounded man but at my request consent was given to keep the wounded man here until he was fit to be turned over to the authorities. I have since been called upon to surrender the man but have been given time to communicate with you. Please ask President Diaz to allow me to keep this man at the Consulate until he is fit to be surrendered to the authorities as I shall personally see that he is delivered at the proper time.

Clare.

[Inclosures 2 and 3—Telegrams.]

Minister Jefferson to Consul Clare.

American Legation,
Managua, July 7, 1914—11 a.m.

Your telegram of yesterday. If you can guarantee the safekeeping of the American during his recovery in asylum at the Consulate and his subsequent delivery to Nicaraguan authorities at a proper time, the Legation will request this consent of the Nicaraguan Government rather than have him, while wounded, placed in a Nicaraguan prison and given indifferent medical care. If this guaranty cannot be safely given, you will see that this American be lodged in a sanitary place and given adequate medical treatment. Answer immediately and keep the Legation advised.

Jefferson.

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Managua, July 7, 1914—1 p.m.

The President has authorized Sand’s detention at the Consulate pending his recovery. If he remains under your protection you should use every precaution to the end that he be delivered later to the Nicaraguan authorities. Report incident fully by mail.

Jefferson.

[Inclosures 4 and 5—Telegrams.]

Consul Clare to Minister Jefferson.

American Consulate,
Bluefields, August 16, 1914.

At the request of the American and foreign interests and with hearty approval of the Government officials, a party was landed from the Tacoma on the thirteenth. Action caused by disturbing rumors, Liberal activity. Arms, ammunition are reported landed two places off the coast and now supposed to be in Bluefields.

Clare.

[Untitled]

American Consulate,
Bluefields, August 17, 1914.

A report relative to the prisoner was to be sent by passenger to Managua who is not now going. The prisoner has been in the paying ward of the hospital since the eighth ultimo and is slowly recovering but yet very weak. He is receiving good treatment.

Clare.

2 Not printed.

Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.00/2342.

[Document 1660]

Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Managua, August 24, 1914.

In a conversation with President Diaz to-day relative to recent disturbances in Bluefields and landing of marines from U. S. S. Tacoma, the President informed me that he has directed the Governor of Bluefields to conclude the matter by the deportation of Clifford Sands allowing the latter to leave on the first boat on condition that he sign an agreement never to return to Nicaragua. He also informed me that he had received no further information regarding the matter except that all was now quiet on the coast. The Legation to-day received the first report from the American Consul at Bluefields stating that at his request the landing of marines was effected without time to consult with authorities or with this Legation. He reports all temporarily quiet but that conditions may become worse if landing party is withdrawn before the canal convention is concluded. I have directed him to keep the Legation fully informed as to all further indications of unrest or political activity in order that this Legation may be instructed in time by the Department as to the steps to be taken with the officials of this Government.

Jefferson.

[Untitled] File No. 817.00/2350.

[Document 1661]

[Untitled]

No. 115.] American Legation,
Managua, August 30, 1914.

Sir: Referring to my despatch No. 109 of August 19, 1914 and telegram of August 24, relative to the recent disturbances in Blue-fields and the attack led by Clifford D. Sands upon the police barracks in that city on the night of July 6 last, and the decision of President Diaz to terminate the matter by allowing Sands to leave the country on condition of his signing an agreement never to return to Nicaragua, I have the honor to report that the American Consul at Bluefields has to-day notified the Legation that Sands has sailed from Bluefields for New Orleans on August 26, by the steamer Senator.

He reports that Sands can partly use one arm and that the other is useless, that he had in the beginning placed Sands in the paying ward of the local hospital and employed a surgeon, thereby probably saving Sands’ arms if not his life as well, and that he has had to pay all the expenses, including Sands’ steamer passage to New Orleans.

I believe that with the deportation of Sands the incident of his attack on police barracks is closed.

I have [etc.]

Benjamin L. Jefferson.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson. File No. 817.00/2347.

[Document 1662]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson.

Department of State,
Washington, September 18, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received and has read with interest your No. 109 of August 19, 1914, reporting in regard to the alleged participation of one Clifford D. Sands, an American citizen, in an unsuccessful attack on the police barracks at Bluefields.

You will keep the Department advised with regard to this case.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.00/2364.

[Document 1663]

Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Managua, November 10, 1914.

American Consul at Bluefields telegraphs that he is informed that insurrection of Creoles in Mosquito Territory is imminent. I should consider it advisable for moral effect that the Department suggest to the Secretary of the Navy the sending of a cruiser to Bluefields, and that. Americans there should again be reminded through the Consul that protection can not be extended to those implicated in any uprising against the Nicaraguan Government.

Jefferson.

The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson. File No. 817.00/2364.

[Document 1664]

The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 14, 1914.

Your November 10. Department is to-day telegraphing American Consul Bluefields: Please warn all Americans that this Government will not countenance insurrection and that Americans interfering with the Government do so at their own peril.

Bryan.

Financial affairs: Good offices of the United States in securing a loan for current expensesFinancial affairs: Good offices of the United States in securing a loan for current expenses3

3 Continued from For. Rel. 1913, pp. 1034–1067.

[1665] The Secretary of State to Brown Brothers & Company and Seligman & Company.

Department of State, Washington, January 13, 1914.

File No. 817.51/621a.

[1666] The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson.

Department of State, Washington, January 17, 1914.

File No. 817.51/622a.

[1667] Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Managua, February 8, 1914.

File No. 817.51/635.

[1668] [Untitled]

American Legation, Managua, March 5, 1914.

File No. 817.51/641.

[1669] [Untitled]

American Legation, Managua, September 5, 1914.

File No. 817.51/675.

[1670] The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson

Department of State, Washington, September 9, 1914.

File No. 817.51/676.

[1671] Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Managua, September 10, 1914.

File No. 817.51/677.

[1672] The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson.

Department of State, Washington, September 14, 1914.

File No. 817.51/677.

[1673] Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Managua, September 23, 1914.

File No. 817.51/683.

[1674] The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson.

Department of State, Washington, October 1, 1914.

File No. 817.51/683.

[1675] President Diaz to the President.

Managua, October 2, 1914.

File No. 817.51/689.

[1676] Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Managua, October 2, 1914.

File No. 817.5.1/686.

[1677] The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson.

Department of State, Washington, October 3, 1914.

File No. 817.51/688a.

[1678] The Acting Secretary of State to Brown Brothers and Company and Seligman and Company.

Department of State, Washington, October 14, 1914.

File No. 817.51/697.

[1679] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister of Nicaragua.

Department of State, Washington, October 14, 1914.

File No. 817.51/697.

[1680] The Minister of Nicaragua to the Secretary of State.

Nicaraguan Legation, Washington, October 16, 1914.

File No. 817.51/707.

[1681] Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Managua, October 24, 1914.

File No. 817.51/704.

[1682] The Minister of Nicaragua to the Secretary of State.

Washington, D. C. , November 17, 1914.

File No. 817.51/705.

[1683] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister of Nicaragua.

Department of State, Washington, November 19, 1914.

File No. 817.51/700.

[1684] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, November 19, 1914.

File No. 817.51/707.

[1685] The Minister of Nicaragua to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Nicaragua, Washington , November 21, 1914.

File No. 817.51/706.

[1686] Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Managua, November 29, 1914.

File No. 817.51/708.

The Secretary of State to Brown Brothers & Company and Seligman & Company. File No. 817.51/621a.

[Document 1665]

The Secretary of State to Brown Brothers & Company and Seligman & Company.

Department of State,
Washington, January 13, 1914.

Gentlemen: The Nicaraguan Minister has represented to the Department that the economic conditions now existing in his country render it desirable that the Nicaraguan Government increase its present loan by $250,000, or perhaps as much as $500,000. The Department will be glad to assist in forwarding any practical measure calculated to relieve the financial conditions now obtaining in Nicaragua. Should you care at this time to consider an increase in your loan to the Government of Nicaragua, the Department will be glad to discuss the matter with your representatives at such time as may best suit your convenience.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson. File No. 817.51/622a.

[Document 1666]

The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 17, 1914.

Department’s August 17, 1913.4 Again request the President to furnish you complete list of all outstanding debts of the Republic and as complete a statement as possible of all other financial obligations acknowledged by Nicaragua. Go over all available data on subject thoroughly with Schoenrich, Thompson and Hamm with view to affording Department comprehensive and accurate understanding of the financial situation up to January first. You will impress upon the President that upon receipt of this information Department will devote earnest attention to determining how best to assist him in effecting complete financial reorganization; will also be prepared to take up Canal Treaty but desires first to determine what importance it will have in relation to financial situation. This data is earnestly desired in order that hearty cooperation between the two Governments shall result in practical remedy which may place Nicaragua upon sound financial basis. This Government can not of course hope to afford intelligent and lasting help to Nicaragua without a frank and full statement covering every phase of the situation.

Bryan.

4  For. Rel. 1913, p. 1046.

Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.51/635.

[Document 1667]

Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 48.] American Legation,
Managua, February 8, 1914.

Sir: Relative to the Department’s desire to secure a frank and full statement covering every phase of the Nicaraguan financial situation as expressed in its telegram of August 17, 1913, and reiterated January 17, 1914, I have the honor to transmit herewith the information5 which I have at length been able to obtain from the President.

[Explanation of the enclosed financial statements.]

In view of the chaotic management of the Government’s accounts and the deplorable and almost incomprehensible state of its finances, it can hardly be hoped that the figures here copied are very accurate.

I have [etc.]

Benjamin L. Jefferson.

5 Not printed.

[Untitled] [Document 1668]

[Untitled]

File No. 817.51/641.

No. 57.] American Legation,
Managua, March 5, 1914.

Sir: Referring to my despatch No. 48 of February 8 last, I regret to have to say that the Nicaraguan Government shows itself reluctant to divulge additional explanatory information. In view of its unwillingness and the difficulties encountered in persuading it to furnish the statements enclosed with the above-mentioned despatch, I deem it unwise to insist at this time on a supplementary explanation of the enclosures thereto.

I have [etc.]

Benjamin L. Jefferson.

[Untitled] File No. 817.51/675.

[Document 1669]

[Untitled]

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Managua, September 5, 1914.

The President is to issue a proclamation convoking Congress in extraordinary session relative to granting power for issuance of bonds, reducing the budget and enacting a moratorium law.

Jefferson.

The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson File No. 817.51/676.

[Document 1670]

The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 9, 1914.

Brown Brothers fear that the taking of the action proposed by the Nicaraguan Government will seriously affect business. If action could be postponed for a few days we may be able to get definite action on the [Canal] Treaty. We are doing the best we can.

Bryan.

Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.51/677.

[Document 1671]

Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Managua, September 10, 1914.

Your September 9. Congress met in extraordinary session to-day. In a long conversation with President Diaz and later with the Minister of Finance, both emphatically held that it would be impossible to accede to the Department’s desire for postponement of contemplated action. Government employees unpaid, failure of crops, shortage in customs receipts, lack of funds for moving coffee crop, importunate creditors, given as reasons for immediate legislative action. The President’s address proposes reduction in budget from $3,500,000 to $2,000,000 United States gold, cutting all salaries. Both agreed not to take any action toward a new bond issue or issuance of paper money without prior notice to the Legation. They insist, however, that the moratorium must be put into operation for four months, affecting all debts and interest, including Ethelburga. Minister of Finance states that the Department has already taken up this last with General Chamorro and raised no objection. He complains bitterly against high salaries paid to Americans here, while Nicaraguan employees of the Government are on small salaries and many unpaid.

Jefferson.

The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson. File No. 817.51/677.

[Document 1672]

The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 14, 1914.

Your September 10. Please report reductions proposed in salaries to Americans.

While it is unjust as well as unreasonable to ask for excessive salaries for American officials, still it must be remembered that no one is likely to go to Nicaragua from this country unless he could make more there than here. Interruption of business, absence from home and discomforts in foreign country must all be taken into consideration. This Department glad to assist in making reasonable reductions, but could not advise such reductions as would make it impossible to secure the competent and efficient men needed.

W. J. Bryan.

Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.51/683.

[Document 1673]

Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Managua, September 23, 1914.

Department’s September 14. The President reports no means of reducing American salaries. Bill suspending for four months payment of interest on Ethelburga loan and bankers’ liens upon customs has been passed by lower House. On receipt of this information bankers have directed Collector of Customs to remit usual monthly amounts and Manager of the National Bank to suspend sale of gold drafts for córdobas. This is not generally known but will cause intense resentment. Period for conversion of billetes, or national paper money, into gold expires to-day. About 800,000 pesos still outstanding.

In view of the present situation, President Díaz has called a conference of forty “notables” to-morrow. I have suggested to him the extreme advisability of delaying action until after careful consideration of measures acceptable to all parties concerned. The Minister of Finance assures me, however, that it is not impossible that a new issue of billetes will be issued forthwith. Salaries of army, police, and telegraph operators several months in arrears, and dissatisfaction growing. I suggest that present use of even $50,000 to $75,000 for part payment of these, if done under supervision of Bank, may go far to hold back trouble for, say, sixty days, allowing time for passage of Canal Treaty.

Jefferson.

The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson. File No. 817.51/683.

[Document 1674]

The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 1, 1914.

Your September 23. We are greatly distressed at the situation in Nicaragua and regret exceedingly that it has been impossible to get action on the treaty. The Senate has been in constant session for a year and a half, something never known before. We are in the midst of a campaign in which nearly a third of the Senators are candidates for reelection. Under the circumstances it has been impossible to make progress. The President is very anxious to secure ratification of the treaty. If we can find any means of hastening action Ave shall employ it.

Please communicate the substance of this to Foreign Minister Chamorro.

W. J. Bryan.

President Diaz to the President. File No. 817.51/689.

[Document 1675]

President Diaz to the President.

[Telegram.]

Managua, October 2, 1914.

Informed by the United States Minister, Doctor Jefferson, of the best personal efforts of yourself and Mr. Bryan to relieve our distressing condition, I beg Your Excellency kindly to accept my cordial thanks together with the expression of my firm confidence in the success of your good and deeply appreciated endeavors in behalf of Nicaragua.

Adolfo Díaz.

Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.5.1/686.

[Document 1676]

Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Managua, October 2, 1914.

Yesterday President Díaz signed the new budget. For provisions see my September 10. At my request all other legislation suspended awaiting action on the Canal Treaty and arrangements with bankers. In my conversation yesterday with the Minister of Finance he stated that the salaries unpaid and other accounts due for the last seven months amount to $504,758 besides which President Díaz has personally signed drafts and notes outstanding on account of the Government amounting to $200,000 more. The above items seem large to me. It is difficult to get at all expenditures of moneys.

In view of the decrease in the customs and the internal revenue and the consequent shortage of something like $50,000 monthly, I have suggested to the Government officials the passage of an act immediately imposing taxes on personal and real property; also a reorganization of the internal revenue service. I would suggest, in the event of another loan and the issuance of more money, that the above reforms be complied with and the income from the internal revenue be supervised and paid through the National Bank.

Jefferson.

The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson. File No. 817.51/688a.

[Document 1677]

The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 3, 1914.

Department approves general principles of contract now being made with bankers but has not had an opportunity to consider details. Hope Congress will adopt system of taxation sufficient to provide for the needs of the Government.

Bryan.

The Acting Secretary of State to Brown Brothers and Company and Seligman and Company. File No. 817.51/697.

[Document 1678]

The Acting Secretary of State to Brown Brothers and Company and Seligman and Company.

Department of State,
Washington, October 14, 1914.

Gentlemen: At the request of the Minister of Nicaragua, I enclose for your information, in connection with the financial situation in the Republic of Nicaragua, a copy of a translation of a cable from the Foreign Minister of Nicaragua to General Chamorro, on which the Secretary of State endorsed an autographic statement. It will be observed that it is the hope of the Secretary that you may be able to make some arrangement to furnish the Nicaraguan Government with the fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) requested by it.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

The Foreign Minister of Nicaragua to the Minister of Nicaragua at Washington.

Managua, October 9, 1914.

Minister Chamoreo: Budget of three million and a half has been reduced to one million, one hundred thousand dollars; and the Executive, even with this reduction, will pay all expenses.

Situation of President Diaz extremely critical and distressing: with one hundred thousand dollars of debts for advances made to the Government for its urgent needs, with everyone wanting to be paid, and unable to avail himself of the moratorium law.

As a last resort, try to obtain from the bankers, through the medium of the Secretary of State, fifty thousand dollars to get President Diaz out of an unsustainable and shameful position. I request that you will personally interest yourself in this matter.

Relaciones.

Autographic Statement by the Secretary of State.

Please say to Brown Bros that I very much hope that they can let your govt have the 50,000 desired.

Yours truly,

W. J. Bryan.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister of Nicaragua. File No. 817.51/697.

[Document 1679]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister of Nicaragua.

Department of State,
Washington, October 14, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Minister: Referring to our conversation of to-day in regard to obtaining from Brown Brothers & Company and Seligman & Company of New York, fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) for the use of your Government, I would advise you that I have informed these bankers of the contents of the memorandum which you left with me this morning, and of Mr. Bryan’s autographic statement endorsed thereon. I enclose a copy of this paper for your use.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

The Minister of Nicaragua to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.51/707.

[Document 1680]

The Minister of Nicaragua to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Nicaraguan Legation,
Washington, October 16, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to inform your excellency that I have received instructions from my Government to communicate to you that, after careful consultation with certain important members of the Nicaraguan Congress, the President has ascertained that it would be very difficult to obtain in Congress the ratification of the last proposed contracts with the New York bankers, Messrs. Brown Brothers and Company and Seligman and Company.

The Nicaraguan Government believes that if by a supreme effort it should obtain in Congress the approval of the said contracts, it would result only in increasing the discontent to-day existing in the country, due to its bad economic conditions. It therefore considers that it would be more advisable that the mentioned bankers, in view of the good faith with which the Nicaraguan Government has always dealt with them, agree to do without these contracts and effect an agreement with the Government respecting the sufficiency and reach of the law of moratorium, in the security that upon the expiration of the four months during which that law remains in force the Government will restore to the bankers all their rights in Nicaragua acquired through former contracts.

The Nicaraguan Government hopes that in the space of four months the Canal Treaty will be ratified by the Senate of the United States, and if this comes to pass it is disposed to take from the product of said treaty a sufficient amount to pay the overdue interest and, if possible, the principal of the debt to the bankers.

My Government trusts that the friendly efforts of your excellency will result in a satisfactory solution of this matter, both in the interest of Nicaragua and of the bankers, with whom my Government desires always to maintain the most complete harmony and understanding.

In anticipation I express to your excellency, in the name of the Nicaraguan Government and of myself, the assurance of our gratitude for the valued services which you have given us, and I renew [etc.]

Emiliano Chamorro.

Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.51/704.

[Document 1681]

Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State.

No. 133.] American Legation,
Managua, October 24, 1914.

Sir: Referring to my telegrams of September 10 and September 23, I have the honor to inform you, with regard to the contemplated action of the Nicaraguan General Assembly suspending the payment of debts, and interest on loans, both foreign and domestic, for a period of four months, that a law suspending the payment of domestic obligations has been passed by the Senate on October 8 and by the Chamber of Deputies on October 20, receiving the signature of the President the same day.

A second bill, suspending for four months from October 1, 1914, the payment of interest on the foreign debt and other liens secured by the Customs revenues, and devoting those revenues during that period to the general expenses of the Republic, has been passed by the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies on October 7 and 8 respectively and sent to the President, but has not yet received his signature, the matter awaiting, I believe, the completion of some new arrangement with the bankers.

I have [etc.]

Benjamin L. Jefferson.

The Minister of Nicaragua to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.51/705.

[Document 1682]

The Minister of Nicaragua to the Secretary of State.

As I had occasion to inform your excellency in a verbal conversation last Thursday, it has not been possible to reach with the bankers, Brown Brothers & Co. and J. & W. Seligman & Co., a satisfactory understanding which would fill completely the purposes of the Government and that are based in trying to improve the terrible economical crisis that the country is at present suffering under.

In the impossibility of obtaining a loan, my Government finds only one solution possible, which is to issue an indispensable amount of national currency (bills), the equivalent of one and a half million of córdobas (which equals the dollar), and to guarantee their emission; and in order that there should be no depreciation of the bills emitted, the Government will guarantee this issue with the product of a tax that will produce five hundred thousand dollars (córdobas) annually, eighty thousand córdobas from the tax on the abattoirs, and which can be duplicated, and twenty thousand córdobas from the excise tax.

Besides, as from this loan a part of the European creditors will be paid and who have asked the Government to make the issue and offering to accept the bills at par with the dollar, the amount so paid to the creditors can be reentered into the Fund of Conversion when the Canal Treaty is ratified.

My Government respectfully requests the opinion of your excellency on this subject matter.

Washington, D. C. , November 17, 1914.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister of Nicaragua. File No. 817.51/700.

[Document 1683]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister of Nicaragua.

Department of State,
Washington, November 19, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Minister: With reference to the Department’s note to you of October 14, 1914, in which reference was made to a cable addressed to you by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Nicaragua, requesting a loan of $50,000, I have the honor to inform you that a reply has been received from Brown Brothers & Company and Seligman & Company, in which they express their regret at not being able to comply with the request for this additional loan.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

[Untitled] File No. 817.51/707.

[Document 1684]

[Untitled]

No. 11.] Department of State,
Washington, November 19, 1914.

Sir: The Department of State acknowledges the receipt of your note of October 16, 1914, in which you state that the Nicaraguan Government will not undertake to obtain from the Nicaraguan Congress ratification of the proposed agreement with Messrs. Brown Brothers & Company and Seligman & Company, postponing for four months the payment of interest on the debt which the Government of Nicaragua owes to these bankers.

The Department of State views with sympathy the efforts which the Nicaraguan Government is making to arrange a difficult financial situation and will be pleased to receive any further information that you desire to place before it.

Accept [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

The Minister of Nicaragua to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.51/706.

[Document 1685]

The Minister of Nicaragua to the Secretary of State.

memorandum.

The Minister of Nicaragua presents his compliments to his excellency the Secretary of State and begs to inform his excellency that to-day he has received a cable from his Government advising that finally an agreement has been reached with the New York bankers, Messrs. Brown Brothers & Co. and J. & W. Seligman & Co., who will furnish the Government five hundred thousand cordobas in order to pay the salaries past due.

In view of this new agreement I respectfully request of your excellency to suspend for the time being all negotiations and consider it unnecessary to call upon the bankers or their representatives.

Legation of Nicaragua,
Washington , November 21, 1914.

Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.51/708.

[Document 1686]

Minister Jefferson to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Managua, November 29, 1914.

Nicaraguan Congress approves contract with bankers and adjourned yesterday.

Jefferson.

Proposed interoceanic canal treaty between the United States and Nicaragua, and protests of Salvador and Costa Rica in relation theretoProposed interoceanic canal treaty between the United States and Nicaragua, and protests of Salvador and Costa Rica in relation thereto6

6 Continued from For. Rel. 1913, pp. 1021–1034.

[1687] The Minister of Nicaragua to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Nicaragua, Washington , February 12, 1914.

File No. 817.812/61.

[1688] The Secretary of State to the Minister of Salvador.

Department of State, Washington, February 18, 1914.

File No. 817.812/49.

[1689] The Secretary of State to the Minister of Nicaragua.

Department of State, Washington, February 21, 1914.

File No. 817.812/61.

[1690] The Minister of Salvador to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Salvador, Washington, March 11, 1914.

File No. 817.812/64.

[1691] The Minister of Nicaragua to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Nicaragua, Washington, May 25, 1914.

File No. 817.812/77.

[1692] The Minister of Costa Rica to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Costa Riga, Washington, July 7, 1914.

File No. 817.812/85.

[1693] The Chargé d’Affaires of Salvador to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Salvador, Washington, July 8, 1914.

File No. 817.812/80.

[1694] The Secretary of State to the Minister of Costa Rica.

Department of State, Washington, July 16, 1914.

File No. 817.812/83a.

[1695] The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires of Salvador.

Department of State, Washington, July 16, 1914.

File No. 817.812/80.

[1696] The Minister of Costa Rica to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Costa Rica, Washington, July 18, 1914.

File No. 817.812/86.

[1697] The Chargé d’Affaires of Salvador to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Salvador, Washington, July 21, 1914.

File No. 817.812/87.

[1698] The Secretary of State to Minister Hale.

Department of State, Washington, July 24, 1914.

File No. 817.812/106a.

[1699] The Secretary of State to the Minister of Costa Rica.

Department of State, Washington, August 1, 1914.

File No. 817.812/76.

[1700] The President of Nicaragua to the Minister of Nicaragua.

Managua, August 3, 1914.

File No. 817.812/93.

[1701] The Secretary of State to the President.

Department of State, Washington , August 8, 1914.

File No. 817.812/102a.

[1702] Minister Hale to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, San José, August 13, 1914.

File No. 817.812/134.

[1703] The Minister of Costa Rica to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Costa Riga, Washington, August 31, 1914.

File No. 817.812/100.

[1704] The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson.

Department of State, Washington, December 16, 1914.

File No. 817.812/102b.

The Minister of Nicaragua to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.812/61.

[Document 1687]

The Minister of Nicaragua to the Secretary of State.

[Memorandum—Translation—Extract.]

1. On February 2 I transcribed by cable to President Diaz the terms of the latest draft of the Canal Treaty now in negotiation between the United States and Nicaragua.* * *

2. On February 4 I received a cable from my Government advising me that President Diaz was gratified that the Secretary of State had agreed to the draft of the Canal Treaty; and on the same day he sent a cable to President Wilson in the following terms: The effect of the Platt Amendment on Cuba has been so satisfactory that, since your Government is considering a canal convention with Nicaragua, I respectfully request that said convention be made to embody the substance of the Platt Amendment, so that my countrymen may see Nicaragua’s credit improved, her natural resources developed, and peace assured throughout the land. I believe that revolutions will cease if your Government can see its way clear to grant the addition of the Amendment as requested.

3. I have also received a cable from President Diaz instructing me to act with the greatest possible urgency, in order that the Treaty, in the said terms, be immediately submitted to the American Senate for its approval.

In previous conversations with the Secretary of State I have had occasion to inform him as to the terrible economic situation now prevailing in Nicaragua, to the point of a practical bankruptcy of the trade of the country; and further, that besides claims of natives and foreigners to whom the Government owes large sums for moneys loaned and merchandise supplied during the war of 1912, there are pending other claims by German, British and Italian subjects who have had recourse to diplomatic channels in demanding payment of their bills.

The Government of Nicaragua thinks that the best mode of settling its economic problem is to be found in the conclusion of the Treaty with the United States as proposed, which, while improving Nicaragua’s credit, guarantees peace, so desired by Nicaraguans, exhausted by continual revolutions.

The present Government of Nicaragua has adopted, frankly and decisively, a policy of rapprochement towards the United States, seeking through that friendship the assurance of peace in Nicaragua, the development of its natural resources, and a means of improving its finances; and in the pursuance of this policy it has moved steadily forward without regard to the protests and opposition of certain Latin countries. I believe, therefore, that in accordance with this spirit of amity the time has arrived for the Government of the United States to lend some aid to Nicaragua.

To effect this, we confide in the interest shown by President Wilson in the future and happiness of Central American countries, and in the altruism and nobility of heart of the Secretary of State, Mr. Bryan.

Legation of Nicaragua,
Washington , February 12, 1914.

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Salvador. File No. 817.812/49.

[Document 1688]

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Salvador.

Department of State,
Washington, February 18, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received and has maturely considered the protest7 which you were so good as to address to it on the 21st of October last for the purpose of reserving any rights and interests of your Government which might be affected or impaired by the grant to the United States by the Republic of Nicaragua, within the latter’s jurisdiction, of the right to establish a naval station on the Gulf of Fonseca.

In your protest the position is taken that the Gulf of Fonseca is a territorial bay whose waters are within the jurisdiction of the bordering States. This position the Department is not disposed to controvert. Your protest, however, further claims that, after the dissolution of the Republic of Central America, the States of Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua remained “the joint lawful owners and sovereigns of the Gulf of Fonseca as they now hold it,” no treaty or agreement having been made to bring to an end the condition of “undivided and joint ownership” which previously existed. The grounds of this claim are not evident, nor do they appear to have been admitted by the bordering States, namely, Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua. From the fact that the Republic of Nicaragua deems itself to have the right to make the concession to which the project relates, it is necessarily to be inferred that that Government regards the jurisdiction over the Gulf of Fonseca as belonging to them severally and not as belonging to them in undivided and joint ownership. The Department understands that this has been and is the view of the Government of Honduras. It would also appear to have been heretofore the view of the Government of Salvador, as is shown by the treaty between Salvador and Honduras of April 10, 1884, by which the boundary between Salvador and Honduras was extended across the Gulf of Fonseca. This treaty, it is true, never became effective for the reason that the Congress of Honduras failed to approve it; but it is understood that this failure of approval was not due to any supposition that it involved the division of a proprietorship which was previously undivided and joint. On the contrary, the treaty seems to have presupposed that each of the three bordering States claimed as its own a certain part of the Gulf and asserted jurisdiction only over such part. The Department is advised that this is the condition of things which exists to-day.

The protest makes a further claim to the effect that the establishment by the United States of a naval station in the Gulf of Fonseca would radically alter the political situation in that quarter in such manner as to put in jeopardy important interests of Salvador and Honduras. In this relation the protest points out that the interests of Nicaragua in the Gulf are much smaller than those of Honduras and Salvador, and that, while Nicaragua has no port of entry in the Gulf, Salvador and Honduras have therein two such ports, La Unión and Amapala, through which a large part of the commerce of the two countries is conducted.

The Government of the United States desires to give the most respectful consideration to these representations, but is obliged to think that they rest upon apprehensions which are hardly justified by the circumstances. In establishing a naval station in the Gulf of Fonseca, the Government of the United States would have at heart the interests of Central America no less than its own. Particularly would it have in view the safeguarding of the local sovereignty; and to this end this Government would be prepared to consider a concession either from Salvador or from Honduras, or from both of them,| similar to that which Nicaragua has indicated a willingness to make.

With reference to the objection that the proposed concession by Nicaragua would form an obstacle to the restoration of the Union of the State of Central America, the Department cherishes the hope that your Government will, upon further consideration of all the circumstances, be inclined to view the subject in a different light. The concession would not give to the United States any right or interest in the political affairs of Central America beyond that which now exists and would in no respect form an obstacle to the political union of the Central American States in case they should at any time wish to take such a step.

The protest finally suggests that the concession of a naval station to the United States in the Gulf of Fonseca would require the plebiscitary authorization of the peoples whose territory and jurisdictional rights would be affected. This objection seems of necessity to rest primarily upon the claim now made that the waters of the Gulf of Fonseca belong to the bordering states in undivided and joint ownership, for on any other supposition the question of a plebiscite could hardly be raised by Salvador in respect of a concession proposed to be made by the Republic of Nicaragua in waters which the Nicaraguan Government evidently regards as being within the exclusive jurisdiction of Nicaragua.

The claim of undivided and joint ownership having heretofore been discussed, it is hoped that the Government of Salvador will, for the reason above set forth, concur with this Government in the view that the claim does not rest upon solid foundation.

Accept [etc.]

William Jennings Bryan.

7  For. Rel. 1913, pp. 1027–1031.

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Nicaragua. File No. 817.812/61.

[Document 1689]

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Nicaragua.

Department of State,
Washington, February 21, 1914.

The Secretary of State of the United States of America presents his compliments to the Minister of Nicaragua and has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the memorandum of February 12 presented to the Department of State by the Minister in regard to the proposed canal treaty between the United States and Nicaragua, and to say that the substance of the memorandum has been communicated to the President.

The Minister of Salvador to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.812/64.

[Document 1690]

The Minister of Salvador to the Secretary of State. 8

[Translation.]

Legation of Salvador,
Washington, March 11, 1914.

Excellency: Under special instructions from my Government, I have the honor to answer your excellency’s polite note dated February 18 last, in which you were pleased to state the reasons for the Department of State’s opinion that there is no substantial ground for the protest which I brought to your knowledge on the 21st of October 1913, for the protection of any right or interest of the Republic of Salvador that might be affected or impaired by the consummation of the concession granted to your excellency’s Government by that of Nicaragua for the establishment of a naval station in the Gulf of Fonseca.

Your excellency declares that the Department is not disposed to dispute the point that the Gulf of Fonseca is a territorial bay whose waters are under the jurisdiction of the bordering States, and that disposition of your excellency’s is well understood by my Government because it bears upon a fact which is the essential foundation of the protest and which it deems incontrovertible.

Since your excellency, without doing me the honor of arguing to the contrary, confines yourself to declare that the grounds upon which my Government rests its contention that the Gulf of Fonseca is the joint property, as it actually is, of the States of Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua are not clear, and inasmuch as, on the other hand, no convention or agreement has been arranged to make an end of that state of undivided common interests, I let every one of the reasons presented by me on this point in the aforesaid protest stand. But inasmuch as your excellency further believes that those fundamental points do not appear to have been accepted by the bordering States, I venture to say to you that the terms of the Treaty of April 10, 1884, to which I refer in my protest, are clear in the sense that the purpose of the signatory Governments was to do away with the indivision of the Gulf of Fonseca, and do not afford the inference which your excellency appears to have drawn, that the High Contracting Parties previously supposed, when they concluded the treaty, that every one of the bordering States claimed as its own a certain part of the Gulf over which they exercised jurisdiction.

That Treaty, which never was raised to the rank of law, is one of the best proofs that the Contracting States recognized the Gulf of Fonseca as joint undivided property.

Your excellency is pleased to tell me that your Government would be prepared to take into consideration a concession from Salvador like that voluntarily offered by Nicaragua, and, on this point I have to say $o you that Article 38 of our Fundamental Charter is positive in forbidding the constituted powers to conclude or approve treaties, or conventions which in any way impair the territorial integrity or national sovereignty.

The Government of the United States whose boundless respect of its institutions is so justly and universally recognized, gives me the fullest confidence to hope that your excellency will value as it deserves my Government’s due observance of constitutional law.

Both the people of Salvador and my Government, true lovers of the Union of Central America, will appreciate to its full value your excellency’s declaration that in no sense will the United States oppose obstacles to the political union of the Central American States.

I think I have demonstrated that the waters of the Gulf of Fonseca belong, as undivided joint property, to the riparian Republics, and consequently my Government insists that the concession of a naval station in that Gulf would require the plebiscitary approval of the peoples whose territorial and jurisdictional rights may be affected.

I cannot conclude this note, Mr. Secretary, without confirming the views offered in my protest already referred to and expressing to you my Government’s confidence that your excellency will do it justice.

I renew [etc.]

Francisco Dueñas.

8 Receipt acknowledged by the Department of State July 11, 1914.

The Minister of Nicaragua to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.812/77.

[Document 1691]

The Minister of Nicaragua to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Legation of Nicaragua,
Washington, May 25, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: Through the “Diario de El Salvador” the Government of Nicaragua has learned of the reply that your excellency made, in a note of the 18th of last February, to the protest of the Government of Salvador against the concession in the Gulf of Fonseca made by Nicaragua to the United States, and of the rejoinder made to that note by the Minister of Salvador at Washington, in which rejoinder it is held that the Gulf of Fonseca is not a territorial bay whose waters are comprised within the jurisdiction of the bordering States, and that there exists no convention or agreement terminating the joint and undivided dominion over that bay.

In order to disprove such allegations and to establish the exclusive right of Nicaragua to that part of the Bay of Fonseca that is within its territorial jurisdiction, I have received special instructions from my Government to bring to your excellency’s notice the existence of a document a copy of which I beg leave to enclose and which is the protocol signed by the Boundary Commission of Nicaragua and Honduras and has probative force in boundary questions between the two Republics, which force springs from section 1 of Article II of the Gámez-Bonilla Treaty of 1894.

The exclusive rights 6f Nicaragua to the waters under consideration were defined by the demarkation of the boundary line between Nicaragua and Honduras effected in 1900–1904 by virtue of the aforesaid Gámez-Bonilla Treaty, which line was run from the center of the Bay of Fonseca to the Totecacinte Gap in the Dipilto Range.

The said demarkation is recorded in eight journals signed at San Marcos de Colón, Republic of Honduras, by the said Honduro-Nicaraguan Boundary Commission created by Article I of the said treaty. The agreement of Nicaragua and Honduras as to the partition of the waters of the bay is shown in the second of the eight journals above referred to.

I beg leave to enclose, together with the said instrument, a copy of the map of the Bay of Fonseca, showing the course of the dividing line.

These documents afford superabundant evidence of the fact that since 1900 Nicaragua does not hold the waters of the Bay of Fonseca in joint and undivided dominion with the Republics of Salvador and Honduras, and that therefore the negotiations now pending between the United States and Nicaragua in regard to the said Bay of Fonseca bear on that which clearly and evidently comes within Nicaragua’s dominion.

Before closing this note I must say to your excellency that in granting the naval station in the Gulf of Fonseca to the United States Nicaragua is fully conscious of the rights it holds over those waters in the part adjoining the Nicaraguan coast, and that if its dominion over those waters can no longer be questioned by Honduras—a bordering nation—much less can it be questioned by one that is not adjoining.

I avail [etc.]

Emiliano Chamorro.

[Inclosure—Extract—Translation.]

[Untitled]

journal ii.

At San Marcos de Colón, June 12, 1900.

The Boundary Joint Commission of the Republics of Honduras and Nicaragua, having before it the public documents produced by both parties in support of their respective rights; the said documents being the territorial titles made and issued in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries by the supreme authority of the former Kingdom of Guatemala, of which the colonial provinces of Comayagua and León formed part; the said documents designating the jurisdiction under which come the places therein referred to whose boundaries in the direction of the above-mentioned provinces generally coincide in one line; there being shown no other demarkation requiring attention in any other document of another nature or of superior force; and that part of the Gulf or Bay of Fonseca adjoining their coasts, except where there is between these the distance of six marine leagues, belonging to both States; after having made a careful survey of the territory lying between the said Gulf or Bay of Fonseca and the Botija Ridge; after performing the appropriate geodetic operations; and after consulting such charts as were deemed acceptable—

Agrees that the dividing line between the territories of Honduras and Nicaragua in the section referred to in the preceding section is fixed as follows:

From the point known by the name of Amatillo, in the lower part of the Rio Negro, the dividing line is a straight line run toward the volcano of Cosiguina, in an astronomical direction south eighty-six degrees thirty minutes west (S. 86° 30’ W.) and over a distance of about thirty-seven kilometers (37 kms) to the middle point of the Bay of Fonseca, at the same distance from the coast of each Republic, on this side; and from that point follows the division of the waters of the Bay along a line also equidistant from the said coasts until it reaches the middle of the distance lying between the northern part of Cosiguina Point and the southern part of Tigre Island. From the said Amatillo Point the line continues along the middle of the above-mentioned Rio Negro, upstream [etc.]

The Minister of Costa Rica to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.812/85.

[Document 1692]

The Minister of Costa Rica to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Legation of Costa Riga,
Washington, July 7, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: I have the honor to bring to your excellency’s knowledge that, having been informed of what your excellency told me concerning the draft treaty with Nicaragua now awaiting the ratification of the Senate, to the effect that it contains a clause similar to the one known as the “Platt Amendment”, which would implicitly establish a protectorate by the United States of America over that Republic, my Government has instructed me to lay before your excellency, with great respect, a formal protest against that clause.

My Government believes any weakening of the autonomy of the Republic of Nicaragua would seriously affect the autonomy of the Republic of Costa Rica, considering the special nature of the relations between the States of Central America since the beginning of their existence.

Without entering into other considerations, I shall limit myself to stating that the institutions created by the treaties signed in the Central American Peace Conference held in Washington in 1907, beginning, with the Court of Justice maintained by the five Republics, would have to disappear under a protectorate, since those treaties were concluded for the express purpose of strengthening the relations and fomenting the common interests of the said five Republics.

In fulfilling the instructions that I have received, I am actuated by the trust, always held by my Government, in the lofty spirit that guides that of your excellency.

Accept [etc.]

J. B. Calvo.

The Chargé d’Affaires of Salvador to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.812/80.

[Document 1693]

The Chargé d’Affaires of Salvador to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Legation of Salvador,
Washington, July 8, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to bring to your excellency’s knowledge that, having heard that the draft treaty with Nicaragua now pending in the Senate for ratification contains a clause like the so-called “Platt Amendment,” which would establish the protectorate of the United States of America over that Central American Republic, my Government has instructed me to lay before your excellency, with the greatest respect, a formal protest against that clause.

My Government holds that the loss or partial destruction of Nicaragua’s autonomy seriously affects the autonomy of Salvador, considering the peculiar ties that have always bound the Central American States.

The contemplated protectorate would nullify the Conventions of the Washington Conference (Central American Conference of Washington, 1907), since those treaties were concluded for the purpose of making stronger and closer the special relations of the Central | American States, maintaining peace and promoting their common I interests; for it is an indestructible fact that the interests and progress of all and every one of the States are one and the same.

My Government believes that, conformably to the treaties between Salvador and the United States, the Nicaraguan treaty under consideration can not be submitted to the Senate for ratification while there is pending the discussion raised by the protest laid by it before your excellency on October 21, 1913, for the protection of the rights and interests of Salvador that would be affected by the concession granted to your excellency’s Government for the establishment of a naval station in the Gulf of Fonseca.

In respectfully filing this protest, my Government not only performs a duty placed upon it by the Fundamental Charter of the country, but also, faithfully voices the sentiment of the nation.

I have great pleasure in renewing [etc.]

Carlos A. Meza.

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Costa Rica. File No. 817.812/83a.

[Document 1694]

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Costa Rica.

Department of State,
Washington, July 16, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Calvo: I beg to acknowledge receipt of your communication of July 7, and to say that your Government has been misinformed in respect to the proposed treaty with Nicaragua. The negotiations have not been concluded and no treaty has’ been presented to the Senate for ratification. The Department is conferring, in confidence, with the Foreign Relations Committee of the Senate in regard to a tentative draft, the terms of which have not been made public. If the matter in which your Government has expressed an interest becomes a matter for practical consideration, we shall be pleased to examine into the protest which you present.

With assurances [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires of Salvador. File No. 817.812/80.

[Document 1695]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires of Salvador.

Department of State,
Washington, July 16, 1914.

Sir: I beg to acknowledge receipt of your communication of July 8, and to say that your Government has been misinformed in respect to the proposed treaty with Nicaragua. The negotiations have not been concluded and no treaty has been presented to the Senate for ratification. The Department is conferring, in confidence, with the Foreign Relations Committee of the Senate in regard to a tentative draft, the terms of which have not been made public. If the matter in which your Government has expressed an interest, becomes a matter for practical consideration, we shall be pleased to examine into the protest which you present.

With assurances [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Minister of Costa Rica to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.812/86.

[Document 1696]

The Minister of Costa Rica to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Legation of Costa Rica,
Washington, July 18, 1914.

My Dear Mr. Bryan: I beg to acknowledge receipt of your letter of July 16, in which, referring to the note of this Legation of the 7th of this month, you say that my Government has been misinformed in respect to the proposed treaty with Nicaragua; that the negotiations have not been concluded and no treaty has been presented to the Senate for its ratification; that the Department is conferring, in confidence, with the Foreign Relations Committee of the Senate in regard to a tentative draft, the terms of which have not been made public; and that, if the matter in which my Government has expressed an interest becomes a matter for practical consideration, you will be pleased to examine into the protest that I presented.

Permit me to express to you, in answer thereto, that the said note of this Legation states that my Government was informed that the proposed treaty with Nicaragua would have added to it a clause, similar to the one known as the Platt Amendment, and that this unequivocal idea was what I transmitted, which in my note reads as follows: [Quotes the first paragraph of his note of July 7.]

Thus the information transmitted to my Government was the same that I obtained from you directly.

It could have been a mistake on my part, in a certain way, to say that the treaty was awaiting ratification by the Senate, but in such case it has its explanation in various recent acts of the Senate in connection with this matter; in that in no other way has this document been generally mentioned; in the text of the minutes of the meetings of Congress; and in the very fact that it lies before the Foreign Relations Committee of the Senate, although only in consultation, as you kindly inform me.

In regard to the precise terms of the preliminary draft alluded to, if it is true that they have not been made public it is also true that the essential features of the so-called Platt Amendment are well known, and therefore for the purpose of the protest it was not indispensable to insert a literal copy of the clause referred to.

In any case, I truly appreciate the willingness shown by the Department to enter into consideration of the protest, entertaining no doubt that this will be taken into consideration at the present time and also if the event contemplated in the protest becomes a fact, said protest having been presented by virtue of the instructions received from my Government, which, in accord with the national sentiment, believes that the autonomy of the Republic of Costa Rica would be endangered by any lessening that the autonomy of the Republic of Nicaragua might suffer, considering the special nature of the relations between the States of Central America since the beginning of their existence; and that you will consider in the same way the points relative to the treaties signed at the Central American Peace Conference held in Washington in 1907.

With assurances [etc.]

J. B. Calvo.

The Chargé d’Affaires of Salvador to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.812/87.

[Document 1697]

The Chargé d’Affaires of Salvador to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Legation of Salvador,
Washington, July 21, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: I have had the honor to receive your excellency’s note dated the 16th instant in which, in acknowledging receipt, of mine of the 8th of the same month, your excellency tells me that my Government has been misinformed in regard to the treaty with Nicaragua; that the negotiations have not been concluded and that no treaty whatever has been referred to the Senate for its ratification; that the Department of State is in confidential consultation with the Committee on Foreign Relations over a tentative draft the terms of which have not been made public; and that if the subject matter in which my Government has evinced interest should come to be taken into practical consideration, your excellency will be pleased to examine the protest that I submitted.

I have to say to your excellency with all due respect that the context of my protest aforesaid shows that it refers to a draft treaty with Nicaragua, but availing myself of your excellency offer to examine my protest in the event of the subject becoming one of practical consideration, I let it stand as also presented for and pending that contingency.

Pursuant to the instruction I have received and referred to heretofore, I have to say that my Government’s action, aiming to safeguard the integrity of Salvador’s autonomy which would be impaired if a protectorate were eventually established over Nicaragua, is perfectly legitimate. The special ties and relations which have always existed among the Central American States are their whole history and constitute the Central American Public Law embodied in the Political Constitution of each State as an essential part of its existence.

Those ties and that law are entitled to full consideration and respect; they form the common patrimony of each and every State and the separate action of any one of them calculated to destroy them is neither just nor constitutional.

I beg your excellency to consider this communication as part of my protest above referred to.

I have great pleasure in renewing [etc.]

Carlos A. Meza.

The Secretary of State to Minister Hale. File No. 817.812/106a.

[Document 1698]

The Secretary of State to Minister Hale.

Department of State,
Washington, July 24, 1914.

My dear Mr. Hale: The Costa Rican Government seems to be very actively opposed to the proposed treaty with Nicaragua. This treaty covers an option on a canal route and a naval base in Fonseca Bay. Please explain to the Government that they need not fear that any rights that they have will be disregarded. Their treaty with Nicaragua does not require that Nicaragua must secure the consent of Costa Rica, but only provides that Costa Rica shall be consulted, and the words of the treaty indicate that the consultation is to be for the purpose of protecting Costa Rica from any injury in case the canal is built. This Government will, of course, safeguard Costa Rica from injury in case a canal is built along the Costa Rican boundary, and we have assured the Costa Rican Government through Minister Calvo that we also are ready and willing to purchase an option from Costa Rica on terms as favorable as those given by Nicaragua. We are also willing to lease a naval base near the southern extremity of Costa Rica, but were assured that Costa Rica did not desire to make such a lease.

As to the Platt Amendment, we have explained to Minister Calvo that that has not been decided upon. The treaty which the Senate Committee is considering in confidence is purely a tentative draft. We shall be glad to examine into the protest of Costa Rica in case the conference results in anything that affects Costa Rica’s treaty rights. We do not understand why Costa Rica should take so active! a part in the fight against the treaty. She has no reason to doubt the disinterested-friendship of the United States and no reason to fear that any harm will be done her by any course taken by the United States.

Please let us know whether you find any hostile feeling there, and, if so, what the foundation is.

Yours [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Costa Rica. File No. 817.812/76.

[Document 1699]

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Costa Rica.

Department of State,
Washington, August 1, 1914.

Sir: While the communication from your Government to the Department of April 17, 1913,9 has been answered verbally in conversations with you, it has been called to my attention that your note has not received a written reply; and I now beg to embody in this letter the substance of the Department’s position on the subject of your Government’s protest against the proposed treaty between the United States and Nicaragua.

The Treaty of April 15, 1858, between Costa Rica and Nicaragua, to which your note refers, has had careful consideration, and you may be sure that this Government has no intention to produce a violation of any of its provisions, if indeed the provisions of that treaty, referred to in your note, may be considered as still existing.

It is not perceived that Nicaragua, by the proposed treaty with the United States, has done or contemplates doing anything that can be regarded as a violation of the Treaty of 1858. The pending treaty between Nicaragua and the United States provides for the sale of an option on a canal route, which may lie entirely within and affect only the territory of Nicaragua, or which may be along the route which, for a part of the way, may follow the boundary line between that country and Costa Rica. Even without a treaty between Costa Rica and Nicaragua, it is not perceived how the latter could convey any rights not hers to convey, or that she could effectually convey any of the territory or substantive rights of Costa Rica; nor is it perceived that by the pending treaty with the United States Nicaragua undertakes to convey any rights which belong to the Government of Costa Rica.

An examination of the Treaty of 1858 fails to disclose that the parties thereto intended to make the development or improvement of the one dependent on the consent of the other. It is only where their certain stated joint and common interests are directly affected that either can be said to be under any obligation to consult the other. The interests of Costa Rica which the Treaty of 1858 contemplated, and about which Costa Rica should be consulted when the same are directly affected, are from an examination of the treaty clearly not attempted to be granted or prejudiced by the proposed treaty of Nicaragua with the United States.

According to the award made by Mr. Cleveland in 1888, as quoted in your note, it appears that the consultive right of Costa Rica was to exist only “where the territory belonging to Costa Rica is occupied or flooded, or where there is encroachment upon certain harbors injurious to Costa Rica, or where there is such an obstruction or deviation of the River San Juan as to destroy or seriously impair its navigation, or that of its branches, where Costa Rica is entitled to navigate the same.” It can hardly be contended that the proposed treaty even remotely affects any of these rights claimed for Costa Rica. As before stated, it is only when a canal constructed through Nicaragua would occupy or flood Costa Rican territory or encroach injuriously upon harbors in which Costa Rica has substantive rights, or obstruct the navigation of a stream which Costa Rica may be entitled of right to navigate, that Costa Rica could claim to be consulted under asserted rights under the Treaty of 1858. But the option secured by the United States from Nicaragua by the pending treaty can not be said to remotely affect any of these rights asserted by Costa Rica under the Treaty of 1858. The claim that an interoceanic canal, when constructed through Nicaragua, might eventually affect some of the territory or rights of Costa Rica is too speculative and conjectural to serve as a basis of a present protest against the grant of the option secured by the treaty with Nicaragua.

The sale of the option does not necessarily involve the immediate construction of a canal; no time is set for the beginning of the work; the Government of the United States secures the right to build a canal in the future, a right to be exercised at any time whenever, in the opinion of this Government, the exigencies make its construction advisable.

Permit me also to direct the attention of your Government to the fact that on December 1, 1900, Nicaragua and Costa Rica separately signed protocols of agreement with the United States, whereby each of the said Governments in the protocol signed by it became engaged to enter into negotiations with the United States to settle the plans and agreements in detail found necessary to accomplish the ownership and control by the United States of an interoceanic canal route from San Juan del Norte on the Caribbean Sea to Brito on the Pacific Ocean, for such of its territory as might be found necessary or advisable on which to construct a canal. The protocol with Nicaragua was signed with the knowledge of and without dissent by Costa Rica, and the principle that the United States might deal with each of said Governments separately in respect to the acquisition of rights and grants for an interoceanic canal was accepted by Costa Rica. Wherefore it appears to the Department that, whatever may have been the treaty agreements between Costa Rica and Nicaragua, the action, of the two Governments in separately agreeing to enter into separate negotiations with the United States for the cession of so much of its territory as might be found necessary or advisable for an interoceanic canal, will estop Costa Rica from objecting to negotiations on the part of the United States with Nicaragua for the cession of any of the latter’s territory, lands, waters, or rights, which may be found necessary or convenient for the construction of such a canal, especially where the negotiations comprehend merely the granting of an option by Nicaragua to the United States for a canal route through its territory. It appears to the Department that whenever it shall be determined that the construction of an interoceanic canal through Nicaragua shall comprehend any of the territory or substantive rights of Costa Rica, it will then be time enough for the United States and Costa Rica to consider negotiations for the acquisition by the former of such territory or rights of the latter as may be found to be involved, and I wish to renew the suggestion made to you in our conversation that the Department will consider entering into such negotiations with Costa Rica, when she shall signify a desire to enter thereupon.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

9  For. Rel. 1913, pp. 1022–1023.

The President of Nicaragua to the Minister of Nicaragua. File No. 817.812/93.

[Document 1700]

The President of Nicaragua to the Minister of Nicaragua. 10

[Telegram—Translation.]

Managua, August 3, 1914.

Canal treaty which you sent me in your cable of to-day meets with my entire approbation. Advise me when the treaty has been signed.

Diaz.

10 Translation left at the Department by the Minister on August 4, 1914.

The Secretary of State to the President. File No. 817.812/102a.

[Document 1701]

The Secretary of State to the President.

The undersigned, the Secretary of State, has the honor to lay before the President with a view to its transmission to the Senate to receive the advice and consent of that body to its ratification, a Convention11 between the United States and Nicaragua, signed at Washington on August 5, 1914, granting to the United States, in return for a money payment for the benefit of the Republic of Nicaragua, the exclusive proprietary rights necessary and convenient for the construction, operation and maintenance of an interoceanic canal by a Nicaraguan route, the lease for ninety-nine years of Great and Little Corn Islands in the Caribbean Sea, and the right to establish a naval base on the Gulf of Fonseca.

Respectfully submitted,

W. J. Bryan.
Department of State,
Washington , August 8, 1914.

11 Not printed.

Minister Hale to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.812/134.

[Document 1702]

Minister Hale to the Secretary of State.

[Extract]

American Legation,
San José, August 13, 1914.

My dear Mr. Bryan: I received your letter of July 24 by Monday’s mail (10th) and at once set about attending to the matter concerned. I have had a long talk with the President. I made known to him the contents of your letter. I told him that I had come here a year ago with a message of peace and friendship from you and the President, and that this (my speech at the presentation of my credentials) had been published in the papers of this city and commended; but that, that courtesy over, I had seen nothing but abuse of my country and people, and especially of the present administration, in the five daily papers published here. He replied that the papers did not represent Costa Rican sentiment, being edited by foreigners—which is just what his predecessor, President Jiménez, said to me when I complained of the newspaper assault on President Wilson over the head of Mayor-elect Mitchell of New York, then a visitor in San Jose, an account of which I sent to the Department—and that the Government and people of Costa Rica had nothing but the sincerest friendship for the Government and people of the United States. I asked him why, then, were they so warmly opposing our Nicaragua negotiations. The President is a finely-bred man—as is the case with his predecessor, Jiménez, and all the public men of this country—and seemed to hesitate to express himself. Finally he said that, considering the relation of Costa Rica to the subject, he thought Costa Rica should have been consulted. He intimated that their national pride had been touched. I referred to your assurance to Minister Calvo that our Government is ready to purchase an option on terms as favorable as those given by Nicaragua. He said that Costa Rica did not wish for money—I understood him to mean a money payment—but only wished that their rights be respected. I inquired how. He said, by recognizing their interest in the canal. That suggested a new idea and I asked if he meant that Costa Rica should have a share in the ownership of the canal when constructed. He said that that was his meaning.

I believe that a treaty could be arranged with this Government upon the terms suggested; that is, to give Costa Rica, in return for its consent, a share (of course, it would necessarily be a small share) in the canal as a going concern.

In this connection, the President said that Mr. Matamoros, the Costa Rican engineer of the Boundary Commission (who, you will recall, was of the party Mr. Calvo had to dine with us at the Shore-ham, the night before I left Washington), had assured him that a sea-level route for a canal between the oceans existed wholly within Costa Rican territory, which came to his knowledge when he was with Menocal’s party in the eighties. He said that Matamoros had offered to make a complete survey of the route for 30,000 colones ($13,953). He added that his Government’s present financial condition did not warrant the expenditure.

I think it would be well if you would have the Department instruct me to open negotiations with Mr. Matamoros on this subject, for there is no comparison in the value of a sea-level canal, particularly in this age of the rapidly increasing size of ships, as contrasted with the fixed dimensions of a lock canal.* * * Most truly yours,

E. J. Hale.

The Minister of Costa Rica to the Secretary of State. File No. 817.812/100.

[Document 1703]

The Minister of Costa Rica to the Secretary of State. 12

Legation of Costa Riga,
Washington, August 31, 1914.

Excellency: Although informally, I know that the latest treaty with Nicaragua has been or shortly will be submitted to the consideration of the Senate. I have no knowledge of the textual wording of that important document but from the information at hand I may draw the conclusion that the rights of Costa Rica are left in the same situation of disregard in which they were placed by the original treaty that is known to us. The reasons which Costa Rica considered more than sufficient for the presentation of her resolute but respectful protest against this act—which Costa Rica considers not only violative of her national sovereignty but also violative of the existing treaties with the Republic of Nicaragua which have so clearly and distinctly received the official recognition of the United States—are therefore still left standing.

President Cleveland’s award first decides that the Cañas-Jérez Treaty of 1858 is valid, and Article VIII of that convention says: Should the canal or transit contracts entered into before the Government of Nicaragua had knowledge of this convention lapse for any reason whatever, Nicaragua binds itself not to conclude any other contract for the same purpose without first hearing the opinion of the Government of Costa Rica respecting the difficulties to both countries that may attend the transaction, etc.

The views of the Government of Costa Rica were not sought at the appropriate time, as provided by the Treaty of 1858, when the Chamorro-Weitzel treaty and the present Chamorro-Bryan treaty were drawn up. There was obvious violation of the Treaty of 1858 and disregard of President Cleveland’s award: a sufficient ground to warrant a declaration of war on the part of Costa Rica had we been less peaceful by temperament and entertained no fear of gravely compromising the great interests of growing civilization achieved through so many efforts and sacrifices. There is also a lively hope resting on the sense of justice that has animated the Government of the United States whenever there was a question of invading our rights.

President Cleveland’s award further provides that “the Republic of Costa Rica can deny to the Republic of Nicaragua the right of deviating the waters of the River San Juan in case such deviation will result in the destruction or serious impairment of the navigation of the said river or any of its branches at any point where Costa Rica is entitled to navigate the same.”

“The Republic of Nicaragua,” adds the award, “remains bound not to make any grants for canal purposes across her territory without first asking the opinion of the Republic of Costa Rica, as provided in Article VIII of the Treaty of Limits of April 15, 1858.”

And in the opinion of the illustrious arbitrator that opinion ceases to be advisory only to be converted into a requisite declaration of consent when the construction of the canal involves an injury to the rights of Costa Rica. Now the award defining those natural rights of Costa Rica goes on to say: “The natural rights of the Republic of Costa Rica alluded to in the said stipulation are the rights which, in view of the boundaries fixed by the said Treaty of Limits, she possesses in the soil thereby recognized as belonging exclusively to her; the rights which she possesses in the harbors of San Juan del Norte and Salinas Bay; and the rights which she possesses in so much of the River San Juan as lies more than three English miles below Castillo Viejo, measuring from the exterior fortifications of the said castle as the same existed in the year 1858; and perhaps other rights not here particularly specified. These rights are to be deemed injured in any case where the territory belonging to the Republic of Costa Rica is occupied or flooded; where there is an encroachment upon either of said harbors injurious to Costa Rica; or where there is such an obstruction or deviation of the River San Juan as to destroy or seriously impair the navigation of the said river or any of its branches at any point where Costa Rica is entitled to navigate the same.”

Years thereafter, when the Government of the United States thought seriously of building the interoceanic canal and appointed that most distinguished commission styled the Isthmian Canal Commission, or Walker Commission, the commission submitted that noted report of November 16, 1908, in whose Chapter VIII dealing with “Rights, Privileges and Franchises” is found the following: “The treaties bearing on the Nicaragua route must first be considered, these including not only the treaties concluded with the Republic of Nicaragua but also those to which the Republic of Costa Rica was a contracting party, since the geographical situation requires the consent of both Governments before the canal can be built; over that route; for, however small may be the part of the territory! of the last-named Republic that will be used in any of the plans under consideration, a good deal of it will be affected.” To that eminent commission the history of the treaties concluded with a view to the opening of the Nicaragua canal made it evident that the work “could not be carried on without the consent and authority of Costa Rica:”

Lastly, the Department of State is aware of the protocol signed by the United States simultaneously with the Republics of Costa Rica and Nicaragua for the purpose of securing to itself those preliminary rights which it deemed sufficient to insure future definitive property rights over the canal. Then and at all times the United States explicitly recognized the rights of Costa Rica, and this would be the only time at which, while tacitly recognizing them as the Secretary of State has done on more than one occasion, a precedent would be established which might later cause disturbances of grave consequence to us.

It would therefore be highly expedient from the standpoint of international justice to insert in the body of the treaty with Nicaragua a clause, paragraph or sentence which would make it clear that the rights of Costa Rica are not included in the present negotiation with Nicaragua.

All the precedents of righteous behavior on the part of the United States which the Secretary of State will find in the highly authoritative report of the Isthmian Canal Commission will sanction that step which, without in the least hampering the success of the treaty, will afford just satisfaction to my country.

This occasion affords me the honor of renewing [etc.]

R. Brenes Mesén.

12 Receipt acknowledged November 21, 1914.

The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson. File No. 817.812/102b.

[Document 1704]

The Secretary of State to Minister Jefferson.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, December 16, 1914.

Senate Committee favorably reported Nicaraguan treaty to-day. Hope to secure consideration in the Senate soon after holidays.

Bryan.

Protest of the United States against the presence in Costa Rica of certain Nicaraguan revolutionists.Protest of the United States against the presence in Costa Rica of certain Nicaraguan revolutionists.

(See Costa Rica.)

Norway:Norway:

Contents

Arbitration agreement between the United States and Norway, extending the duration of the Convention of April 4, 1908Arbitration agreement between the United States and Norway, extending the duration of the Convention of April 4, 1908

Signed at Washington, June 16, 1913; ratification advised by the Senate, February 21, 1914; ratified by the President, April 9, 1914; ratified by Norway, March 13, 1914; ratifications exchanged at Washington, April 13, 1914; proclaimed, April 15, 1914.

[1705] By the President of the United States of America.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this fifteenth day of April in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-eighth.

Treaty Series, No. 589.

By the President of the United States of America. Treaty Series, No. 589.

[Document 1705]

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas an Agreement between the United States of America and Norway extending, for a further period of five years, the arbitration convention concluded between them on April 4, 1908, was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Washington on the sixteenth day of June, one thousand nine hundred and thirteen, the original of which Agreement, being in the English and Norwegian languages, is word for word as follows:

The Government of the United States of America and the Government of the Kingdom of Norway, being desirous of extending the period of five years during which the Arbitration Convention concluded between them on April 4, 1908, is to remain in force, which period is about to expire, have authorized the undersigned, to wit: William Jennings Bryan, Secretary of State of the United States, and H. H. Bryn, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Norway to the United States, to conclude the following agreement:

Article I.

The Convention of Arbitration of April 4, 1908, between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of the Kingdom of Norway, the duration of which by Article IV thereof was fixed at a period of five years from the day of the exchange of the ratifications, which period will terminate on June 24, 1913, is hereby extended and continued in force for a further period of five years from June 24, 1913.

Article II.

The present Agreement shall be ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof; and by His Majesty the King of Norway, and it shall become effective upon the date of the exchange of ratifications, which shall take place at Washington as soon as possible.

Done in duplicate in the English and Norwegian languages, at Washington this sixteenth day of June, one thousand nine hundred and thirteen.

[seal.] William Jennings Bryan

[seal.] Helmer H. Bryn

And whereas, the said Agreement has been duly ratified on both parts, and the ratifications of the two Governments were exchanged in the City of Washington, on the thirteenth day of April, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Agreement to be made public, to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this fifteenth day of April in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-eighth.
Woodrow Wilson.

By the President:
W. J. Bryan,
Secretary of State.

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, concluded between the United States and NorwayTreaty for the advancement of general peace, concluded between the United States and Norway

Signed at Washington, June 24, 1914; ratification advised by the Senate, August 13, 1914; ratified by the President, October 14, 1914; ratified by Norway, September 18, 1914: ratifications exchanged at Washington, October 21, 1914; proclaimed, October 22, 1914.

[1706] By the President of the United States of America.

[seal.]Done at the City of Washington this twenty-second day of October in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.

Treaty Series, No. 599.

By the President of the United States of America. Treaty Series, No. 599.

[Document 1706]

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas, a Treaty between the United States of America and Norway looking to the advancement of the cause of general peace was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Washington on the twenty-fourth day of June, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, the original of which Treaty, being in the English and Norwegian languages, is word for word as follows:

The President of the United States of America and His Majesty the King of Norway, being desirous to strengthen the bonds of amity that bind them together and also to advance the cause of general peace, have resolved to enter into a treaty for that purpose, and to that end have appointed as their plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States, William Jennings Bryan, Secretary of State of the United States; and

His Majesty the King of Norway, H. H. Bryn, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Norway to the United States;

Who, after having communicated to each other their respective full powers, found to be in proper form, have agreed upon and concluded the following articles:

Article I.

The High Contracting Parties agree that all disputes between them of every nature whatsoever shall, when diplomatic methods of adjustment have failed, be referred for investigation and report to a Permanent International Commission; provided, however, that treaties in force between the two parties do not prescribe settlement by arbitration of such dispute.

The Commission shall be constituted in the manner prescribed in the next succeeding article.

The High Contracting Parties agree not to declare war or begin hostilities during such investigation and before the report is submitted.

Article II.

The International Commission shall be composed of five members, to be appointed as follows: One member shall be chosen from each country by the Government thereof; one member shall be chosen by each Government from some third country; the fifth member, who shall be the chairman of the Commission, shall be chosen by common agreement between the two Governments, it being understood that he shall not be a citizen of either country nor a resident in either of them. If an agreement is not reached as to this appointment, the fifth member shall be chosen according to the rules laid down in Art. 87 of the Convention signed at The Hague on October 18, 1907, for the Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes.

The expenses of the Commission shall be paid by the two Governments in equal proportion.

The International Commission shall be appointed within four months after the exchange of the ratifications of this treaty; vacancies to be filled according to the manner of the original appointment.

Unless otherwise agreed between the parties, the procedure of the International Commission shall be regulated by the prescriptions contained in Chapter III of the Convention mentioned above.

Article III.

In case the High Contracting Parties shall have failed to adjust a dispute by diplomatic methods, and the dispute is not to be settled by arbitration, the Parties shall at once refer it to the International Commission for investigation and report.

The International Commission may, however, spontaneously offer its services to that effect, and in such case it shall notify both Governments and request their cooperation in the investigation.

The High Contracting Parties agree to furnish the Permanent International Commission with all the means and facilities required for its investigation and report.

The report of the International Commission shall be completed as soon as possible and at the latest within one year after the date on which the Commission shall declare its investigation to have begun, unless the High Contracting Parties shall extend or limit the time by mutual agreement. The report shall be prepared in triplicate: one copy shall be presented to each Government, and the third retained by the Commission for its files.

Article IV.

The High Contracting Parties agree that, upon the receipt of the report of the International Commission, they will immediately endeavor to adjust the dispute directly between them upon the basis of the Commission’s findings. They reserve, however, the right to act independently on the subject matter of the dispute after the report of the Commission shall have been submitted.

Article V.

The present treaty shall be ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by His Majesty the King of Norway.

The ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible.

The treaty shall take effect immediately after the exchange of ratifications and shall continue in force for a period of five years; and it shall thereafter remain in force until twelve months after one of the High Contracting Parties have given notice to the other of an intention to terminate it.

In witness whereof the respective plenipotentiaries have signed the present treaty and have affixed thereunto their seals.

Done in duplicate, in the English and Norwegian languages, at Washington, this 24th day of June, 1914.

[seal.] William Jennings Bryan.

[seal.] Helmer H. Bryn.

And whereas, the said Treaty has been duly ratified on both parts, and the ratifications of the two governments were exchanged in the City of Washington, on the twenty-first day of October, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Treaty to be made public, to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal.]Done at the City of Washington this twenty-second day of October in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.
Woodrow Wilson.

By the President:
Robert Lansing,
Acting Secretary of State.

International Conference on SpitzbergenInternational Conference on Spitzbergen

[1707] The Secretary of State to the Minister of Norway.

Department of State, Washington, February 21, 1914.

File No. 850d.00/242.

[1708] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, May 1, 1914.

File No. 850d.00/258c.

[1709] The Minister of Norway to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Norway, Washington, May 4, 1914.

File No. 850d.00/259.

[1710] The Secretary of State to Minister Schmedeman.

Department of State, Washington, May 19, 1914.

File No. 850d.00/265b.

[1711] The Secretary of State to Messrs. William Miller Collier and Albert G. Schmedeman.

Department of State, Washington, May 23, 1911

File No. 850d.00/271a.

[1712] The American Delegates to the Secretary of State.

Christiania, June 16, 1914.

File No. 850d.00/286.

[1713] [Untitled]

Christiania, June 18, 1914.

File No. 850d.00/288.

[1714] The Secretary of State to Delegate Collier.

Department of State, Washington, June 19, 1914.

File No. 850d.00/288.

[1715] The Secretary of State to the President of the International Conference on Spitsbergen.

Department of State, Washington, June 24, 1914.

File No. 850d.00/290.

[1716] The Secretary of State to Minister Schmedeman.

Department of State, Washington, June 27, 1914.

File No. 850d.00/298.

[1717] Minister Schmedeman to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Christiania, July 29, 1914.

File No. 850d.00/327.

[1718] [Untitled]

American Legation, Christiania, July 30, 1914.

File No. 850d.00/328.

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Norway. File No. 850d.00/242.

[Document 1707]

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Norway.

No. 337.] Department of State,
Washington, February 21, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of January 7, 1914,1 in which you state that the Norwegian Government has deemed it expedient to fix June 16, 1914, as the date for the opening of the Conference in relation to Spitzbergen and that your Government will be glad to receive the delegates of the Government of the United States at Christiania on that date.

In reply I have the honor to say that the Government of the United States expects to be represented at the conference by Mr. Schmedeman, the American Minister at Christiania. An additional delegate may also be designated to represent this Government.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
J. B. Moore.

1 Not printed.

[Untitled] File No. 850d.00/258c.

[Document 1708]

[Untitled]

No. 370.] Department of State,
Washington, May 1, 1914.

Sir: Referring to previous correspondence with your Legation regarding the approaching International Conference on Spitzbergen which is to be held at Christiania on or about June 16, 1914, I have the honor to advise you of the appointment by this Government of Mr. William Miller Collier of Auburn, New York, and Mr. Albert G. Schmedeman, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States at Christiania, as delegates to represent the Government of the United States at that International Conference.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The Minister of Norway to the Secretary of State. File No. 850d.00/259.

[Document 1709]

The Minister of Norway to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Norway,
Washington, May 4, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s note of the 1st instant containing information of the appointment of Mr. W. M. Collier and Minister A. G. Schmedeman as delegates to represent the Government of the United States at the International Conference in relation to Spitzbergen to be opened at Christiania on June 16, 1914.

I have taken pleasure in transmitting the said note to my Government.

Please accept [etc.]

H. Bryn.

The Secretary of State to Minister Schmedeman. File No. 850d.00/265b.

[Document 1710]

The Secretary of State to Minister Schmedeman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 19, 1914.

Inform Foreign Office Department has appointed Fred K. Nielsen, Assistant Solicitor of this Department, as its technical delegate to assist delegates of this Government at the Spitzbergen Conference.2

Bryan.

2 Mr. Nielsen was later appointed plenipotentiary delegate.

The Secretary of State to Messrs. William Miller Collier and Albert G. Schmedeman. File No. 850d.00/271a.

[Document 1711]

The Secretary of State to Messrs. William Miller Collier and Albert G. Schmedeman.

Department of State,
Washington, May 23, 1911

Gentlemen: The President having selected you to represent the United States at the forthcoming International Conference on Spitzbergen to be held at Christiania, the following instructions are communicated to you for your guidance: 1. The United States is a participant in this conference by reason of two facts: First, that certain of its citizens have interests of great importance in the archipelago of Spitzbergen, and, second, that those islands are in the anomalous position of being politically unorganized and subject to the sovereignty of no nation whatsoever. They are and for centuries have been admittedly “no man’s land”. The assertion within the past decade by private persons of rights of exclusive occupation of portions of the land, the existence of conflicting claims between the subjects and citizens of certain nations, the development of valuable mines, and the settlement of several hundred people engaged in mining now necessitate the establishment of some form of government which will preserve peace and order and define the relative rights and obligations of the persons there resident or asserting claims therein.

2. The authority which all nations are universally conceded to have over their nationals, wherever they may be, affords a basis for the establishment of an administration over territories such as those of the islands of Spitzbergen which are under the dominion of no nation. The fulfillment of the duty of protection which nations owe to their nationals would, moreover, seem in the circumstances to require the Governments having nationals in Spitzbergen to create or aid in creating an orderly and efficient government for the archipelago. The United States could not refrain from participating in this conference without subjecting itself to the charge of abandoning or neglecting the interests of its citizens and of failing to provide for the exercise of that control over them which, in a certain measure, other nations may reasonably expect from this Government.

3. You will, therefore, take part in the discussions and deliberations of the conference, exercising your discretion in offering suggestions as to the method of settling the questions relating to the existing and future interests of American citizens in the islands, as to necessary measures to secure a continuance of the present equal right and opportunity of the nationals of all countries in the use and enjoyment and development of the resources of the island (existing private rights being respected), and as to plans of government for the archipelago.

4. The claims of American citizens to rights over lands in Spitzbergen are of great importance and for several years have received the attention and support of this Government. There is no intention or desire on the part of this Government to obtain for its nationals any industrial monopoly or any recognition of extravagant claims. By their enterprise and perseverance American citizens have demonstrated the value of certain of the resources of these islands, a fact of special interest to northern Europe. They have invested their capital and by their energy and skill have established an industry which gives employment to a large number of persons. They have created property of value. This Government seeks for these citizens only the recognition of the rights to which their efforts and financial risk entitled them and the establishment of a government which will conserve these rights.

5. One of your first acts in the proceedings of the conference will be to endeavor to obtain either a definite and specific recognition of the rights which have thus been acquired by American citizens in Spitzbergen or a recognition in principle with a specific agreement providing a method of their determination upon a just and equitable basis which will insure an early settlement of their character and extent. It is felt by this Government that a definite and final determination of these rights, of their character and extent, and of the relative rights of other claimants and their extent should be made before the conference adjourns and should be unconditionally accepted by it. If it should become manifest at any time during the proceedings that this can not be done and that no other satisfactory arrangement can be made, this Government may be compelled to decline to permit you to continue your participation in the sessions of the conference or to sign its final acts, and to refuse to consider any agreement executed by the conference which provides for the extension of the jurisdiction of any other power or powers over American citizens and their interests in Spitzbergen. It is desirable, therefore, that, at the outset of the conference, while expressing your hope and confidence that a satisfactory determination of the rights of claimants to land in the archipelago will be made before the final session of the conference, you make known to the delegates that your action with reference to all matters which may arise and your expression of the views of this Government are to be considered as tentative and contingent and as in no way obligating the Government of the United States to accept any plan which may be adopted, in the event that a satisfactory settlement of questions in relation to existing claims is not obtained before the close of the conference.

6. The call for the conference and the exchanges of views between several of the interested Powers manifest a unanimous determination to maintain the political status of the archipelago as terra nullius. It is, however, advisable that the conference early in its proceedings should, in the interest of certainty, make a formal declaration to this effect. Such a declaration would furnish the basis upon which the conference could, in the opinion of this Government, most successfully proceed. In case a plan is proposed in the conference which appears to you to be inconsistent with the principle of terra nullius you will immediately report the proposal in detail to this Government and await its instructions.

7. If the political status of Spitzbergen as terra nullius is recognized expressly or by implication, it appears that a government over the islands can be formulated only by adopting one of the following methods: (a) The establishment by each of the interested Powers of a governmental agency of its own in Spitzbergen, administering a suitable legal system applicable solely to its own nationals resident in the archipelago; (b) the delegation by a nation of its jurisdiction over its nationals to some other nation or nations; or (c) the delegation to nationals of certain of the powers of jurisdiction to be exercised in accordance with a plan provided for by a convention to which all the interested nations are signatories or adherents.

8. The Norwegian, Swedish and Russian Governments have intimated their willingness to undertake the government of the islands and have submitted a tentative plan for such a government, which has received the careful consideration of the Government of the United States. While this plan admits the principle of terra nullius there are provisions in it which this Government considers repugnant to that principle. Furthermore, there are declarations in the plan asserting or implying the existence in these three nations of a paramount right over other nations to administer the affairs of Spitzbergen. The Government of the United States has dissented from that view and has expressed its dissatisfaction with any form of government in Spitzbergen which in theory or in practical effect will constitute an admission of a right in any nation to exercise the powers of government over any persons therein other than the citizens or subjects of such nation or of a nation which may delegate powers over its nationals to another nation. The plan submitted by the three Governments above named also appears to this Government to be objectionable because it provides a complex, elaborate, and expensive system of government for a community with a small population and with the simplest of social relations.

9. The United States has tentatively submitted a plan of government, a copy of which is hereto appended,1 together with memoranda explanatory of the theory on which it is based and of the reasons and purposes of certain of its provisions. This plan, in the opinion of this Government, provides a simpler, less expensive, and more efficient government, and is consistent with the accepted principle that no power shall acquire sovereignty, actual or nominal, over the islands. These ends you will at all times keep in view.

10. In the plan which this Government has tentatively submitted as a basis for negotiation in place of the one proposed by Norway, Sweden, and Russia it was sought to preserve the present political status of Spitzbergen and the equal rights of all nations by reserving to each and every Power, signatory or adhering, a right of veto upon any proposition made by the proposed commission or other legislative agency, which may be composed of nationals of one or more of the interested nations, and also a right to disapprove or to refuse to confirm the appointment of subordinate officers who may be nominated. The theory of this Government is that the persons or body to whom are delegated conditional legislative rights over persons in Spitzbergen, or a limited exercise of administrative and judicial rights, become the agents of the signatory and adhering Powers. These agents, subject to the direction of the signatories and adherents, exercise jurisdiction over the nationals of these Powers within the territorial limits of Spitzbergen.

11. A possible alternative for the law-making body suggested in this Government’s plan, in case no nation is willing that its nationals should act as agents subject to a veto power, or in case of a failure by the Powers to agree upon the general provisions of the plan, would be for the diplomatic representatives of the signatory and adhering Powers at Christiania or certain of their consular officers in Norway to act as a permanent commission, or without constituting themselves as such a governing body, to meet in conference twice a year or oftener to confer and agree, under instructions from their respective Governments, upon such rules, regulations, and restrictions as may seem expedient. Such agreements should assume the form of ordinances or regulations for promulgation in Spitzbergen. While such a system would not create a method of easy legislation and would fall short of that which seems desirable, it would be worthy of consideration in case it should become manifest that an agreement on a plan in the nature of that suggested by this Government is impossible. However, before such an alternative scheme is suggested or discussed by you, you will make a specific report of the conditions which, in your judgment, necessitate its consideration, and you are directed to refrain from formally presenting or discussing it without special instructions after such report has been received and considered by this Government.

12. The question of the administration of public affairs in the islands has been carefully considered by this Government, and the method suggested in the plan submitted by it as a basis for negotiation is considered to be the most practicable under existing circumstances. It is not believed that, from the point of view of efficiency, fundamental changes in it will be necessary. Departures from its details are entirely within your discretion, especially if they tend toward simplicity and economy and are not repugnant to the principle of terra nullius.

13. This Government has the right, and it is its duty to insist, that the system of taxation, as well as all other governmental measures which may be adopted, shall not be unjust, discriminatory in effect, or unduly burdensome to its citizens or their interests. You will faithfully guard the rights of American citizens in this matter. On the other hand, this Government recognizes that it is equitable for those who receive the benefits of government to contribute their just proportion to the expense of maintaining it.

14. An important feature of the government to be established for Spitzbergen will be a judicial system. The system suggested in this Government’s plan seems to be simple and efficient. If discussion or new information should show that the suggested system fails to furnish a satisfactory instrument for the administration of justice you will suggest such modifications as may seem advisable in the circumstances. If the suggested system, even in a modified form, can not, in your opinion, be obtained, or, if there should be a failure to agree upon the applicable system of law or upon the designation or constitution of a suitable tribunal, it may become expedient to consider the conferring of judicial authority on consular officers. There are some advantages to be derived from this alternative method, but it is felt by this Government that they are outweighed by the manifest inconveniences and disadvantages, if a satisfactory system can be obtained by modifications of the judicial system embodied in the plan which the Government of the United States has submitted. You will keep this Government advised of any proposed radical changes in the suggested judicial system and await special instructions before accepting or rejecting them.

15. Even if a system of consular courts, each of them exercising jurisdiction over its own nationals and applying to them the law of their respective countries, should seem practical, the police and other administrative functions could not be successfully discharged except by some official or official body recognized by all the interested nations as vested with authority over their nationals in Spitzbergen. In the case of the exercise of police powers this Government is convinced that they can only be exercised successfully under the direction of a single official who is of the same nationality as the majority of the persons living upon the islands and who speaks the language spoken by those persons.

16. In all your negotiations you should constantly bear in mind the traditional policy of the United States to refrain from interference in European affairs. You will scrupulously avoid committing this Government, even tentatively, to any plan which in any way or to any degree is at variance with this established course. While the political status of Spitzbergen is such that perhaps this policy is not strictly applicable, and while Spitzbergen might be considered an Arctic region rather than a European region, the Government of the United States has heretofore treated it as European and does not now desire to regard it otherwise. It is not deemed to be for the best interests of this Government or to be consistent with its established policies either to contribute to the expense of maintaining a government in Spitzbergen or to share in the responsibility of its administration.

17. With these instructions the representation of the United States is entrusted to you by the President with full confidence in your discretion and in your ability to treat the complex questions to be considered. You will make frequent telegraphic reports to this Government of the progress of the conference and will seek specific instructions whenever you are in doubt as to its views upon any new proposal which may be offered for consideration. At the close of the conference you will make to the President a full report of its proceedings and conclusions.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

1 Not printed.

The American Delegates to the Secretary of State. File No. 850d.00/286.

[Document 1712]

The American Delegates to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

Christiania, June 16, 1914.

Conference convened to-day. Minister Hagerup elected President. Norway, Russia and Sweden submitted amended plan. Conference adjourning for one week to consider it. Copies of plan sent by mail. No other plans or suggestions yet submitted. Gunther appointed Secretary of our delegation.

Collier.

Schmedeman.

[Untitled] File No. 850d.00/288.

[Document 1713]

[Untitled]

Christiania, June 18, 1914.

Reply of President [of the Conference] presenting modified pro jet de convention prepared by the three northern Powers in the preliminary conference states that American plan has been considered but cannot be used as a substitute since it is conceived in the terms of Anglo-American jurisprudence, is in English, and besides all other nations have used only the three-power projets as bases for their study of Spitzbergen questions. We fear that its presentation might cause unfavorable feeling and delay. If however Department wishes it presented translation should be made in Washington with the care given to the preparation of official text of treaties, and with a view to the necessary attendant delay before the receipt of printed copies. But we believe it best to use it, for the present, as a guide in suggesting amendments to their plans. We request telegraphic instructions as next session is on Monday.

Schmedeman.

Collier.

The Secretary of State to Delegate Collier. File No. 850d.00/288.

[Document 1714]

The Secretary of State to Delegate Collier.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 19, 1914.

Your June 18th. Department concurs in your view not to present American plan but to use it for the present as a guide for suggesting amendments.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the President of the International Conference on Spitsbergen. File No. 850d.00/290.

[Document 1715]

The Secretary of State to the President of the International Conference on Spitsbergen.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 24, 1914.

I have the honor to inform your excellency that owing to the regrettable illness of Mr. William Miller Collier and his present incapacity to perform the duties of Delegate to represent the Government of the United States at the International Conference on Spitzbergen, Mr. Franklin Mott Gunther has been designated additional Technical Delegate to assist the Delegation representing this Government.

In view of the impossibility of his commission reaching him for some time, I have the honor to request that pending its receipt this announcement be accepted by the Conference as entitling Mr. Gunther to all the rights and privileges of the Conference, with full powers to sign ad referendum the conclusions of the Conference.

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Schmedeman. File No. 850d.00/298.

[Document 1716]

The Secretary of State to Minister Schmedeman.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 27, 1914.

The Honorable Alvey A. Adee, Second Assistant Secretary of State, now in Paris, will at once proceed to Christiania to attend Conference as [plenipotentiary] Delegate of the United States. I have informed the President of the Conference of this designation by telegraph.

Bryan.

Minister Schmedeman to the Secretary of State. File No. 850d.00/327.

[Document 1717]

Minister Schmedeman to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Christiania, July 29, 1914.

It is understood that conference will adjourn tomorrow, without having signed any acts. Russian delegates appear to have received instructions today not to sign separate arbitration.

Schmedeman.

[Untitled] File No. 850d.00/328.

[Document 1718]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Christiania, July 30, 1914.

Conference adjourned this morning to meet again in February next. No acts were signed. Nielsen will obtain passage for America at the earliest possible date. Adee leaves tomorrow.

Schmedeman.

Panama:Panama:

Contents

Message of the President, Belisario Porras, to the National AssemblyMessage of the President, Belisario Porras, to the National Assembly

[1719] Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, September 4, 1914.

File No. 819.032/14.

Minister Price to the Secretary of State. File No. 819.032/14.

[Document 1719]

Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

No. 269.] American Legation,
Panama, September 4, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith a copy of the annual message sent to the National Assembly by the President of Panama on the occasion of its inaugural session September 1, 1914.* * * The message, as will be noted, is conservative in tone and has not excited much comment from the opposition party.

I have [etc.]

Wm. Jennings Price.

[Inclosure—Extracts—Translation.]

[Untitled]

The relations of our country with the other nations are of the friendliest character, except with Colombia, with which neither communication nor commerce has been established since the Isthmian people separated themselves from its rule eleven years ago.

Recently there was made public the treaty celebrated in Bogota between the said Republic and the United States of North America, in which, in exchange for very liberal concessions on the part of the Government at Washington to Colombia, this country recognizes the independence of Panama and its existence as a sovereign nation. In the negotiations relative to that treaty Panama has had no intervention, which is regrettable because important interests are affected in that convention and in a certain manner the honor of our Republic, which cannot view indifferently any act which voluntarily or involuntarily disregards the significance of our sustained efforts for emancipation from Colombia and the efficiency of its resolve to obtain the benefits of autonomy. Moreover, it is just to wish that no compromise be made which may restrict our means of defense in the question of boundaries and of pecuniary obligations to Colombia.

The treaty to which I refer has been approved by the Colombian Congress but not yet by that of the United States, by which modifications may perhaps be made which may delay the conclusion of that negotiation and place us in a better position to protect our rights.

Special care has been and is taken to make pleasant and easy here the mission of the diplomatic agents, of other nations and to attend to and entertain those who merely pass through to other posts. Particular effort has been made, as far as possible, in making our hospitality friendly and sumptuous when treating of the visit of the President of the United States and its Secretaries, to whom we owe the greatest deference for the known cordiality and importance which the close relations of Panama with the American nation have.

During the present two years the Government of the Republic has celebrated with the United States an arbitration treaty identical with those made by that great nation with other countries, in which the pacific and noble ideas of President Woodrow Wilson and Secretary of State William J. Bryan have been collected and given form.

With no friendly power has the Government of Panama so many and varied matters to treat as with that represented by the authorities at the capital of the American Union and in the Canal Zone—the execution of the great inter-oceanic work across our Isthmus, now practically finished and utilized for commercial purposes, although it will not be solemnly and officially placed in universal service until next year; the necessities of the administration of our Republic and the Zone; the nature of the ties between Panama and the United States, obliging constant contact between the officials of both jurisdictions. It is pleasing to be able to inform you that such is the spirit of cordiality and good will existing between Panamans and Americans invested with official powers that, notwithstanding the importance of the interests handled by them, all negotiations are transacted without friction by the two Governments, taking into consideration in all cases the ruling object that bound the two countries: the opening, conservation, and defense of the Canal between the two oceans.

As a proof of that reciprocal consideration for matters interesting both nations and the deference we show the North American nation, I can point out, among other important arrangements concluded, the acquisition at an equitable price of the valuable building in this city in which the Canal Administration offices were formerly located, and which our nation needs to conveniently locate many of the public offices, scattered today in buildings rented from private parties; and also the enlargement of the area of the city of Panama, for which it has been necessary to modify the existing convention on provisional limits of this city and Colon. The new convention has already been signed by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Panama and the Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States; the boundaries of the Canal Zone are definitely fixed therein from one end to the other; the territory under Panaman jurisdiction in Colon has been slightly modified, and that same jurisdiction is extended to all territory giving access to Panama and departure from this city on the eastern side, independent of the Canal Zone; and at the same time the north boundary is withdrawn leaving the Sabanas road entirely to Panama.

The Mixed Commission created by the treaty of November 18, 1903, charged with valuing and indemnifying for damages and expropriations caused by the canal work, has worked recently with some interruptions caused, first, by the absence in the past year of the two members named by the Government of the United States and later by the recent lamentable death of one of the Americans composing this tribunal, whose successor has not yet arrived. In spite of these interruptions the work done by the said commission is large and there remains only a small part to do if compared to the great amount of claims for damages and expropriations of private property to which the formation of the vast Gatun lake and other secondary ones and still other works complementary to the Interoceanic Canal gave rise.

One of the questions of greatest importance which our Republic has pending is the boundary controversy with Costa Rica.1 The country knows the history of the events which induced us to make an arbitration treaty with that neighboring nation, in order to submit to the final decision of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States the differences existing between the two countries on boundaries, in spite of the fact that these had been definitely defined in 1900 in the decision pronounced by the President of France. There is also known, because the Government informed the National Assembly of 1910 thereof, the value and importance of that pact to the two contending nations, and the gravity of the situation to be faced in order that we might not lose the position in which the arbitration award placed us. I will always consider it one of the highest honors of my life to have defended, as attorney of Panama, and placed the interests of my country, endangered in that memorable epoch, in a secure position. Because the desire of Costa Rica was that the old dispute on all points examined and decided by the Arbitration of 1900 be reopened and that the entire question be submitted again to a new arbitration through the auspices of the Department of State of the United States. The attitude assumed by me, approved and applauded by the Panaman Government, and the arguments employed to resist those designs of Costa Rica, resulted in the convention signed in Washington, March 17, 1910, very different from that proposed and hoped to be secured by the illustrious and able representative of our opponent, Doctor Luis Anderson. What was agreed upon to be submitted to the Chief Justice of the United States in this pact is only the following question: What is the boundary between Panama and Costa Rica which most nearly conforms to the meaning (intention) of the decision of the President of France of September 11, 1900?

The controversy resulted in the convention I have mentioned; the parties presented their arguments within the time fixed; our distinguished Minister Plenipotentiary in Washington, Doctor Eusebio A. Morales, assisted by Mr. Edward B. Hill, a talented and sagacious lawyer who knows the question perfectly, have argued before the arbitrator all the reasons which should move him to sustain the decision in so far as it favors our rights and to maintain the same within the well-defined jurisdiction fixed by the arbitrator in the arbitration convention of 1910. In referring to this important point the attorney of Panama thought it opportune to place with his own allegation the exposition which I left written and printed before being replaced as attorney in the boundary litigation, in which I made a complete study of that question of jurisdiction of the arbitrator.

Everything induces the hope that the arbitrator will appreciate at their just value our reasons, and that his decision, which should be pronounced before the 18th of September, will be inspired by the strictest justice.

As you know, exclusion laws exist in our country against the immigration of Chinese and Turks of Europe, Asia, and Africa. The new law, which required individuals of those nationalities resident in our Republic to reregister in books specially kept for them, caused a movement of rebellion and protest among the Chinese, who tried to avoid the obligation required of them which has its justification in the frequent and secret entry of Chinese which has taken place in spite of constant effort of the authorities to prevent it.2

I must state that my convictions in the matter of human liberty and equality do not accord with the exclusion measures which prohibit entry in some countries to certain foreigners for commercial or industrial reasons, for race prejudices or ethnic aversions. It seems to me that the same necessities of progress demand facilities and guaranties for the movement and voluntary radication of all men, without, exceptions save those of objectionable individual character, for the preservation of morality and the health of society. Notwithstanding that, before my social and philosophical principles come my duties as agent of the Panaman people, and on that account, without vacillation but on the contrary with decision and energy, I have fulfilled the precepts of the immigration law, without those evils predicted by opponents of the action of the Government having occurred.

1 See post.

2 See For. Rel. 1913, pp. 1105–1139.

Neutrality in the waters of the Isthmus of Panama: Protocol of an agreement between the United States and Panama, signed at Washington October 10, 1914Neutrality in the waters of the Isthmus of Panama: Protocol of an agreement between the United States and Panama, signed at Washington October 10, 1914

[1720] [Untitled]

In testimony whereof, the undersigned have signed and sealed the present Protocol in the city of Washington this tenth day of October, 1914.

Treaty Series No. 597.]

[Untitled] Treaty Series No. 597.]

[Document 1720]

[Untitled]

Protocol of an agreement concluded between Honorable Robert Lansing, Acting Secretary of State of the United States, and Don Eusebio A. Morales, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the Republic of Panama, signed the tenth day of October, 1914.

The undersigned, the Acting Secretary of State of the United States of America and the Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the Republic of Panama, in view of the close association of the interests of their respective Governments on the Isthmus of Panama, and to the end that these interests may be conserved and that, when a state of war exists, the neutral obligations of both Governments as neutrals may be maintained, after having conferred on the subject and being duly empowered by their respective Governments, have agreed:

That hospitality extended in the waters of the Republic of Panama to a belligerent vessel of war or a vessel belligerent or neutral, whether armed or not, which is employed by a belligerent power as a transport or fleet auxiliary or in any other way for the direct purpose of prosecuting or aiding hostilities, whether by land or sea, shall serve to deprive such vessel of like hospitality in the Panama Canal Zone for a period of three months, and vice versa.

In testimony whereof, the undersigned have signed and sealed the present Protocol in the city of Washington this tenth day of October, 1914.
Robert Lansing [l.s.]
Eusebio A. Morales [l.s.]

Assault on American citizens in PanamaAssault on American citizens in Panama3

3 continued from For. Rel. 1913, pp. 1069–1081.

[1721] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Price.

Department of State, Washington, January 9, 1914.

File No. 419.11D29/48.

[1722] The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

Department of State, Washington, April 7, 1914.

File No. 419.11D29/50a.

[1723] Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, April 9, 1914.

File No. 419.11D29/51.

[1724] The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

Department of State, Washington, April 16, 1914.

File No. 419.11D29/51.

[1725] Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, April 18, 1914.

File No. 419.11D29/52.

[1726] [Untitled]

American Legation, Panama, April 18 [sic], 1914.

File No. 419.11D29/54.

[1727] The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

Department of State, Washington, April 20, 1914.

File No. 419.11D29/52.

[1728] Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, April 25, 1914.

File No. 419.11D29/55.

[1729] Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, April 28, 1914.

File No. 419.11D29/53.

[1730] The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

Department of State, Washington, May 6, 1914.

File No. 419.11D29/54.

[1731] Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, May 16, 1914.

File No. 419.11D29/57.

[1732] The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

Department of State, Washington, May 18, 1914.

File No. 419.11D29/57.

[1733] Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, May 23, 1914.

File No. 419.11D29/59.

[1734] [Untitled]

American Legation, Panama, September 19, 1914.

File No. 419.11D29/70.

[1735] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Price.

Department of State, Washington, September 28, 1914.

File No. 419.11D29/70.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Price. File No. 419.11D29/48.

[Document 1721]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Price.

No. 16.] Department of State,
Washington, January 9, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your No. 51 of the 23d ultimo4 in which you report that you transmitted in person to Señor Lefevre a note vigorously insisting upon a prompt closing of the negotiations in regard to demands made by the Government of the United States growing out of the assault on American sailors and marines in the Cocoa Grove district, July 4, 1912.

Your action is approved. The Department hopes to receive at an early date information of the acquiescence by the Panaman Government in the just and reasonable demands which the United States has made in this matter.

I am [etc.]

J. B. Moore.

4  Id. 1080.

The Secretary of State to Minister Price. File No. 419.11D29/50a.

[Document 1722]

The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 7, 1914.

Inform Foreign Office that this Government insists upon immediate settlement of matters growing out of the Cocoa Grove disturbances of July 4, 1912. Report by telegraph.

Bryan.

Minister Price to the Secretary of State. File No. 419.11D29/51.

[Document 1723]

Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Panama, April 9, 1914.

Answering your April 7, at hand on my return from the trip to interior with officials of Panama. I have not yet succeeded in communicating with Minister for Foreign Affairs. It is doubtful whether it can be done before Monday on account of Holy Week. I have been insistent and persistent in these matters. Minister for Foreign Affairs just before trip above mentioned assured me progress in the matter was real.

Price.

The Secretary of State to Minister Price. File No. 419.11D29/51.

[Document 1724]

The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

No. 40.] Department of State,
Washington, April 16, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your telegram of the 9th instant replying to the Department’s telegram of the 7th instant, urging early settlement of the claims growing out of the Cocoa Grove disturbances in Panama City.

In reply the Department desires to point out that nearly two years have elapsed since several American citizens were killed and many more wounded in Panama City by the unlawful action of the Panaman police, and the Government of Panama has apparently not yet concluded its investigation of the affair. Therefore, it inevitably appears that that Government is chargeable with wholly unwarranted delay.

You will present the matter in this light and say that an assurance given so long after the event that “progress in the matter was real” is entirely unsatisfactory and that this Government must insist upon the immediate settlement of the matters growing out of the occurrences mentioned.

I am, [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Cone Johnson.

Minister Price to the Secretary of State. File No. 419.11D29/52.

[Document 1725]

Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Panama, April 18, 1914.

Answering your telegram April 7. Panaman Minister for Foreign Affairs to-day states that he will have conference with Secretary of Government and Justice, judge, and attorney of the Supreme Court, without further delay, for the purpose of hastening proceedings. He promised to do this last Tuesday. He adds assurance of strict justice being decreed in accordance with law and the practice of civilization.

Price.

[Untitled] File No. 419.11D29/54.

[Document 1726]

[Untitled]

No. 133.] American Legation,
Panama, April 18 [sic], 1914.

Sir: Referring to the Department’s telegram of April 7, and supplementing my telegrams of April 9 and April 18, relating to a demand upon the Panaman Government for the immediate settlement of the matters growing out of the disturbances occurring in the Cocoa Grove district of the city of Panama on July 4, 1912, I have the honor to report that I did not succeed in having a talk with Sr. Lefevre, Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Panama, about this matter until Monday, April 20, but that promptly after the receipt of the Department’s telegram I sent a communication respecting said matter to the Foreign Office, a copy of which is herewith enclosed. The departments here and offices in general were closed from Thursday until Monday the 20th, in celebration of Holy Week holidays. Sr. Lefevre showed interest in this matter in my talk with him on Monday and promised to get a meeting within the next two days of the officials having the case directly in hand and give me a prompt response. Later this response was promised for yesterday but is only just now at hand. Same together with its translation are herewith enclosed.

Sr. Lefevre has from time to time been assuring me of progress in this matter, in answer to my various responses and demands. Just a few weeks since, he declared that the Court was then only awaiting the filing of an opinion by the Prosecuting Attorney which would be forthcoming in a very short time.

The response of Sr. Lefevre, received today and herewith transmitted, is disappointing and not in harmony with the assurances given me as reported above. I have now transmitted another Foreign Office note in this matter, a copy of which is also enclosed.

I shall continue to do my best to obtain not only favorable but prompt action by the Panaman Government in this affair.

I have [etc.]

Wm. Jennings Price.

[Inclosure 1.]

Minister Price to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

No. 40.] American Legation,
Panama, April 9, 1914.

Excellency: Referring again to my Foreign Office Note No. 26, dated February 3, 1914, and to the urgent insistence of my verbal communications both before and since, I have the honor to inform your excellency that upon my return from our delightful trip to the Province of Chiriquí I found awaiting me a cablegram from my Government directing me to inform your excellency that an immediate settlement of the matters growing out of what has become known as the Cocoa Grove disturbances of July 4, 1912, is insisted upon. In addition, I am directed by my Government to report to them by telegraph on this matter.

Your excellency’s assurances have been gratifying in this important and deplorable affair and I am sure that your renewed endeavors will result in a satisfactory conclusion of these negotiations without a continuance of the delays experienced in the past.

While awaiting the response from your excellency that, I am sure, the circumstances of this whole situation cannot but impress your excellency as to duly merit, I avail [etc.]

Wm. Jennings Price.

[Inclosure 2—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Minister Price.

No. S 3476.] Department of Foreign Affairs,
Panama, April 18, 1914.

Mr. Minister: I have the honor to refer to your note No. 40 of the 9th instant, in which your excellency puts in writing in concrete form his urgent verbal requests with reference to the matter of the pending claim made by the United States relative to the lamentable incident which occurred in the Cocoa Grove district of this capital on the 4th of July, 1912, adding that cablegram from his Government had been received by him in which the immediate settlement of the matter in question is requested. In this connection I inform your excellency that I shall without loss of time proceed to have a conference with the Secretary of Government and Justice, with the attendance of the Judge and the Fiscal of the Superior Court, in order to push as much as possible the course of the judicial proceedings pending against the accused and to obtain an early sentence.

Your excellency may rest assured that the judicial authorities will mete out strict justice in conformity with the laws and the practices of civilization.

I avail [etc.]

E. T. Lefevre.

[Inclosure 3.]

Minister Price to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

F. O. No. 46.] American Legation,
Panama, April 18, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s esteemed note No. S–3476, in response to my Foreign Office Note No. 40 of the 9th instant, relating to the matter of the Cocoa Grove affair of July 4, 1912.

I appreciate the assurance of your excellency that without loss of time your excellency will proceed to have a conference with the Secretary of Government and Justice, the Judge and Prosecuting Attorney of the Superior Court, in order to hasten this whole matter, and that action conforming to the dictates of law and the practices of civilization will be taken.

In view of the continued and long delays of the past and of the assurances heretofore given, I can not but feel disappointment that your excellency’s note apprises me that the meeting referred to is yet in the future and that no details are given as to what has been taking place during the many weeks now past, and that no definite statements as to a real satisfaction of the expectancies and several demands of my Government in this distressful matter are proffered.

The interest and insistency of my Government in this horrible affair could be no less than they are, consistently with self-respect. The shooting down of its citizens, some to death and others to pain, injury and maiming, by the official police organization of another Government, particularly by that of Panama, between which and my country unusual relations of friendliness and consideration should appertain, occurring under the circumstances that the indisputable proof in this case shows, and which details extremities resorted to by said police that are absolutely indefensible in morals, law or equity whatever claim of provocation may be made by interested or prejudiced parties, I respectfully protest to your excellency is a matter of importance entitled to the attention and full relief which the settled and unalterable opinion of my Government feels to be due and which with all consideration and respect have been asked so long since and so many times.

Your excellency’s intentions and efforts in this important matter pending between our respective Governments are not doubted, but on the contrary appreciated, but yet somewhere in the machinery at least of the handling of this affair there must have been defects to have permitted the exasperating inaction referred to above, and the kind offices of your excellency with reference thereto are respectfully and earnestly solicited and anxiously awaited.

I avail [etc.]

Wm. Jennings Price.

The Secretary of State to Minister Price. File No. 419.11D29/52.

[Document 1727]

The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 20, 1914.

Your telegram April 18. Continue to press vigorously for immediate settlement matters arising from Cocoa Grove disturbances.

Bryan.

Minister Price to the Secretary of State. File No. 419.11D29/55.

[Document 1728]

Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

No. 144.] American Legation,
Panama, April 25, 1914.

Sir: Referring again to the matter of the demands of our Government growing out of the Cocoa Grove disturbances of July 4, 1912, and acknowledging the Department’s telegram of April 20, I have the honor to report that I have transmitted another Foreign Office note to Señor Lefevre, Secretary of Foreign Affairs, insistently urging settlement of these matters without further delay. A copy of said note is enclosed.

Sr. Lefevre today reported to me that Judge Arosemena, before whom the judicial proceedings in the matter are pending, would hand down his decision in the case the first days of next week; that both of them had agreed that it would be best for his decision then to be referred to the Supreme Court, composed of five judges, for their review before giving it out; that he would urge immediate action by them and that he was sure their judgment would be rendered within the next fifteen days. Judge Arosemena is the Superior Judge of the Republic, having sole jurisdiction of the higher crimes.

Sr. Lefevre, of course, has excuses for the delays in the case and took occasion to say that the evidence in the case was not definite in pointing out any specific individuals guilty of the assaults charged, and that if the soldiers and marines on the night in question had been in charge of patrols, as Panama had more than once demanded, the trouble would not have occurred. I not only made response to these observations, but emphasized again that our Government was unalterably of the opinion that Panama’s police was grievously at fault in this matter and that fall reparation must be made. He promised a formal response to my note by next Tuesday and that he would hurry a conclusion of the whole matter as fast as possible.

I think his comments above mentioned foreshadow a judicial “whitewashing” and the necessity of continued vigorous pressure to obtain any substantial satisfaction.

I have [etc.]

Wm. Jennings Price.

[Inclosure.]

Minister Price to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

No. 48.] American Legation,
Panama, April 24, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor again to refer to my notes Nos. 40 and 46 of the dates respectively of April 9 and April 18 last, and to your excellency’s note No. S-3476, of the last-named date, to which said note No. 46 was a reply, having reference to the matter of the Cocoa Grove affair of July 4, 1912; and further to inform your excellency that I am now in receipt of another cablegram from my Government vigorously insisting upon a satisfactory and prompt settlement of this whole affair.

With due regard to every consideration of courtesy and good will, I would assure your excellency that the insistency and emphasis have been sincere with which I have attempted to impress your excellency ever since coming to this mission with the importance which my Government puts upon a full, satisfactory, and prompt settlement by your excellency’s Government of our expectancies and demands in this wretched affair; and I must respectfully ask that the patience of my Government shall not be further unduly provoked in this matter.

I avail myself [etc.],

Wm. Jennings Price.

Minister Price to the Secretary of State. File No. 419.11D29/53.

[Document 1729]

Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Panama, April 28, 1914.

Vigorous action continued in the Cocoa Grove matter. Pursuant to your telegram of April 20, Panaman Minister for Foreign Affairs on Saturday promised formal reply to-day advising at least that judge in charge of case would render decision at once and the same would be reviewed by Supreme Court promptly and their decree given within 15 days. Reply not received to-day. Reference to testimony made by Panaman Minister for Foreign Affairs foreshadows, I believe, a judicial whitewashing. I shall make another demand in the morning.

Price.

The Secretary of State to Minister Price. File No. 419.11D29/54.

[Document 1730]

The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

No. 42.] Department of State,
Washington, May 6, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your No. 133, of the 18th ultimo, in which you forward a copy of a note addressed to you on the date of your despatch by the Panaman Foreign Office answering your demand for an immediate settlement of the matters growing out of the disturbances which occurred in the Cocoa Grove district of the city of Panama on July 4, 1912.

You will state to the Foreign Office that in the opinion of the Department the response of the Foreign Office dated April 18, 1914, to your insistence in this matter is highly unsatisfactory, and that the long delay which has ensued in the settlement of this case has served to create an unfortunate impression upon the Department that the Government of Panama is not desirous of performing justly its international obligations towards the United States—an impression which can only be removed by immediate action on the part of the Panaman Government in accordance with the principles of justice and equity. You will conclude by requesting to be advised at once whether the Government of Panama will take such action.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Minister Price to the Secretary of State. File No. 419.11D29/57.

[Document 1731]

Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Panama, May 16, 1914.

The Panaman judge before whom Cocoa Grove fourth of July matter has been pending adjudges, in an opinion transmitted by Panaman Minister for Foreign Affairs, that the proceedings against all of the accused be dismissed on the ground that there has not been proved that any particular policeman committed the offenses charged nor that there was any excess of force employed beyond that necessary to self-defense either by police as a body or any individual unless possibly by one of them who died in attack, 1912. The case now goes to Supreme Court for review. Panaman Minister for Foreign Affairs claims they have discovered new sources of evidence which he thinks will result in producing an impression on the Supreme Court different from that had by judge of the lower court and has requested that Supreme Court open the case to hear additional testimony. I continue vigorously to insist on the action by Panama which we claim that justice demands; and, to urge the seriousness with which the Department considers this matter, I have communicated with Panama heretofore and will again in the sense of Department’s instruction 42. I believe Panama plans a judicial whitewashing in this matter pursuant to which it will claim to be bound by the action of its judicial authorities and therefore unable to comply with any of our demands.

Price.

The Secretary of State to Minister Price. File No. 419.11D29/57.

[Document 1732]

The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 18, 1914.

Your May 16. Inform Foreign Office that decision of Panama judge, if affirmed by Supreme Court, will constitute denial of justice, and that if Government of Panama stands upon such decision in dealing with claims of this Government arising from Cocoa Grove affair, it can not be regarded otherwise than as clear evidence that Government of Panama does not desire to do justice in relation to American citizens. You will request to be informed immediately when Supreme Court will render decision.

Bryan.

Minister Price to the Secretary of State. File No. 419.11D29/59.

[Document 1733]

Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Panama, May 23, 1914.

Your telegram May 18, communicated to Panaman Minister for Foreign Affairs formally and in person and with all emphasis on May 19. His reply verbally was to the effect that Panama could pay a money indemnity but that it could not control decisions of its judicial authorities. No further response has been received. I have had conferences with Colonel Blauvelt, Captain Cocheu, of the Tenth Infantry, Captain Barber of Canal Zone Police and Governor Goethals. All of them feel that juries would not, even if Supreme Court reversed Panama criminal judge, order prosecution of certain policemen, and that for all practical purposes for us except causing the annoyance of trials it would be better to leave record as now made. Governor Goethals after conferring to-day authorizes me to say that he joins me in recommending for the most serious consideration of the Department the taking over of the police force of Panama in the cities of Panama and Colon pursuant to seventh article of the Treaty of 1903 as the most effective means of penalizing in this matter in addition to money indemnity and as the most beneficial way of improving exasperating conditions and as being fully justified. The others mentioned join in same recommendation. Street cleaning and disposition of sewerage in Panama City were taken over a few months since by us under this article of the treaty.

Price.

[Untitled] File No. 419.11D29/70.

[Document 1734]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Panama, September 19, 1914.

Supreme Court of Panama in the Fourth of July cases revokes decree of criminal court reported by telegram of May 16th, but instead of ordering prosecutions begun against somebody adjudges that the depositions of police regulations on file are too vague and that Supreme Court itself shall reopen a full inquiry having appointed one of the members to hold same and to report to the court.

The most favorable outcome could only result in ordering prosecution begun by lower court. I have been asked by Supreme Court judge if we would present again for personal examination such of our witnesses as he might want later.

Price.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Price. File No. 419.11D29/70.

[Document 1735]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Price.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 28, 1914.

Your September 19. The Department has no objection to the reexamination of such witnesses as may be readily available but could not consent to the presentation of witnesses who have left Panama.

Continue to urge upon the Government of Panama the necessity of bringing the investigation to an early conclusion.

Lansing.

Boundary dispute between Costa Rica and Panama; award made by the Chief Justice of the United States; refusal of Panama to accept the award; acceptance by Costa Rica of the good offices of the United States tendered to both partiesBoundary dispute between Costa Rica and Panama; award made by the Chief Justice of the United States; refusal of Panama to accept the award; acceptance by Costa Rica of the good offices of the United States tendered to both parties5

5 Continued from For. Rel. 1911, pp. 674–677.

Note.—In pursuance of the joint letter (printed in For. Rel. 1911, p. 677) addressed to Chief Justice White by the Ministers of Costa Rica and Panama on July 31, 1911, accepting the conditions (Id. 676) on which he would be willing to serve as arbitrator, Mr. Justice White undertook the arbitration of the boundary dispute.

On September 12, 1914, the arbitrator rendered his opinion and decision, the text of which will be found, post, inclosed with the communication from the Legation of Costa Rica dated November 7, 1914.

[1736] The President of Costa Rica to the President.

San José, September 13, 1914.

File No. 718.1915/211.

[1737] Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, September 20, 1914.

File No. 718.1915/212.

[1738] [Untitled]

American Legation, Panama, October 1, 1914.

File No. 718.1915/213.

[1739] [Untitled]

American Legation, Panama, October 7, 1914.

File No. 718.1915/215.

[1740] The Minister of Panama to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Panama, Washington, October 20, 1914.

File No. 718.1915/222.

[1741] Chargé Cresson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation”, Panama, October 22, 1914, 10 a.m.

File No. 718.1915/218.

[1742] The Minister of Costa Rica to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Costa Rica, Washington, November 7, 1914.

File No. 718.1915/223.

[1743] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister of Costa Rica.

Department of State, Washington, November 16, 1914,

File No. 718.1915/223.

[1744] Chargé Cresson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, November 18, 1914,

File No. 718.1915/225.

[1745] The Minister of Costa Rica to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Costa Rica, Washington, November 25, 1914.

File No. 718.1915/226.

[1746] The Secretary of State to Chargé Cresson.

Department of State, Washington, November 25, 1914.

File No. 718.1915/226a.

[1747] Chargé Cresson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, November 27, 1914.

File No. 718.1915/224.

[1748] Chargé Cresson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, November 27, 1914.

File No. 718.1915/227.

[1749] The Secretary of State to the Minister of Costa Rica.

Department of State, Washington, December 2, 1914.

File No. 718.1915/226.

[1750] Minister Hale to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, San José, December 5, 1914.

File No. 718.1915/230.

[1751] The Minister of Costa Rica to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Costa Rica, Washington, December 7, 1914.

File No. 718.1915/229.

[1752] The Legation of Panama to the Department of State.

Legation of Panama, Washington , December 8, 1914.

File No. 718.1915/228.

[1753] Minister Rale to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, San José, Costa Rica, December 18, 1914.

File No. 718.1915/232.

[1754] The Department of State to the Legation of Panama.

Department of State, Washington , December 19, 1914.

File No. 718.1915/228.

The President of Costa Rica to the President. File No. 718.1915/211.

[Document 1736]

The President of Costa Rica to the President.

[Telegram—Translation.]

San José, September 13, 1914.

Costa Rica and my Government cordially applaud the award rendered by the illustrious Chief Justice, and once more has the good fortune of settling its boundary disputes through a decision dictated by the high sense of justice of your great nation. Will your excellency please accept the expression of our gratitude.

Alfredo Gonzalez.

Minister Price to the Secretary of State. File No. 718.1915/212.

[Document 1737]

Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Panama, September 20, 1914.

Demonstration resulting from Costa Rican boundary decision of Justice White, which parties and newspaper opposed to Porras administration began inciting yesterday, took place tonight; seemingly unsuccessful. Crowd visited presidential mansion and Costa Rican consulate; dispersed by police. Panaman President accused of lack of attention and capability in handling case. American Legation not visited. National Assembly is being called upon to demand reopening of the case.

Price.

[Untitled] File No. 718.1915/213.

[Document 1738]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Panama, October 1, 1914.

Decision of Justice of Supreme Court regarding Costa Rica boundary continues to monopolize political discussion of newspapers and National Assembly. Panaman President submitted same National Assembly stating that the decision subtracted from the Loubet award,6 did not take into consideration [cause?], and gives Panama less territory than the Costa Rican representative before Loubet admitted belonged to Panama.

Members of Assembly presented protest refusing to abide by decision unless compelled by superior force. Same action by the Senate upon statement of administration leader that it reflected sentiment of administration but that results could be accomplished better in some manner such as Costa Rica adopted in the matter of Loubet award. Committee of lawyers appointed by citizens meeting and committee of National Assembly to study decision, resolution of latter calling for Panaman Minister at Washington to express opinion both on decision and best method of avoiding compliance with it.

Price.

6  For. Rel. 1910, pp 786–787.

[Untitled] File No. 718.1915/215.

[Document 1739]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Panama, October 7, 1914.

Local politics and attitude of Costa Rican newspapers resulted in unanimous adoption by National Assembly yesterday of resolution that the boundary dispute should not be considered ended. Full rejection of award may be expected earlier than indicated my telegram October 1.

Price.

The Minister of Panama to the Secretary of State. File No. 718.1915/222.

[Document 1740]

The Minister of Panama to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Panama,
Washington, October 20, 1914.

Your Excellency: I am instructed by my Government to notify your excellency’s Government that the Republic of Panama declines to accept or recognize as valid the decision of the Honorable the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States, dated September 12, 1914, as arbitrator under the convention of arbitration between the Republic of Panama and the Republic of Costa Rica of March 17, 1910,7 but rejects said decision and considers the same null and void because it is not authorized by the said convention and not within the powers conferred thereby upon the arbitrator.

The convention in question defines, by its first article, the question submitted to the arbitrator for decision and the limits of his jurisdiction in the following terms: The Republic of Panama and the Republic of Costa Rica, although they consider that the boundary between their respective territories designated by the arbitral award of His Excellency the President of the French Republic the 11th of September, 1900, is clear and indisputable in the region of the Pacific from Punta Burica to a point beyond Cerro Pando on the Central Cordillera near the ninth degree of north latitude, have not been able to reach an agreement in respect to the interpretation which ought to be given to the arbitral award as to the rest of the boundary line; and for the purpose of settling their said disagreements agree to submit to the decision of the Honorable the Chief Justice of the United States, who will determine, in the capacity of arbitrator, the question: What is the boundary between Panama and Costa Rica under and most in accordance with the correct interpretation and true intention of the award of the President of the French Republic made the 11th of September, 1900?

In order to decide this the arbitrator will take into account all the facts, circumstances and considerations which may have a bearing upon the case, as well as the limitation of the Loubet award expressed in the letter of his excellency Monsieur Delcassé, Minister of Foreign Relations of France, to his excellency Señor Peralta, Minister of Costa Rica in Paris, of November 23, 1900, that this boundary line must be drawn within the confines of the territory in dispute as determined by the Convention of Paris between the Republic of Colombia and the Republic of Costa Rica of January 20, 1886.

Thus, by the terms of the convention, the line of the Loubet award was recognized as binding upon the parties. As to about one-half of that line (from Punta Burica to a point beyond Cerro Pando) it was expressly stated that no question whatever existed and that portion of the boundary is in no way involved in the present arbitration. It is and remains the boundary, not because the parties, by agreement, selected it, but simply and solely because President Loubet awarded it. Both parties, by this convention, affirmed anew their recognition of the entire correctness and validity of the Loubet award, which affirmation, indeed, Panama had made a condition of any arbitration.

With regard to that part of the line as to which a question was submitted to arbitration, the convention again recognized the entire validity of the Loubet award by the statement that the difference between the parties was— in respect to the interpretation which ought to be given to the arbitral award as to the rest of the boundary line.

This again is an affirmance of the binding and conclusive character of the award. No question is made as to its validity, none as to its correctness, but only as to its interpretation. To submit to arbitration the interpretation of the award necessarily involves the affirmance of its validity and correctness. No award which could be impeached as either invalid or erroneous, could be submitted for arbitration as to its interpretation. Nor is it possible that, if any difference existed between the parties as to so vital a point as the validity of the award, the convention should make no mention of it and state, as the only difference, the interpretation which should be given it. Apart from the form of the question stated in the convention and definition of the difference which gave rise to it, the declarations already quoted are an explicit acceptance of the Loubet award in every respect.

The only question, therefore, submitted was, What was the true line awarded by President Loubet? And the only difference between the parties which caused a resort to arbitration at all was stated to be a difference as to the interpretation of a part of this award.

Nor was this definition hastily or carelessly made. The convention of arbitration was made under the good offices of the United States, then represented by your excellency’s distinguished predecessor, after prolonged discussion and debate between the representatives of Panama and Costa Rica concerning precisely the definition of the issues involved and the formulation of the question to be submitted to the arbitrator.

During the debate Costa Rica proposed that the validity and correctness of the award of President Loubet be submitted to the arbitrator and Panama constantly refused, and insisted on the absolute and unconditional acceptance of that award as valid and correct, as the condition of any arbitration whatever.

Under the influence of your excellency’s Government the contention of Panama prevailed and the convention was formulated as it is, with the express purpose of excluding, as it does, from the jurisdiction of the arbitrator any question of the validity or correctness of the Loubet award.

Indeed it would have been impossible for the Government of Panama to have submitted any such question to arbitration. By the Constitution of the Republic of Panama her boundary with Costa Rica is defined as being that awarded by President Loubet, and her Government would have been constitutionally unable to enter into any convention which would make possible the setting aside or modification of his award. This fact was officially stated to your excellency’s predecessor by the representatives of Panama at the time of framing the convention of March 17, 1910, and was recognized by them as limiting the scope of any possible arbitration of the boundary question. It was similarly made known to and recognized by the representatives of Costa Rica in that negotiation.

If the Government of Panama at that time had undertaken to enter into any convention by which the validity of the Loubet award could, by any possibility, have been put in question, it would have acted beyond its powers and the treaty would not have been binding upon the Republic. It did not do so. The convention of March 17, 1910, was framed with the fact before the eyes of all parties, that it could have no binding force if it made it possible to call in question the validity of the Loubet award, and was carefully expressed to exclude any such possibility.

Under these circumstances, it is with profound astonishment that my Government has seen the distinguished arbitrator, in what assumes to be a decision under this convention, omit to decide the only question submitted to him, viz: the “correct interpretation and true intention “of the Loubet award, and exceed his powers by undertaking to decide two questions not submitted to him, but, on the contrary, intentionally and carefully excluded from his jurisdiction, viz: 1st, the question of the validity of the Loubet award; and,

2nd, the question what the arbitrator would think to be the proper boundary between the two countries if the Loubet award were disregarded.

I need not point out to your excellency that a purported decision under a convention of arbitration which does not decide the question, and the only question, formulated in the convention as the subject of the arbitration, cannot possibly be a valid and binding-award under that convention.

Nor need 1 point out that where an arbitrator, asked only to interpret the description of a boundary in a previous award, renders a purported decision declaring the boundary which he was asked to define “non-existent,” such a decision is beyond his powers, is one which he is is not authorized to make, and one which has no legally binding effect.

Still less is it necessary to argue that where an arbitrator, whose only office is to apply the boundary awarded by a former arbitrator, wholly discards that boundary and undertakes to fix one of his own choice, avowedly and intentionally differing from the boundary which he was asked to apply, his decision is ultra petita, null and void.

It is true that the arbitrator says that: It is conceded by both parties that under this treaty there is the power and duty to substitute for the line set aside a line within the scope of the authority granted under the previous treaty most in accordance with the correct interpretation and true “intention “of the former award.

and that in the depositive part of his decision he describes his new boundary as that “most in accordance with the correct interpretation and true intention “of the Loubet award; but in fact, as his decision shows, such does not even profess to be the character of this new boundary. So far from taking the Loubet award as a guide or attempting in any way to conform to it, the arbitrator first declares the line of that award to be “non-existent,” and then proceeds to fix a proposed boundary without reference to the former award at all.

In fact the arbitrator appears to have reached the conclusion that the “correct interpretation and true intention “of the award which he was appointed to construe was a line starting from Punta Mona, following the divide north of the valley of the Sixaola or Tarire to the Cordillera, and the latter to the point mentioned, near the [ninth] degree of north latitude. But having reached that conclusion, His Honor declares such a boundary to be void, not because to award it went beyond the terms of the convention of 1886 (which was the sole criterion of the powers of President Loubet), but because, from extraneous evidence, he believes that before the submission to President Loubet’s arbitration the dispute of the parties had not been such as to justify that boundary. That is, he thinks that before the conventions of 1880 and 1886 were made the controversy between the parties was only which of several rivers was the true boundary; and, therefore, that President Loubet could only award a boundary formed by a river, though none of the conventions under which he acted contains any reference to any such limitation on his jurisdiction.

His Honor has thus twice misconceived the fundamental rule of international law concerning the powers of arbitrators, viz: that they are determined, and determined only, by the convention of arbitration. He has held President Loubet to be limited by matters to which the conventions under which he acted do not, even by implication, refer; and he has held himself not to be bound by the most explicit provisions of the convention by which the submission to him was made.

His Honor is in error in supposing that Panama has ever conceded that he might set aside the Loubet award, or that he might fix a boundary at variance with that award, at his own pleasure or in accordance with his independent judgment. On the contrary, she has always maintained and still maintains that he has no authority to do either of these things and that in doing them he has greatly exceeded his lawful powers. Had there been any such concession, it could have conferred no power not to be found in the convention, and no such power as the arbitrator has undertaken to exercise can be found in that document. But there was no concession.

Furthermore, the line awarded by the arbitrator under the present convention must be, by the terms of that treaty, the boundary “under “as well as “most in accordance with the correct interpretation and true intention of” President Loubet’s award. The present arbitrator does not even assert that “under “that award any such boundary as he proposes would be possible. Plainly it would not be.

But it is superfluous to argue that a boundary which is totally divergent from and based upon considerations totally in conflict with the Loubet award and to reach which the line described by President Loubet is declared void and “non-existent,” cannot be the boundary either “under” or “most in accordance with the correct interpretation and true intention of “the boundary awarded by him. Except in the formal use of the words to which we have referred, it does not profess to be so.

The present arbitrator has conceived himself to be sitting on appeal from President Loubet, an appeal expressly forbidden by the convention of 1886.

He has not tried to apply or harmonize the award of President Loubet but has held it erroneous and has undertaken to annul it and to give such an award as he thinks should have been made in the first place. In so doing he has assumed powers never granted him and refused to perform the duty which the convention of March 17, 1910, required.

The purpose of this review is not to show the errors in His Honor’s award. A different examination would be required to that end. The present statement is intended only for the purpose of pointing out to your excellency’s Government the extra-limitation of his powers involved in the purported decision of the present arbitrator.

In view of this, my Government not only has the right but is bound to reject and repudiate, and does reject and repudiate the decision of the Honorable the Chief Justice dated September 14 [12], 1914, as null, void and of no effect; and declares that it considers the same as non-existent and in no respect affecting its claims, and that the Republic will not abide by nor accept the same.

My Government sincerely regrets that it is compelled to adopt this course, but high consideration of duty to the country and to the cause of international arbitration leave it no alternative.

Duty to the country, which has, as I have already noted, established the line of the Loubet award as the constitutional boundary, requires my Government to accept no other line. That constitutional provision would, indeed, make any acceptance of another line by the Government ineffectual and invalid; but even if my Government had power it would have no moral right to make such acceptance. Equally would a proper care for the interests of the country, apart from any constitutional provision, forbid such action.

In the interests of international arbitration my Government is also bound to reject this purported decision. The cause of international arbitration would suffer irreparable injury were it thus to be established that an arbitrator is not bound by the terms of the convention under which he acts and that, however carefully questions may be framed and issues limited, a nation which enters an arbitration is not protected, but must submit to decisions on questions which it refused to arbitrate and which the convention was framed to exclude.

Mindful of its international duties and obligations, my Government is making this announcement to your excellency’s Government, to that of the Republic of Costa Rica and to the arbitrator himself at the earliest moment possible, that there may be no doubt in the minds of any one concerned in the affair as to the attitude of Panama.

I repeat [etc.]

Eusebio A. Morales.

7  Id. 820–822.

Chargé Cresson to the Secretary of State. File No. 718.1915/218.

[Document 1741]

Chargé Cresson to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation”,
Panama, October 22, 1914, 10 a.m.

Referring to Legation’s telegram of October 1, Costa Rican boundary decision was rejected by the Foreign Relations commission of the Panama Congress for the reason that fluvial not mountain line was fixed upon. Panaman President informed Panaman Congress similar decision has already been telegraphed Washington and Costa Rica. Panaman Congress approved executive action.

Cresson.

The Minister of Costa Rica to the Secretary of State. File No. 718.1915/223.

[Document 1742]

The Minister of Costa Rica to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Legation of Costa Rica,
Washington, November 7, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: In compliance with special instructions from my Government, I have the honor to forward to your excellency a copy of the award of the Chief Justice of the United States, which brought to a happy end the boundary dispute between Costa Rica and Panama.

It gives the Government of my country extreme pleasure to express, most cordially, its gratitude to the Government of your excellency, through whose efficacious mediation the Anderson-Porras Treaty was concluded. And it also gladly recalls on this occasion that through the ever friendly intercession of the United States the award rendered by the illustrious President Cleveland, and also the services of General Alexander in the physical marking of the boundary, settled once for all time, the boundary dispute with the Republic of Nicaragua, which contributed in no small measure to secure the maintenance of strong and unalterable harmony. And it is now my Government’s most earnest hope that, the award of the Chief Justice of the United States having forever settled the almost century-old boundary question, the international difficulties with the Republic of Colombia and later with that of Panama, formerly frequent, have finally vanished.

I avail [etc.]

R. Brenes Mesén.

[Inclosure.]

in the matter of the arbitration of the boundary dispute between the republics of costa rica and panama provided for by the convention between costa rica and panama of march 17, 1910.

Washington, September 12, 1914.

Opinion and Decision of Edward Douglass White, Chief Justice of the United States, acting in the capacity of Arbitrator as provided in the Treaty aforesaid.

Before proceeding to a consideration of the subject for decision, to avoid breaking continuity of statement, it is observed that a motion made by one of the parties to strike out certain documents because not filed in duplicate, and a motion by the other party to eliminate certain papers because they are said to be partial and hence unauthorized, have both been considered and found irrelevant to the determination of the case and the motions are therefore overruled without further statement on the subject.

Moreover, at the threshold I say that when the duty of considering this case as provided in the treaty was undertaken, it was understood that all the documents and papers in the Spanish language would be translated by the parties into English, and therefore such documents will be referred to in the translations which the parties have furnished.

To state at the outset, first, the geographical situation of the two countries, parties to this arbitration, and, second, to give the history of the nature, origin, development and undisputed facts of the controversy, will conduce to a clearer appreciation of the matters to be passed upon. In doing so for the purposes of the rights with which this arbitration is concerned, Costa Rica will be taken as representing not only rights enjoyed by it in its own name, but all those concerning the matter here in dispute which it possesses as the successor of a prior government, the Republic of Central America; and Panama will likewise be taken as representing for the same purposes, not only its own rights, but also those of its governmental ancestors, the Republic of Colombia, the Republic of New Granada, the United States of Colombia and the Republic of Colombia.

First. The two countries have an extended coast line on the Atlantic and the Pacific Oceans, the territory between the oceans being divided by the main range of the Cordilleras. Not taking into account any conflict as to boundary, if any there be, between Panama and the Republic of Colombia lying southeast of Panama, the territory of Costa Rica and Panama on the Atlantic extends from the upper boundary of Costa Rica at about the eleventh parallel of latitude in a southeasterly direction down to about 8° 40’, a distance not considering the sinuosities of the coast approximating 450 miles.

Second. For seventy-five or eighty years there were controversies between Panama and Costa Rica or their predecessors concerning the extent of their territorial authority. All the disputes referred to arose from two subjects differing fundamentally; the one, a contention on the part of Panama that its territorial sovereignty embraced the entire Atlantic coast, not only along its own front, but also along the front of Costa Rica and Nicaragua, which country lies above Costa Rica, since the claim of sovereignty terminated only at Cape Gracias a Dios, which was practically the uppermost boundary of Nicaragua dividing that country from Honduras. This claim was based upon what was asserted to be the operation of a Spanish Royal Order of 1803. The other claim, distinct from the former because resting upon independent considerations and which would require to be disposed of even if the former claim was held to be unfounded, concerned the boundary dividing the territory of the two countries in the expanse from the Atlantic to the Cordilleras, across the same and on the Pacific side. So far as the entire territorial claim is concerned and the points in the mere boundary claim which concern the crossing of the Cordilleras and the line of boundary on the Pacific side, no further statement need be made for reasons hereafter to be set forth. The aspect of the controversy therefore necessary to be stated here involves only the boundary between the two countries in the territory situated on the Atlantic side between that ocean and the range of the Cordilleras.

On the part of Costa Rica in substance from the beginning its lower boundary was claimed to embrace an island in the Atlantic Ocean designated as Escudo de Veragua opposite the mouth of a river named as the Chiriquí, which emptied into the Atlantic shortly below what was known as Almirante Bay, and following the course of that river to the Cordilleras. This claim of boundary, if valid, would necessarily have deprived Panama or its predecessors of a large area of territory over which that country asserted jurisdiction. This assertion of boundary right made by Costa Rica was based, besides a reference to other Spanish documents or decrees, especially on what was asserted to be the result of certain Spanish Céclulas or Capitulaciones of 1540, 1573 and 1600. Again for reasons which will hereafter be made apparent, the facts concerning the rightfulness of this claim of boundary on the part of Costa Rica need not be further enumerated.

On the other hand, the claim on the part of Panama or its predecessors was that the boundary line was made by a river which took its source in the Cordilleras and flowed into the Atlantic at a point much above Almirante Bay. The river which it was thus contended by Panama constituted the boundary was designated by various names and the point at which it emptied into the Atlantic would seem for a considerable time to have been in doubt. There is no ground, however, for real dispute that it came finally to pass that Panama recognized that the stream which it relied upon and continued to insist constituted the boundary along its entire course from the mountains debouched in the Atlantic Ocean shortly below a point indifferently designated as Punta Carreta or Punta Mona—indeed that such river was the first stream emptying into the Atlantic below that point—and that at its mouth at least the stream in question was known as the Sixaola. The boundary dispute therefore involved the territory lying between the two rivers contended for in their courses as they flowed from the mountain range in which directly or indirectly they took their sources to the ocean, and the area, and extent of the controversy, therefore, depended in the nature of things upon the direction of the flow of the bounding rivers which the parties had in mind and upon which they respectively relied as constituting the division between the two countries.

As the statement just made in a general way points to the questions of fact and law to be passed upon, it might well be taken as adequate for the purposes of the mere outline which I at the outset indicated, and therefore would render it necessary now to make no further statement before coming to an analysis of the questions of law and fact for decision under the present arbitration.

But as when the discharge of that duty is reached it will become apparent that in its last analysis every issue for decision will involve an appreciation of the facts concerning the claim of river boundary relied upon by Panama, the assertion of the river boundary contended for by Costa Rica being, as I have said, out of the case, in order to avoid repetition and to clear a broad way leading to the merits, I propose to state the facts concerning the essential matters which require to be considered, concerning the claim of Panama under a third heading as follows:

Third. The origin of the claim made by Panama, the acts, dealings and admissions of that Government or its predecessors concerning such claim, the negotiations for a prior arbitration, the environment of such negotiations, the treaties made agreeing to the same, the award, the course taken by the parties in executing it, the controversy which resulted, either concerning its interpretation or its binding force, the entering into the arbitration treaty now being executed, and such additional facts as are found in this record as may be considered necessary to be taken into view in connection with the questions of law which require to be passed upon.

To the end of orderly consideration I state the subjects which this general proposition embraces separately under four headings enumerated (a), (b), (c) and (d).

(a) The source of the boundary claim of Panama and Panama’s official assertions of its right by way of negotiations or attempts to negotiate with Costa Rica with reference to the same or otherwise.

There is no document in the record upon which the assertion by Panama or its predecessors to the river boundary above referred to can be said to rest as an original muniment of title, and therefore the non-existence of any document of that character may be assumed. I say this because although Señor Madrid, a Colombian publicist, in 1852 in a report made to the Colombian Minister of Foreign Affairs declared that official documents to such effect existed, Señor Borda, another Colombian publicist, as late as 1896 in a work prepared officially for the use of the Colombian Government declared that no such official documents had been found and could not be said to exist unless they were considered to be embraced by two alleged maps which were referred to.

But without reference to the source of the title, the existence of the dispute as to boundary at an early date is clearly shown, since in 1825 Costa Rica as a state of the United Provinces of Central. America in its Constitution declared its boundary to be the Escudo de Veragua, the island opposite the Chiriquí River which, as I have said, is the boundary now relied upon by Costa Rica. And in the same year, presumably as the result of a dispute concerning this boundary, the Republic of Colombia (Panama) and the United Provinces of Central America (Costa Rica) entered into a convention by which they obliged themselves to “respect the limits of each other as they now exist “, and expressed their purpose to fix their boundaries upon that basis and contemplated a future agreement or convention to give effect to that purpose. The provisions thus referred to were embraced in Articles VII and VIII of the convention. There was no express agreement between the parties for the settlement or demarcation of the territorial claim as to sovereignty over the coast up to Cape Gracias a Dios, although Article IX of the convention contained a provision for a modus vivendi between the parties concerning such claim.

Clear as is the text of the treaty in question on the two distinct subjects stated, if there were room for obscurity it would be greatly illumined by a consideration of the negotiations which preceded the adoption of the treaty. I say this because in those negotiations a proposition on the part of Colombia (Panama) to adjust or compromise the larger territorial claim on a basis stated was promptly rejected by Costa Rica, and on the other hand a proposition made by the representative of Colombia that “as to boundaries it is necessary to hold to the uti possidetis of 1810 or 1820 as may be desired,” was promptly accepted by Costa Rica, thus indicating why as to the larger claim nothing but a provision for a modus Vivendi was inserted, while as to the boundary claim proper a basis for its adjustment was agreed upon and a declaration of the purpose to execute in the future that agreement was made. What exactly was the possessory boundary relied upon as then existing does not appear. Subsequently, the contemplated purpose of delimiting the boundary stated in the convention not having been carried out, that is in 1836, the Republic of New Granada (Panama), in establishing a new territory called Bocas del Toro fixed the limits of that territory on the Atlantic coast from the river called Concepción up to the mouth of a river described as the Culebras and then “on the northwest [that is, from the mountains to the mouth of the Culebras] by the frontier line which separates on that side the Republic of New Granada from that of Central America.” It is apparent that this description, while it amounted to an attempt to definitely fix a line of boundary on the Atlantic coast at the entrance of the Culebras River, did not define the line of that boundary from the point of the mouth of that river to the main Cordilleras, but left it to follow the course of the existing boundary line between the two countries—an omission which was presumably caused by the fact that by Articles VII and VIII of the Convention of 1825, as we have seen, the line of such boundary was to be determined by the application of the doctrine of uti possidetis and the subsequent demarcation which was contemplated but which had not taken place. It is to be observed, however, that while the line from the mouth of the river to the mountains was thus left open to be marked, the provision clearly points out that the line of boundary or frontier as it then existed and as it was understood between the parties, considered in its trend from the mountains to the mouth of the river, ran in a northeasterly direction, or, conversely, from the mouth of the selected river to the mountains, in a southwesterly course.

Following the assertions of right on behalf of Costa Rica to the southern boundary at the Chiriquí River, as at the outset stated, and of Panama to a northern boundary at the mouth of the river called the Culebras, running from the mountains to the ocean on a line having the course above indicated, many subsequent negotiations occurred which we outline briefly as follows:

In 1856 a treaty was drawn between New Granada (Panama) and Costa Rica, by which the northern boundary between the two countries on the Atlantic was fixed by a river named the Doraces from its source in the Cordilleras “down-stream by the middle of the principal channel of this river until it empties into the Atlantic.” When the Congress of New Granada (Panama) came to act upon this Treaty it defined the mouth of this river in the Atlantic as being “the first river which is found at a short distance to the southeast of Punta Carreta [Punta Mona].” As a result of this definition the Treaty was not ratified because Costa Rica declined to agree to the definition, which, of course, if accepted, would have destroyed its claim to a boundary by the Chiriquí, whose point of emptying into the Atlantic was many miles below Punta Carreta. And this serves to demonstrate that the real difference between the parties, at least as to the boundary on the Atlantic side, did not arise from the fact that the parties were quarrelling over the direction of either of the different bounding rivers upon which they respectively relied, but were disputing and unalterably at odds as to which river was the boundary.

Again in 1865 a further attempt by treaty was made to fix a boundary by a river described as the Carnaveral, which if made the boundary would in substance, that is, for all practical purposes, have created a boundary the equivalent of that claimed by Costa Rica in the Chiriquí River. The treaty failed of ratification, and without going into detail it is true here again to say that the failure of the ratification in part at least arose from the impossibility of securing a meeting of minds of the two countries as to the abandonment of the claims of the river boundary pressed by either side, and was not concerned with the contention upon one side or the other concerning the course or direction of the bounding river which either claimed, if that river had been accepted as the boundary.

In 1873 another treaty was drawn which defined the boundary by a river called the Bananos flowing from its source in the Cordilleras emptying in the Atlantic at Almirante Bay. As the concession of the boundary by this river would have clearly repudiated Panama’s claim previously asserted of a river emptying into the Atlantic, the first below Punta Carreta or Punta Mona, its ratification would have destroyed all right of Panama to such claim. But the treaty was not ratified, thus again affording an illustration of what was the real dispute, that is, which of the rivers was the boundary, and the difficulty of securing the ratification of any treaty on that subject.

In the long period of time embracing the acts to which I have just referred there were various official statements of responsible officers of the Colombia (Panama) Government, all resting its boundary claim upon a river boundary, and not one word of intimation is found in the slightest degree tending to show that any other or different boundary right was claimed than one by a river, whatever may have been the controversies or doubts suggested concerning the particular name of the river or the point where it emptied into the Atlantic, and, indeed, this also is true concerning the general course and trend of the bounding river relied upon. I make these statements, not overlooking the fact that there are instances where Punta Mona, a place on the Atlantic shore not on the mouth of any river, is mentioned as the boundary and indeed one instance where it was declared that Humboldt was authority for that proposition, although the very official making the statement pointed out that the boundary was the Culebras River which, as then understood, was a stream entering the ocean below Punta Mona. Likewise, Madrid, the distinguished Colombian publicist already referred to, making a report to the Colombian Senate said in referring to the boundary on the Pacific as well as on the Atlantic and of the crossing of the boundary line over the Cordillera range, that the whole boundary line, both on the Pacific and the Atlantic sides, including the crossing of the mountains, consisted of a line to be drawn from the middle of the Gulf of Dulce on the Pacific side, thence crossing the Cordilleras and traversing the Atlantic side to “the mouth of the River Doraces or Culebras, a short distance from Punta Careta, which is also, approximately, the boundary indicated by Baron de Humboldt and other celebrated travelers,” thus in effect confirming a river boundary as asserted from the beginning and at all times without hesitation or deviation by Panama, and in addition making it quite clear that the course and direction of the bounding river as understood between the parties was that which has been previously stated.

(b) The light thrown upon the subject, if any, by a consideration of maps and charts applicable to the claim.

It is undoubted that in the earlier maps there was great uncertainty as to the particular name of the river relied upon, some showing a river named Dorces, Doraces or Dorados, some a river called Culebras, and some showing two distinct rivers one named Dorces, Doraces or Dorados and the other Culebras. However, it is true to say that in a general sense all the rivers so named are shown on all these maps to have a general northeasterly direction from the main Cordilleras where, or in the vicinage of which, they purported to take their source and flowed to the Atlantic Ocean, whatever was the confusion in the respective maps as to the precise point of location of the rivers or the place where they emptied into the Atlantic. For instance, what is known as the Spherical Chart of 1805–9 shows the Dorados river flowing from the region of the mountains in a northeastern direction without tributaries to its mouth in the Atlantic, the first below Punta Mona, while the map of Ponce de Leon and Paz of 1864 showed the Culebras or Dorados having the same general course emptying into the Atlantic above Punta Mona. But none of these differences serve to confuse the situation when looked at comprehensively, that is, they do not serve to create any material doubt concerning the boundary river, the first below Punta Mona, relied upon by Panama and the general northeasternly course which such river was considered to have from the point of view of its source in the mountains and journeying from thence to the place where it emptied into the ocean.

And indeed it is here again worthy of remark that this coincidence of course corresponds in its general trend with the assertion by Colombia (Panama) of its boundary line in the very first instance where it found exact expression in the definition of the boundary in the act creating the territory of Bocas del Toro, to which I have referred.

(c) The demonstration as to the exact nature of the claim afforded by the occupation or settlement of the territory covered by the boundary during the period of dispute.

It is, moreover, to be observed that it is obvious if the parties contemplated the boundary to be a river flowing from the mountains to the ocean in a northeasterly course, the eastern bank of such river would belong to Colombia (Panama) and the western bank to Costa Rica, an understanding which it is undoubted was the one entertained by the two Governments. I say this because the proof here is adequate and comprehensive that the western bank of a river so flowing was occupied and settled under the jurisdiction of Costa Rica, and that as far as settlements were made by Colombia (Panama) the eastern bank was taken as the line of its jurisdiction of that country. This is aptly illustrated by the following facts. A Colombian settlement was located at the mouth of the boundary river, the first below Punta Mona, which came to be known as the Sixaola. This bank, if a river had been contemplated as flowing east and west in its course from the Cordilleras to the sea, would have been the south bank of the river, as indeed at the point of settlement it was accurately speaking such bank owing to the direction of the flow of the Sixaola in the immediate region of its mouth. But disregarding this merely local condition and evidently looking at the situation with reference to the trend of the boundary line which it had entertained from the beginning and the general course of the river which had been from the commencement and without change considered to be the boundary, complaint was made by Colombia (Panama) to Costa Rica of intrusion upon “the Colombian village ‘Sixaula’, situated upon the eastern side of that river.” And similar language was repeatedly used in the course of the negotiations between the parties. Indeed, it is correct to say that whatever may have been the more accurate knowledge acquired of the names of rivers and of their true location and courses and distances, there is nothing whatever in the record to indicate any action taken or any expression by word which directly or indirectly would justify the belief that up to the period when the previous award was rendered, the consideration of which we shall hereafter approach, the boundary line between the two countries as insisted upon by Panama, was made in any other way than by a river having the general trend and course of the river or rivers to which we have referred and which in practice were treated as the dividing line—a practice which, as I have said, was shown by official action in many forms, by the exercise of dominion by the respective countries and was demonstrated by the settlements which manifested the practical conception which prevailed concerning the real situation as to boundary.

(d) The controlling effect of the action of Panama concerning the submission of the matter to a former arbitration, and the dominating influence of its conduct in connection with the hearing and submission thus previously made.

The failure to provide for the exact delimitation of the boundary line as contemplated by the Convention of 1825 may well be presumed to have produced its natural results. Certain is it that there had been a failure to do so not only on the Atlantic but on the Pacific side of the mountains, in 1880, growing out of disputes as to rights of possession and authority in the territory on the Pacific side, a rupture between the two countries was threatened and war between them was imminent. In view of these exigencies and in contemplation of a proposed negotiation with Costa Rica for an adjustment which might obviate an armed conflict, the Senate of Colombia (Panama) on July 14, 1880, formulated a statement of the claim of Colombia embracing the following conclusions:

(1) Colombia has, under titles emanating from the Spanish Government and the uti possidetis of 1810, a perfect right of dominion to, and is in possession of the territory which extends towards the north between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans to the following line:

From the mouth of the River Culebras, in the Atlantic, going upstream to its source, from thence a line along the crest of the ridge of Las Cruces to the origin of River Goifito; thence the natural course of the latter river to its outlet into the Gulf of Duice in the Pacific.

(2) Colombia has titles which accredit its right, emanating from the King of Spain, to the Atlantic littoral embraced from the mouth of the River Culebras as far as Cape Gracias a Dios.

(3) Colombia has been in uninterrupted possession of the territory included within the limits indicated in Conclusion I.

And in another Conclusion which I do not reproduce, it was virtually declared that as a condition precedent to negotiations there must be an “evacuation [by Costa Rica] of any portion of territory in which that nation may have established its authorities beyond the limits marked out in Conclusion I.” Although these Conclusions were communicated for his guidance to the Negotiator representing Colombia, who was endeavoring to reach an adjustment with Costa Rica, it is worthy of remark that the instructions transmitting to the Negotiator the Conclusions of the Senate while insisting that as a sine qua non to the negotiations certain territory situated on the Pacific coast which was the more immediate cause of the dispute should be evacuated, made no request of such a character as to one foot of soil on the Atlantic side based on the want of right to possess along the bounding river having the course and direction which I have stated. This conduct certainly shows that even in the vivid light which must have been thrown on the controversy between the two countries resulting from the almost flagrancy of war, the parties concerning the boundary on the Atlantic coast entertained and suggested no different view of that boundary than a river, by whatever name it might have been called, following the general trend and course of the bounding river which had been asserted by Panama from the beginning, and that settlements by Costa Rica on the Atlantic coast which did not transcend or interfere with such a boundary were not really the subject of serious dispute between the two countries. It is also worthy to be observed that although the larger territorial claim of the Atlantic coast to Cape Gracias a Dios was embodied in the Conclusions of the Senate under Number 2, no express instructions whatever concerning that claim were given to the Negotiator, and it is in addition of importance that the President of Colombia issued a proclamation concerning the claims of that Government and although in such proclamation he embodied in so many words the propositions contained in the Senate Conclusions with reference to the assertion of the river boundary, no mention whatever was made as to the claim of sovereignty over the coast up to Cape Gracias a Dios as mentioned in the Senate Conclusions since the Senate’s statement as to that asserted right was wholly omitted from the proclamation—a fact which gives support to the view that such controversy was not embraced by the Treaty of 1880.

The rupture between the two countries was avoided and a treaty was negotiated and ratified between them for the purpose of submitting to the arbitrament of the King of Spain the disputes stated in the treaty. The preamble of this treaty recited that its purpose was “to close the only source of differences that may arise between them, which is no other than the question of boundaries foreseen in articles VII and VIII of the Convention of March 15, 1825, between Central America and Colombia, and which has subsequently been the subject of diverse treaties between Costa Rica and Colombia”—a declaration of purpose clearly embracing the river boundary dispute which was the subject provided for in the articles of the Convention of 1825 referred to and which articles were therefore virtually incorporated into the treaty and became by reference a part thereof. The first article, which gave effect to the purpose thus expressed in the preamble, by its terms when reasonably construed related to the fixing of a boundary along the disputed line coming within the scope of articles VII and VIII of the Convention of 1825 to the end that the possession of both parties within their proper territory might be secured—a boundary which, as we have seen, by the acts and declarations of Colombia, by the authoritative writings of the publicists of that country, and by the very conclusions of the Senate leading up to the treaty had come to mean a river flowing from its source in the Cordilleras in a northeasterly direction to a point where it emptied into the Atlantic Ocean as the first river having its mouth below Punta Mona. And the fact that this, was the subject contemplated by the treaty is further shown when it is considered that the Convention of 1825 had in it an article expressly referring to a modus Vivendi regarding the larger claim concerning the Atlantic coast to Cape Gracias a Dios, and that no reference or incorporation of the provisions on that subject was made in the treaty—a view additionally sustained by the instructions to the Negotiator who commenced the negotiation of the treaty and by the President in his proclamation, in both of which the controversy as to the sovereignty of the coast line was treated as negligible for the purpose of the negotiations which the treaty consummated.

The King of Spain accepted, but before his duty was discharged, although the Government of Spain had taken initial steps towards its performance, the King died. Thereafter in 1886 the two Governments negotiated an additional treaty of arbitration. The preamble of this Convention after reciting the previous treaty, the acceptance of the King of Spain, the beginning by the Spanish Government of the execution of the duties incident to the arbitration and the death of the King, declared that the parties to remove all doubt regarding the competency “of his successor [the King’s] to continue to exercise jurisdiction over said arbitral suit until final judgment, have agreed to execute the following convention ad referendum additional to that signed* * * on December 25, 1880.” The first Article of this treaty recognized in express terms the right of the successor of the King or the government of Spain “to continue exercising jurisdiction over the arbitration proposed by the two Republics, and to render an irrevocable and final award in the controversy pending concerning the territorial boundaries between the High Contracting Parties.” While no reference in terms was made to an additional power to consider and decide as an arbitrator the controversy concerning the larger territorial claim, it can not be subject to serious dispute that under the terms of the treaty an additional power to that conferred by the previous treaty was given to the arbitrator to adjudge as to the larger claim of Panama to territorial sovereignty extending along the coast line to Cape Gracias a Dios. I say this because such is the natural result of an enumeration of the limits of the territory in dispute embraced in Article II and the statement in Article III concerning the authority of the arbitrator to decide the controversies.

I do not reproduce the text of the two articles since it is hereafter quoted (p. 25) in the analysis of the legal questions which are involved in the merits of the controversy. But in my opinion the fact that the additional power was given concerning the territorial claim clearly did not change or expand the power conferred by the previous treaty concerning the boundary claim, since such conclusion is rendered absolutely necessary by the express statements which I have referred to in the treaty that the power formerly given and which had been partially executed was to continue until final judgment, and finally by the provision saving the prior treaty from abrogation as a result of the adoption of the latter.

It having resulted from reasons purely of convenience not necessary to be stated, that the King of Spain did not complete the discharge of the duties of arbitrator begun under the first treaty nor enter upon those resulting from the second treaty, the parties in 1896 entered into a Convention agreeing to submit the subjects to the arbitration of the President of the French Republic. The Convention expressly declared that it made no change in the fundamental matters referred to, and that it was but intended to submit the controversy under the terms and limitations thereof to the arbitrament of a new tribunal. Prior to the assumption by the President of the French Republic of the duties created by this treaty, the authorized representative of Costa Rica addressed to him a letter enclosing the text of the arbitration treaty and asking him to undertake the duties which it imposed. The letter in addition said: “I also enclose a geographical map of the territory in litigation upon which are indicated the boundaries claimed by each of the contracting parties.” The map which was thus sent clearly delineated the bounding river, the Chiriquí claimed by Costa Rica, and the river claimed to be the boundary by Colombia (Panama), that river being marked on the map as entering into the Atlantic the first below Punta Mona and having in its flow from the mountains to the ocean a general northeasterly-direction conforming to the course and flow of the bounding river which, as I have seen, had prevailed without question or hesitation from the beginning. The river which was thus delineated on the map was designated as the “Yurquin “(Yorquin) from its source in or near the Cordilleras to a point where it emptied into a river named the “Sixola” (Sixaola), the two in the course and direction indicated thus being marked on the map as the bounding river on which Colombia relied. There is no proof in this record that such letter written by the representative of Costa Rica, was ever communicated to the representatives of Panama, but there is nothing in the record indicating that anything occurred which called for its communication, as there is nothing to show that there was any intimation of controversy between the parties as to the trend and course of the bounding river claimed by Colombia to constitute the boundary if the general controversy between Colombia and Costa Rica as to which of the two rivers was the boundary should be determined in favor of Colombia. The duty under the treaties was accepted by the President of the French Republic and the case was made up and submitted for award.

On the part of Panama an elaborate argument was submitted to sustain the claim of that country to sovereignty over the Atlantic coast to Cape Gracias a Dios, under the Royal Order of 1803, and in addition an argument was made to sustain a broad claim of territorial authority under a Royal Cedula of March 2, 1537, which it would seem was presented for the first time in the argument in question. Aside from the elaborate argument just stated there was no detailed discussion or argument on the part of Panama concerning the dispute between itself and Costa Rica as to which of the two rivers was the boundary and nothing whatever was said concerning the course and trend and location of the river claimed by Panama as the boundary, if the river asserted by it should be found to be the true boundary, which in the slightest degree conflicted with the statements on that subject contained in the letter written by the minister of Costa Rica or which, moreover, in any way whatever challenged the source, the course, and the trend of the river relied upon by Colombia as resulting from the history of the boundary controversy from the beginning which has been previously given. I say this because the only statement concerning these subjects contained in the argument made by Colombia after a discussion concerning the validity of its claim to authority over the coast line was a general reference to Colombia’s title to what it called the Duchy of Veragua, which Colombia confessedly held, and the claim in the following words asserted to exist as the result of the ownership of that title: “This title alone would suffice to show the actual right of possession of Colombia over Chiriquí Lagoon, the Bay of the Admiral [Almirante Bay] and the contiguous country in the direction of the Sixaola River (dans la direction du Rio Sigsaula.)”

On the part of Costa Rica the argument was addressed to an attempt to refute the larger claim as to sovereignty over the coast made by Panama and in addition as to the boundary dispute to establish that the River Chiriquí, was the true, boundary and by a negative pregnant to thereby demonstrate that the river claimed by Colombia was not. But there was not one word in the argument tending to show that it was considered that if Colombia’s claim to boundary was rightful, it embraced any other territory or any other river than that which had been described in the letter to the Arbitrator, and which description conformed to all the facts which, as I have stated, are demonstrated by the history of the subject from the beginning.

The whole record which was before the former Arbitrator is not shown to be a part of this record, but neither party disputes, if they do not in terms concede, that the substantial facts which I have previously stated were embraced in the record for the purposes of the prior arbitration. Prior to making the award and as an aid in doing so, the Arbitrator appointed a Commission of distinguished officials of the French diplomatic corps, and in addition the Keeper of the Maps in the National Library, to consider the subject presented by the arbitration. The written report to that Commission, if any was made, is not in this record.

The award of the Arbitrator was made on September 11, 1900. Leaving aside certain provisions contained therein as to islands both along the Atlantic and Pacific so much of the award as is necessary here to be considered is as follows, the translation from the French being taken from the argument of the Republic of Panama in this case, there being no question on the other side as to its substantial accuracy.

The Frontier between the Republics of Colombia and Costa Rica shall be formed by the counterfort of the Cordillera which starts from Cape Mona, on the Atlantic Ocean, and closes on the North the valley of the Tariare or Rio Sixola; then by the chain of division of waters between the Atlantic and Pacific, to nine degrees, about, of latitude; it will follow then the line of division of waters between the Cheriquí Viejo and the affluents of Gulf Dulce, to end at Point Burica on the Pacific Ocean.

Upon the announcement of this award the Minister of Costa Rica who had also been its agent for the purposes of the proceedings under the arbitration addressed a letter to Monsieur Delcasse, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of France, in the name of Costa Rica in form at least seeking to interpret the award and requesting that a particular line be indicated by the arbitrator as a boundary. The line thus asked as an interpretation of what had been awarded was substantially like that which the Minister of Costa Rica had marked on the map which he sent to the President of the French Republic before the arbitration was undertaken as showing what the claim of Colombia was as to the river which it asserted to be the boundary and therefore as demonstrating what that country would be entitled to if its claim was allowed.

To this letter the Minister of Foreign Affairs replied as follows: Answering the request which you have been pleased to express in your letters of September 29th and October 23rd ultimo, I have the honor to inform you that, on account of the lack of exact geographic data, the Arbitrator was not able to fix the boundary except by means of general indications; I think, therefore, that there would be difficulty in fixing them on a map. But there is no doubt, as you observe, that, in conformity with the terms of articles 2 and 3 of the Convention of Paris of January 20, 1886, this boundary line must be drawn within the confines of the territory in dispute, as they are determined by the text of said articles.

It is in accordance with these principles that it is for the Republics of Colombia and Costa Rica to proceed to the physical delimitation of their frontiers, and the Arbitrator trusts, on this point, to the spirit of conciliation and good understanding with which the two Governments in litigation have up to the present time been inspired.* * *

Costa Rica declined to accept the award unless it was interpreted according to its view as stated in the letter written by its minister to Monsieur Delcassé, and Colombia insisted that the award required no interpretation and should be executed according to its terms. The award remained without practical effect although various negotiations were had on the subject and although a proposed treaty for adjusting the differences was drawn but failed of ratification. In this situation a treaty providing for the duty of arbitration to be performed by the Chief Justice of the United States, now being executed, was entered into. By that treaty the previous award as to the Pacific coast, as to the line crossing the Cordilleras and the dividing line on that range of mountains “to a point beyond Cerro Pando* * * near the ninth degree of North Latitude” was expressly declared to be binding, and, therefore, all controversy concerning those subjects was put at rest. It follows, therefore, that the treaty accepted in its entirety the award as to the Pacific coast and provided only by the methods and to the extent contemplated by its terms, which I shall hereafter have occasion to specifically state and consider, for an examination and decision concerning the controversy in relation to the award concerning the dispute as to the boundary between the two countries on the Atlantic coast from the mountains to the ocean.

The record contains nearly fifty volumes, and the arguments submitted as to the subject-matter in controversy and voluminous, covering on one side or the other the widest possible field and every aspect of everything that has taken place in the long period of time to which I have referred. Without reference to its materiality to the issues here to be decided there is certainly this distinction between the record now under consideration and that which was before the previous Arbitrator which ought not to be passed without mention. By the terms of the present treaty, provision was made for the appointment of a commission “for making a survey of the territory”; and this request having been made, in October, 1911, such a board was organized, composed of four members, one appointed by the President of Costa Rica, one by the President of Panama, and the other two by the Arbitrator. The appointees were all civil engineers of the highest attainment and distinction in their profession. They were as follows: Professor John F. Hayford, of Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, Chairman; Professor Ora M. Leland, of Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, Secretary; Mr. P. H. Ashmead, of New York City; and Mr. Frank W. Hodgdon, of Boston, Massachusetts. After the organization of the board and after the adoption of a plan to govern the performance of its duty, which plan was approved by both countries, a survey in the field was undertaken and accomplished after prolonged and arduous labor, and its results were submitted in a report and in many maps and charts displaying the situation in the most careful, comprehensive and accurate manner. It is true to say, overlooking what may be qualified as minor differences, the board was in substance united. And great as is the satisfaction afforded by the action of the Commission of Survey, there is an additional and important cause of gratification arising from the fact that its work as to fiscal arrangements and in every other respect was aided and facilitated by the two countries whose controversy is here for decision. I do not go into detail concerning the report or the map or maps which accompanied it, since in the view now taken of the case it does not depend upon their analysis or statement. But although it is not essential to the conclusion which I have reached, it is pertinent to the contentions which I shall be obliged to notice before announcing that conclusion to state the facts shown by the report and maps of the Commission concerning a continuous counterfort (range or spur) stretching from the main Cordilleras to Punta Mona which was made the boundary line in the previous arbitration. These facts show that there is undoubtedly a high spur projecting itself out in the direction of Punta Mona from the main range for a distance of about nine miles, but there is then a sudden drop of about 3,600 feet in less than four miles, where an elevated but broken country begins, full of ridges, transverse to the direction of the spur. From this region continuing towards the Atlantic there is a gradual lowering except for occasional peaks, the country falling to an elevation of about six hundred feet when a distance of about sixteen miles from Punta Mona is reached, and sinking yet farther to about three hundred feet most of the way and finally subsiding into a swamp which is a mile and one-half wide, until a small eminence which marks Punta Mona is attained. Whether, as is urged, the designation of “counterfort” was mistakenly applied to such a situation, however, I am not called upon to consider, since my conclusion, as I have said, is wholly independent of that fact.

There is no real controversy between the parties as to the facts previously stated. I say real controversy because if it be that there is any dispute on the subject the preponderance of evidence makes such clear proof concerning such facts that they may be accurately said to be not disputable. And in my opinion it is also true to say that likewise the inferences which I have drawn from the facts stated in the course of making the statement are so clearly compelled by the facts stated as to be equally beyond dispute. I now come to consider the propositions relied upon by the parties in the light of the facts and the inferences which I have heretofore or shall hereafter draw from them under a heading—The Merits of the Controversy.

the merits of the controversy.

Costa Rica insists, first, that under the facts the selection by the Arbitrator of Punta Mona as an initial boundary point and the making of the boundary line by a range or spur of mountains extending from there to the Cordilleras was void because beyond the scope of the authority which the arbitration embraced. Second, it insists that in any event as something cannot be made out of that which does not exist, it clearly follows that the selection of the line was in other respects void since under the proof it is demonstrated that the mountain range made the basis of the award has no existence.

On the part of Panama the contention is, first, that assuming the facts which I have given in stating the history of the case to be true, nevertheless the line of alleged mountain boundary was within the power of the Arbitrator to fix because the authority to do so was conferred upon him by the treaty upon which the arbitration was made. And second, |hat this view remains unaffected even if it be assumed that the range of mountains has no existence since the line of boundary which that range was intended to mark remains and is plainly discernible by the conformation of the country and the watershed which it contains. Third. It is additionally insisted by Panama that the validity of the line of mountain boundary must be tested not by the assumed dominancy of any general principles of law governing arbitration, but by the former arbitration treaty alone, because the treaty under which the power to arbitrate is now being exercised confines the authority of the present Arbitrator to determining whether the previous award was within the terms of the previous treaty and excludes the power to hold the previous award invalid if it was within the treaty upon the theory that it conflicted with general and controlling principles of law.

Considering these propositions as a whole, inasmuch as there can be no question of the power of the two Governments to have entered into the previous treaties of arbitration and to insert in them such provisions as they deemed best, it clearly results that the first proposition of Panama, if its premise be true, is well founded and is controlling since it cannot be said that action taken under the treaties was void for want of power if it was within the power which the treaties conferred. It also is patent, this being true, that it cannot be held under this treaty that an act done under the prior treaty was void although sanctioned by such treaty because of some conception of general principles of law. This must be the case because to so do would amount to deciding that this treaty gave the power to set aside acts which were authorized by the previous treaty. It thus necessarily comes to pass that the fundamental question to be decided requires it to be determined whether the boundary line fixed by the previous arbitration was within the previous treaty or treaties. And if it was not, it must follow that its correction is within the scope of the authority conferred by this treaty; and if it was, no power here obtains to revise it. It is therefore true that the whole case comes down to the question stated: which is, the scope and meaning of the prior arbitration treaty or treaties, and the solution of that inquiry will decide both of the propositions relied upon by Costa Rica, as well as all those insisted upon by Panama.

The study of that question from the point of view of the argument presented by Panama requires the immediate consideration of the text of the previous treaty, that of 1886, the pertinent articles of which are as follows:

Article II. The territorial limit which the Republic of Costa Rica claims, on the Atlantic side reaches as far as the Island Escudo de Veraguas, and the River Chiriquí (Calobebora) inclusive; and on the Pacific side, as far as the River Chiriqul Viejo, inclusive, to the Bast of Point Burica.

The territorial limit which the United States of Colombia claims reaches, on the Atlantic side, as far as Cape Gracias a Dios, inclusive; and on the Pacific side, as far as the mouth of the River Golfito and In Gulf Dulce.

Article III. The arbitral award shall confine itself to the disputed territory that lies within the extreme limits already described, and cannot affect in any manner any rights that a third party, who has not taken part in the arbitration, may set up to the ownership of the territory comprised within the limits indicated.

The construction relied upon to establish that the mountain boundary was within these treaty provisions and therefore valid and not subject to be reexamined under this treaty is this: The second article, it is said, specifically states the exterior points of the vast territory which was in dispute and therefore brought within the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator everything within those exterior boundaries and gave him authority at his discretion wholly without reference to any particular controversy pending or dispute existing as to claims within the boundaries, to fix such a line of boundary within the exterior limits as was deemed best. And support for this proposition is derived from the clause of the third article saying, “The Arbitral award shall confine itself to the disputed territory that lies within the extreme limits already described,” the construction given to these words being that they empower the fixing of a line not only concerning a dispute as to the exterior limits, but a line within the exterior limits wholly without reference to the disputes prevailing between the parties as to land within the exterior limits. The demonstration of the extreme result which would come from maintaining the construction thus asserted is too plain to require more than to direct attention to the consequences which would result from sustaining it—consequences which could not be better exemplified than they are by the facts of this case where in a dispute only as to which of two rivers was the bounding one with no difference whatever as to what either of the parties would be entitled to if either river relied upon was made the boundary, no river boundary was made, but a mountain range was fixed carrying with it a large amount of territory to which the successful party would not possibly have had any title if every claim which was made in the dispute as to that boundary had been held to be correct. Besides, on the face of the text the curious premise upon which the argument proceeds is patent since it in substance is that from a grant of power to determine as to the “disputed territory that lies within the extreme limits “there arose the right to determine as to territory within such limits as to which there was ho dispute whatever. And that this anomalous result of the proposition is not overdrawn is made manifest by the statement on the subject in the argument on behalf of Panama, where it is said: Article III only provides that the award shall be confined to the disputed territory within the limits fixed by Article II, and cannot affect the rights of third parties.* * *

It will be noted that the only limitation which these Articles imposed upon the Arbitrator was with regard to the terminal points of the boundary which he should fix. He could not, upon the Atlantic, fix a line which should begin south or east of Escudo de Veraguas or the mouth of the river Chiriquí, nor north of the northern frontier of Costa Rica; nor could he fix any line which should meet the Pacific at a point south of the Chiriquí Viejo or north of the Golfito.

But except in this respect his jurisdiction was unlimited. No claim was made by either party as to interior lines and nothing in the treaty prescribes any rule upon the subject. So long as the terminal points upon the two coasts were within those stated, he was at complete liberty, in the interior, to connect them by a line running in whatever course he should think proper.

I do not stop to point out how plain would be the duty to resort to every reasonable intendment to save the articles of the treaty from the construction attributed to them if the premise upon which the proposition rests were true that their text alone afforded the measure of deciding the question of power conferred as to the boundary issue. But the question of power is not to be solved alone by the article of the treaty thus relied upon by Panama, since on the face of the record it is apparent that it must be solved by the text of a different treaty which when it is considered renders it impossible to ascribe the meaning relied upon to the provisions referred to. A brief recurrence to the history of the case previously made will make this clear since that history shows beyond the possibility of question that the boundary dispute was first provided for by the Treaty of 1880 and contained a limitation or direction based upon the Treaty of 1825 between Colombia. (Panama) and Central America (Costa Rica) which causes it to be impossible to suppose that the extensive power now claimed was conferred concerning the boundary dispute. This becomes clearer, if it were possible to add to its clearness, when the statement is recalled that when the Treaty of 1886 was drawn in express terms it reserved the powers granted by the previous Treaty of 1880 and declared that the powers created under the new treaty were additional to those conferred by the former, and to make assurance doubly sure, there was added to the Treaty of 1886 a clause saving from repeal the Treaty of 1880.

Even upon the hypothesis that the Treaty of 1880 provided both for the boundary dispute and for the territorial claim up to Cape Gracias a Dios winch embraced on the Atlantic side the exterior boundaries subsequently stated in the Treaty of 1886, such assumption would be without consequence because it could not possibly be assumed that, the inclusion of the larger and wholly distinct territorial claim was intended to destroy the express limitations concerning the boundary claim which the treaty embodied by making reference as it did on that subject to the articles of the Treaty of 1.825. And, indeed, this would be the result if it were additionally supposed for the sake of argument that the Treaty of 1880 and the Treaty of 1886 became incorporated into one and the same instrument by the effect of the adoption of the Treaty of 18.86, since it would be obvious under the terms of the Treaty of 1886 as thus Construed that it was the clear intention of that treaty to preserve unimpaired and unchanged the powers, duties and limitations previously created and therefore to impose the duty of enforcing the two harmoniously so that the duties under both might be performed.

While these considerations dispose of all the principal arguments advanced to maintain the contention that the text of the Treaty of 1886 sustains the extreme power asserted and I might well pass from the subject, nevertheless before doing so in order not to seem to overlook suggestions made or necessarily arising, I proceed to notice some considerations concerning some words in the text which have been deemed to be of importance but which I have not previously noticed in order to avoid breaking the continuity of the argument. The clause in the third article of the Treaty of 1886 saving the rights of third parties, it is suggested by reasoning whose import is not clearly discernible, lends some strength to the contention that the treaty conferred the extreme authority claimed. But it is obvious that this clause instead of removing a limit, imposed one, since its plain terms evidence that it was intended in any and all events but to restrict the operation of the award so as not to affect third parties—a restriction presumably inserted because at the time the treaty was drawn the United States [sic] was insisting that rights which it asserted might otherwise without such restriction be affected, and, moreover, because the line embraced in the shore claim of Panama, as we have seen, extended beyond the territory of Costa Rica up to Cape Gracias a Dios. And the contention in another aspect, manifests a confusion like that which I have previously pointed out since it would be singular, indeed, to say that a limitation which was inserted for the purpose of protecting those who were not heard had for its object the extension of the scope of the arbitration so as to cause it to embrace as to the parties to the convention the absolute right on the part of the arbitrator to condemn them without a hearing, which, of course, would be the result if the provision had the extreme construction which it is now insisted belongs to it.

From these considerations the following general conclusions are established: (1) That the controversy as to boundary between the parties which had existed for so many years was limited to a boundary line asserted by one party and to that asserted by the other, the territory in dispute between them, therefore, being that embraced between the lines of their respectively asserted boundaries. (2) That the previous treaties of 1880 and 1886 by which the boundary dispute thus stated was submitted to arbitration, instead of going beyond the general principles of law which otherwise would have applied and conferring an extreme power to make an award wholly without reference to the dispute or the disputed territory, by their very terms confined the award to the matter in dispute and the disputed territory. (3) That as the line of boundary fixed by the previous award from Punta Mona to the Cordilleras was not within the matter in dispute or within the disputed territory, it results that such award was beyond the submission and that the Arbitrator was without power to make it, and it must therefore be set aside and treated as non-existing. The only question then is, What in other respects is the duty arising under the present arbitration from that situation?

As by the terms of the present treaty the previous award was not set aside as a whole, and the power was only given to correct it in so far as it might be found to be without the authority conferred, the consequence is that all the results necessarily implied by the selection of the mountain line from Punta Mona along the stated counterfort, which can be upheld consistently with the previous treaty, must be sustained although the mountain line itself be void for want of authority to make it. While not in express terms urged, it may be implied from the argument that the contention is that, the mountain line being out of the way for illegality, there would remain as a part of the previous award a river line composed of the Sixaola-Tarire Rivers since the award declared that the mountain line would bound on the north the valley of such rivers and hence they may constitute a boundary line within the award previously made. To dispose of this suggestion it is only necessary to point out the fallacy of the premise upon which it must rest since that premise virtually is that the previous selection was of a line formed by the Sixaola-Tarire Rivers instead of the counterfort or range of mountains. But this is so obviously refuted by the record as to need only a few words of statement to demonstrate its error. In the first place the line previously fixed did not even commence with the mouth of a river, but began at Punta Mona, and in express terms was declared to proceed along the counterfort. It is true, as is suggested, that it was said that the line thus made bounded on the north the valley of the Sixaola and Tarire, but this declaration did not convert the mountain boundary into a river one. In fact such a view of the previous award could only be taken as the result of wholly inadmissible surmises and conjectures. It is certain, as indicated by the letter of Monsieur Delcassé previously quoted, that there was not a complete knowledge of the geography of the country when the previous award was made. And it is also certain that under the previous arbitration there were present maps showing a range of mountains from Punta Mona to the Cordilleras ostensibly of such a permanent and dominant character as to cause it, if existing, to constitute a natural frontier dividing for all practical purposes the country on the one side from that lying on the other. When this is borne in mind a reason which may have given rise to the selection of the mountains is not far to presume since the natural frontier which their presence would cause and the benefit to arise from the establishment of such frontier may well have led the mind to consider that subject from the point of view of statesmanship alone and therefore have unwittingly concentrated attention exclusively on the advantages of such a boundary and thus have diverted attention from the consideration of the limits which inhered in the submission. On the contrary the suggestion relied upon would necessarily compel it to be assumed that although a river boundary was selected, a mountain boundary was for some unaccountable and undisclosed reason named.

As it is conceded by both parties that under this treaty there is the power and duty to substitute for the line set aside, a line within the scope of the authority granted under the previous treaty “most in accordance with the correct interpretation and true intention “of the former award, I come to that subject. As it was impossible to make the previous selection of a mountain line without rejecting both the claim of Colombia (Panama) to the shore up to Cape Gracias a Dios and also without adversely disposing of the claim of Costa Rica to the boundary of the Chiriquí River, both of those express or implied awards remain unaffected by the fact that it is now held that the mountain boundary line was void. And by the same reasoning it follows that the initial point of the boundary which is to replace the rejected one must and can only be the mouth of the first river below Punta Mona, the Sixaola, since there is physically no other river mouth to respond to the claim made under the circumstances stated. Besides, this result is inevitable because the mouth of such river, under the facts stated, is indubitably the initial point on the Atlantic of the river boundary contemplated by the parties from the beginning, sustained by all the facts to which I have referred as to negotiations, declarations and settlements and the exertion of governmental power by the two countries consequent thereon. It is true it results from the previous statement that the river which was relied upon by Colombia (Panama) as the boundary was designated by Various names because, undoubtedly, of the want of accurate geographical knowledge which prevailed. But whatever may have been the Babel of names, there can be no doubt that they all came to be used to designate virtually one and the same river emptying into the Atlantic at about one and the same place and having virtually one and the same course or flow from the source near the mountains to the mouth in the Atlantic. Nothing could serve to make this clearer than does the statement which was made by the Colombian Congress in 1856 which, while it described the river as the Doraces, fixed its mouth as the one first below Punta Mona, and the further illustration which is afforded by the facts previously stated concerning the settlements at the mouth of the Sixaola by Colombia and the claim of authority which the government of that country asserted thereunder. And this serves to make clear what river was referred to by the use of the name Culebras, since the President of the State of Panama had in 1870 declared that that river was the same as the Doraces. Moreover, when the situation is rightly appreciated these facts readily explain why in the Resolutions of the Colombian Senate which immediately preceded the Treaty of 1880 the river upon which Colombia relied as the boundary was described as the Culebras and not as the Sixaola, which latter river was then known to be the river having its mouth the first below Punta Mona, and therefore was the same as the Doraces or Culebras. But the claim of Colombia as first formulated in 1836 in the organization of the territory known as Bocas del Toro, called the river whose mouth was fixed as the boundary, the Culebras. And therefore it is quite natural to assume that in stating the claim for the purposes of the Resolutions and the controversy then pending, desirous of losing nothing of the original right and of retaining everything that had accrued under it by way of negotiations, admissions and settlements the original description was adhered to and reiterated—a conclusion whose cogency is greatly reinforced when it is considered that years before Senor Madrid, the Colombian publicist, had recognized that the river which Colombia referred to as the Culebras was the river which Costa Rica referred to as the Sixaola. To adopt views contrary to those just stated would necessarily lead to the conclusion that because in formulating its claim Colombia in order to preserve it in its integrity had resorted to the definition of that claim as originally stated, it had thereby abandoned its right, or, what is equivalent thereto, had by resorting to the most efficient way of stating that claim acquired a non-existing, unheard of or imaginary one.

The only remaining question then is, how is the boundary line to proceed from the mouth of the Sixaola River to the Cordilleras until it joins the line terminating “beyond Cerro Pando “?

On the one hand it is claimed that such line should follow the thalweg of the Sixaola River to the point where it joins with a river called the Yorquin, then follow that stream in a southerly direction to its source in or near the mountains and thence to the point “beyond Cerro Pando”. On the other hand the contention is that the line should run by the Sixaola passing the entrance of the Yorquin to a point where the Tarire is attained and then follow that river to its source in the Cordilleras and thence by a line to the point “beyond Cerro Pando”. This contention rests upon the assumption that the Sixaola and Tarire Rivers are shown to be really one and the same, although designated by different names. It cannot be denied that the direction of the boundary river, if the Sixaola-Tarire be selected, would be wholly at variance with the trend of the river boundary contemplated from the beginning and would project a line of boundary into territory over which the authority of Costa Rica was never questioned and thus give to Panama what she had never claimed. While, on the contrary, the line of the Sixaola-Yorquin, if followed, would in substance conform in its course and direction with that which had been recognized as the direction of the boundary line from the beginning and had been virtually treated as not the subject matter of dispute up to and during the proceedings had under the previous treaty. And no reason is afforded for departing from the river line thus shown to be the boundary line within the dispute between the parties by suggesting that some other river line would most comport with the interests of the two governments and best subserve the purpose of a boundary. To admit such considerations would in substance but be indulging in views of public policy and public interest which would lead the mind away from the fundamental proposition which is here controlling, that is, the execution of the duty of arbitration which calls for judgment as to a dispute between the parties and affords no room for the application of discretion beyond the limit which that consideration necessarily imposes. Discretion or compromise or adjustment, however cogent might be the reasons which would lead the mind beyond the domain of rightful power, and however much they might control if excess of authority could be indulged in, can find no place in the discharge of the duty to arbitrate a matter in dispute according to the submission and to go no further. No more fatal blow could be struck at the possibility of arbitration for adjusting international disputes than to take from the submission of such disputes the element of security arising from the restrictions just indicated. Under these circumstances, since the duty here is not to elucidate and pass upon mere abstract questions of geography, nor to substitute mere expediency for judgment, but to determine what was the river claimed as the boundary by Colombia, declared by her to be the boundary for so many years, to which she asserted rights and which virtually was claimed to be the boundary upon which she relied prior to the entry into the previous treaty for arbitration and in the proceedings under that treaty, it is plain that the Sixaola-Yorquin is the line which should take the place of the line from Punta Mona along the counterfort of the Cordilleras to the point “beyond Cerro Pando “, as declared in the previous award.

In framing the award and coming to particularly specify the new line there may arise some difficulty because of the absence of precise geographical data as to the situation at the headwaters of the Yorquin River and therefore of the considerations which should control the drawing of the line from such headwaters to the Cordilleras. In the argument of this case Costa Rica stated a formal decree which it deemed should be entered upon the hypothesis that the award here made should be against the mountain line and in favor of the Sixaola-Yorquin line, and no objection to the form of such proposed decree has been made by Panama. Following the line to the headwaters of the Yorquin, the proposed decree from thence directs a stated line to the Cordilleras. This line rests upon the assumption that the headwaters of the Yorquin lie in the region of the northern slope of the northern watershed of a river known as the Changuinola, and the proposed line runs from the headwaters of the Yorquin along such watershed to the Cordilleras. The situation thus assumed by the proposed decree to exist in the region of the headwaters of the Yorquin is in conformity with maps which are in the record, one of which was made by the Commission of Engineers in this case, but which is not, however, the result of a survey by that body as it was not called upon by either party to make one. As the line thus suggested would seem to be in all respects the most reasonable, I shall adopt it with some verbal modifications as a part of the award to be entered, however, with the following reservation: Without prejudice to the right of the parties in case there should be differences between them resulting from contentions as to the topography of the country between the headwaters of the Yorquin and the Cordilleras differing from that above stated, to raise such question in any appropriate way consistent with the provisions of the treaty now being enforced.

Coming to give effect to the opinions previously stated and the conclusions deduced from them, the award now made under the authority of the treaty is as follows: 1. That the line of boundary which was purported to be established by the previous award from Punta Mona to the main range of the Cordilleras and which was declared to be a counterfort or spur of mountains in said award described, be and the same is held to be non-existing.

2. And it is now adjudged that the boundary between the two countries “most in accordance with the correct interpretation and true intention “of the former award is a line which, starting at the mouth of the Sixaola River in the Atlantic, follows the thalweg of that river, upstream, until it reaches the Yorquin, or Zhorquin River; thence along the thalweg of the Yorquin River to that one of its headwaters which is nearest to the divide which is the north limit of the drainage area of the Changuinola, or Tilorio River; thence up the thalweg which contains said headwater to said divide; thence along said divide to the divide which separates waters running to the Atlantic from those running to the Pacific; thence along said Atlantic-Pacific divide to the point near the ninth degree of north latitude “beyond Cerro Pando”, referred to in Article I of the Treaty of March 17th, 1910; and that line is hereby decreed and established as the proper boundary.

3. That this decree is subject to the following reservations in addition to the one above stated: (a) That nothing therein shall be considered as in any way reopening or changing the decree in the previous arbitration rejecting directly or by necessary implication the claim of Panama to a territorial boundary up to Cape Gracias a Dios, or the claim of Costa Rica to the boundary of the Chiriquí River.

(b) And, moreover, that nothing in this decree shall be considered as affecting the previous decree awarding the islands off the coast since neither party has suggested in this hearing that any question concerning said islands was here open for consideration in any respect whatever.

(c) That nothing in the award now made is to be construed by its silence on that subject as affecting the right of either party to act under Article VII of the treaty providing for the delimitation of the boundary fixed if it should be so desired.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister of Costa Rica. File No. 718.1915/223.

[Document 1743]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister of Costa Rica.

Department of State,
Washington, November 16, 1914,

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of November 7, in which, in compliance with special instructions from your Government, you express its gratitude for the mediation of the Chief Justice of the United States, a copy of whose award you enclose, in the boundary dispute between Costa Rica and Panama.

In reply I beg to assure you of the profound gratification with which the Department has learned of your Government’s satisfaction with the results of the friendly good offices which it afforded pleasure to the Government of the United States to extend to the Governments of Costa Rica and Panama in this matter.

Accept [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

Chargé Cresson to the Secretary of State. File No. 718.1915/225.

[Document 1744]

Chargé Cresson to the Secretary of State.

No. 331.] American Legation,
Panama, November 18, 1914,

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith the text of the correspondence and its translation (as appearing in the “Estrella de Panama”) which has passed between the Panaman Secretary of Foreign Affairs and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Costa Rica with respect to the objections made by Panama to the award of the Chief Justice of the United States, acting as Arbitrator with respect to this matter.

I have been assured by the Sub-Secretary of Foreign Affairs that the correspondence forwarded herewith is substantially correct.

I have [etc.]

Wm. P. Cresson.

[Inclosure 1—Translation.]

Panama to Costa Rica.

No. 4739.] Department of Foreign Affairs,
Panama, October 17, 1914.

Mr. Minister: The Minister of this Republic in Washington has informed this Department that under date of September 12 last he was informed of the decision rendered by the Chief Justice of the United States in the boundary dispute between Panama and Costa Rica, and at the same time transmitted a copy of the decision.

From the study made by the Government of Panama of this decision it has arrived at the following conclusions: 1. That through the Porras-Anderson Treaty the Arbitrator received power and jurisdiction to determine the boundary between Panama and Costa Rica most nearly in accord with the real intention and correct interpretation of the Loubet Award, which was the only question that Panama could constitutionally submit to arbitration.

2. That the said treaty fixed the boundary between Panama and Costa Rica and declared that the boundary from Punta Burica to Cerro Pando is clear and unquestionable. The boundary line on the Pacific, therefore, was recognized, not because the interested parties decided upon it in the Treaty of March 10 [17], 1910, but because the award established it.

3. That the said treaty also establishes that the parties “have not been able to reach an agreement in respect to the interpretation which ought to be given to the arbitral award as to the rest of the boundary line,” thus given additional force to the attitude of Panama in not consenting to submitting to discussion the validity and correctness of the the award.

4. That it is therefore clear that the validity and correctness of the Loubet Award were not questions submitted to the arbitration of Mr. Chief Justice White, and that he therefore lacked jurisdiction to consider or decide them.

5. That the essential question submitted to the Arbitrator was the interpretation of the Loubet Award in the part where it referred to one part of the boundary line, and that he had power to determine only that part of the line, taking the said award for his basis and deciding as nearly as possible in conformity therewith.

6. That the Arbitrator, instead of determining the boundary line by interpretation of the said award, has ignored that award completely and fixed a line that has no contact at any point with the line established by President Loubet.

7. That although the Porras-Anderson Treaty specified as fundamental the question of the validity of the Loubet Award, when the award was submitted to the Arbitrator for interpretation he specified as a fundamental question for his decision “to determine whether the line fixed in the former arbitration was within the former treaty or treaties”.

8. That Panama, before and during the arbitration hearings, relying on the treaty that gave life to the arbitration, constantly contended that the Arbitrator had no power to revise or correct the Loubet Award, and that if for any reason he found that award inapplicable he should abstain from rendering a decision on the essence of the controversy; that the Arbitrator has nevertheless declared that power was conferred upon him to correct the award in so far as he might find it outside the jurisdiction conceded to the previous arbitrator.

9. That Mr. Chief Justice White in the award describes the boundary between the two countries adjudged by him as “most in accordance with the correct interpretation and true intention of the former award”; that Panama cannot, however, consider that expression to be compatible with the bases of the award, since the award declares, inter alia, “that the line of boundary which was purported to be established by the previous award from Punta Mona to the main range of the Cordilleras, and which was declared to be a counterfort or spur of mountains in said award described, be and the same is held to be non-existing.”

10. That the Arbitrator has, in short, made a revision of the Loubet Award instead of interpreting it, as he was by the arbitration convention called upon to do; and that as a consequence of such revision he has fixed a boundary line entirely foreign to said award.

For the foregoing reasons the Government of Panama considers that the Arbitrator, Mr. Justice White, has exceeded the powers conferred upon him by the Porras-Anderson Treaty; that the award made by him is therefore null in the light of international law; and that the Republic of Panama considers itself not obliged to comply with a decision which is juridically ineffectual for the settlement of the boundary dispute between Panama and Costa Rica.

It is with genuine regret that I communicate the foregoing to the Government of your excellency, expressing at the same time the hope entertained by my Government that what has occurred will not in the least alter the harmony that happily exists between our two countries, and declaring that it is the invariable desire and purpose of Panama to seek the solution of its international difficulties by righteous means alone.

I avail [etc.]

E. T. Lefevre.

[Inclosure 2—Translation.]

Costa Rica to Panama.

No. 63A.] Ministry for Foreign Affairs,
San José, October 30, 1914.

Mr. Minister: I have had the honor to receive your excellency’s note No. 4739 of the 17th instant, in which your excellency states the reasons that have guided your Government in considering the award made on September 12 in the arbitration of the boundary dispute between Costa Rica and Panama to be null in the light of international law because the Arbitrator exceeded the powers conferred upon him by the arbitration treaty, and in considering itself consequently not obliged to comply with that award.

I have communicated the contents of your note to the President of the Republic, and, in pursuance of his instructions, I have the honor to reply as follows:

In spite of the profound respect that I entertain for the opinion of your excellency, it gives me a complete and well justified surprise to learn of the momentous and, let me say, perhaps not fully matured determination of your excellency’s Government to reject the award that ended a dispute which, for more than a decade, had been extensively discussed between the two parties before submitting it to the rigidly impartial and highly respectable decision of the Chief Justice of the great American Republic, to whose Government’s friendly mediation and patient effort is due the conclusion of the treaty that served as the basis of that decision; a dispute which was thereupon ventilated for over four years in an ample and thoroughly unrestricted argument in which each of the parties made use of all the resources and facilities granted it by the treaty and by the inexhaustible courtesy of the eminent Arbitrator, whose care for the perfect equality of the parties and for maintaining the strongest light upon the case was constantly praised by the representatives of both parties.

In the opinion of my Government the said decision is absolutely invulnerable, as well on account of the profound learning and indestructibly solid bases upon which it rests as by virtue of Article VII of the treaty, which says: The award, whatever it be, shall be held as a perfect and compulsory treaty between the high contracting parties. Both high contracting parties bind themselves to the faithful execution of the award and waive all claims against it. The boundary line between the two republics as finally fixed by the arbitrator shall be deemed the true line, and his determination of the same shall be final, conclusive, and without appeal.

My Government, therefore, can not at all contemplate the matter from the point of view taken by that of your excellency; and it entertains the deep conviction that after mature reflection and careful reconsideration of the case in the light of the reasons that I shall advance herein in support of the position of my Government, your excellency’s Government will readily adopt conclusions in harmony with the respect due to the decision in its character of res judicata and in conformity with the clear text Of the treaty and the fundamental principles of international law.

The conclusions at which your excellency’s Government has arrived are thus formulated:

[Quotation of the ten conclusions set forth in the foregoing note.]

If the true and acceptable propositions contained in the conclusions above quoted are separated from those which, in the opinion of my Government, are of the contrary nature, they will form two groups, as follows:

First group. Correct propositions, admitted by both Governments. (a) That through the Porras-Anderson Treaty the Arbitrator received power and jurisdiction to determine the boundary between Panama and Costa Rica most nearly in accord with the true intention and correct interpretation of the Loubet Award.

(b) That said treaty declared the boundary between Costa Rica and Panama fixed by President Loubet, from Punta Burica on the Pacific Ocean to the highest point of the Central Cordillera beyond Cerro Pando near the ninth degree of north latitude, is clear and indisputable.

(c) That the said treaty establishes the fact that the parties have not been able to reach an agreement in respect to the interpretation which ought to be given to the arbitral award as to the rest of the boundary line; namely, from the said point of the Central Cordillera to the Atlantic Ocean.

(d) That the Arbitrator in the award describes the boundary between the two countries adjudged by him as the one “most in accordance with the correct interpretation and true intention of the former award.”

(e) That the validity and general correctness of the Loubet Award were not questions submitted to the arbitration of Mr. Justice White.

In regard to these five points there is no divergence of opinion, and they should therefore be discarded from the present discussion.

Second group. Propositions now advanced by the Government of Panama and contradicted by the Government of Costa Rica. (a) That under the treaty the parties submitted for arbitration merely the one question of the interpretation of the Loubet Award, without regard to the limitation of that award expressly set by the treaty.

(b) That the only question that Panama, under its Constitution, could submit to arbitration was that of the mere interpretation of the Loubet Award.

(c) That the boundary line on the Pacific Ocean was recognized riot because the parties decided on it in the Treaty of March 17, 1910, but because the award established it.

(d) That the attitude of Panama during the arbitration proceedings was that of not consenting to submit to discussion the partial correctness of the award.

(e) That because the correctness of the Loubet Award was not submitted to arbitration, Mr. Justice White lacked jurisdiction to consider or decide that point.

(f) That the Arbitrator exceeded the limits of his powers when he failed to confine himself to the mere interpretation of the boundary line fixed by the Loubet Award; and that on the contrary he completely ignored that line and fixed another and different one.

(g) That the Arbitrator erred when he established as a fundamental question for his decision “to determine whether the line fixed in the former arbitration was within the former treaty or treaties.”

(h) That Panama, during the arbitration hearings, constantly contended that the Arbitrator had no power to correct the Loubet Award; that if for any reason he found the award inapplicable he should abstain from rendering a decision on the essence of the controversy; that the Arbitrator has nevertheless declared that power was conferred upon him to correct that award in so far as he might find it outside the jurisdiction conceded to the previous arbitrator.

(i) That in the opinion of the Government of Panama the expression used by the Arbitrator, “the boundary most in accordance with the correct interpretation and true intention of the former award,” cannot be considered compatible with the bases of the award, since the award declares “that the line of the boundary which was purported to be established by the previous award from Punta Mona to the main range of the Cordilleras,” is not within the disputed territory, and therefore should be ignored and “held to be non-existing.”

(j) That the Arbitrator has, in short, made a revision of the Loubet Award instead of limiting himself merely to interpreting it, as he was by the arbitration convention called upon to do; and that as a consequence he has fixed a boundary line entirely foreign to said award.

Such are the propositions presented by the Government of your excellency which Costa Rica rejects, not without regret, as totally unfounded and inadmissible. And now I proceed, with the permission of your excellency, to their refutation.

Point “(a)” is discarded from the discussion with the observation that the argument of Panama is here based solely on the suppression of the second paragraph of Article I of the Porras-Anderson Treaty, which says: In order to decide this the arbitrator will take into account all the facts, circumstances and considerations which may have a bearing on the case, as well as the limitation of the Loubet Award expressed in the letter of his excellency M. Delcassé, Minister of Foreign Relations of Prance, to his excellency Señor Peralta, Minister of Costa Rica in Paris, of November 23, 1900, that this boundary line must be drawn within the confines of the territory in dispute as determined by the Convention of Paris between the Republic of Colombia and the Republic of Costa Rica of January 20, 1886.

This text being still in force, it is not permissible to ignore any part of it, and any argument based on its suppression is incompetent.

Point “(b)” is likewise inapplicable, for if it were valid it would prove that since January 21, 1825—the date of the first Constitution of Costa Rica—the boundary question, which has just been finally settled by the award of Mr. Justice White, had been forever adjudicated. Your excellency will surely remember that in that Constitution and in several subsequently promulgated, the national territory of Costa Rica on the Colombia or New Granada frontier was bounded by the Chiriquí (Calobebora) River from the Atlantic, and the Chiriquí Viejo River from the Pacific. When in 1903 the Constitution of Panama was framed and reference was made therein to the Loubet Award, Costa Rica and Colombia had already for several years been discussing the scope and interpretation of that award, and consequently that award could not benefit Panama except insofar as the final decision of the pending dispute might legally do so. Any other interpretation would evidently lead to the absurd and inadmissible consequence that one of the parties could render the decision in the case, to the damage of the other party.

Point “(c)” is purely technical or academic; a correct statement of this point would be to say that the part of the boundary line there referred to (the Pacific section, from the cordiliera to the ocean) was recognized because the award clearly established it as well as because the parties readily accepted it in the Treaty of March 17, 1910. This question lacks practical importance because for either of the above reasons, or for both probably, it is not today and never has been the object of dispute.

Point (d)” contains an error which is exposed by the lucid texts of the statement of Panama’s case dated November 18, 1913; as follow, first on page 4: The “true intention” of the award being established to the effect that the boundary line must be drawn “within the limits of the territory in dispute,” it is therefore incumbent on the present Arbitrator to modify that part of the line so as to conform to that intention, and nothing more is necessary.

At a preceding point in the same paragraph occurs the following: If the line described by President Loubet did, in any part, lie outside the territory in dispute, this limitation (that contained in the letter of Minister Delcassé) would avert all difficulty arising therefrom (from the fact of having run the line through territory foreign to the dispute).

And then it says: It would be merely an occasion for the Arbitrator to exercise his powers.

On page 10 occurs the following: But if any part of the line fixed by President Loubet did in fact lie outside the limits set by the Convention of 1886, that part would require modification, and the present Arbitrator would be compelled to substitute for said part another that should be adjudged “most in accordance with” what he might find to be the “true intention of the award.”

On page 3: For such a contingency it is provided that the Arbitrator may have recourse not only to the interpretation of the language of the award but also to its “true intention”; and if he cannot fix a line exactly and precisely as described in the award, he must fix one that shall be “most in accordance with “not only the “correct interpretation” but also with the “true intention” of the award made by President Loubet.

Also on page 3: But if any ambiguity appear, or if in any part it be impossible to draw the line exactly as described in the award, and be therefore necessary to fix the line “most in accordance” with the “true intention “of President Loubet, the Arbitrator, in order to clear up such ambiguity or to determine the true intention, must “take into account all the facts, circumstances and considerations which may have a bearing on the case “as he would have had to do if the treaty had been silent in this regard.

Page 5: That is, the language of the award could not be followed literally, and the Arbitrator would have to choose such a line as he might find “most in accordance” with the award, thus escaping the difficulty.

It (the Loubet Award) would stand in all its force in accordance with its “correct interpretation and true intention “as determined by the Arbitrator.

The ideas of modification of and substitution for the line of the Loubet Award are here perfectly expressed, and these ideas are nothing but the admission of the possibility of introducing into the Loubet Award amendments or corrections, which Panama now refuses to accept.

The competence of possible amendments or corrections of the Loubet Award in accordance with the treaty having been demonstrated, the argument against acceptance of the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator in point “(e)” fails for lack of foundation.

The same is true of point “(f)”, since the argument rests entirely on the premise of the fixing of a line different from the one fixed by the Loubet Award.

The statement made in point “(g)” is not sustainable in the presence of the following text from the above-quoted statement of Panama’s case dated November 18, 1913, on page 8: The question now to be considered is—as expressed in the treaty—What is the boundary line with respect to this award?* * * We must confine ourselves to that part of the line between this point of the Cordillera Central to the north of Cerro Pando near the ninth degree of north latitude, and Punta Mona on the Atlantic. As to this part of the line two questions may arise: 1. Is it drawn, as described in the award, entirely within the territory in dispute, as determined by Articles II and III of the Treaty of January 20, 1886?

2. If the line as described in the award is entirely within the territory in dispute, can it be identified more in detail, to the point of being made clear and indisputable, as the parties have agreed that the rest of the line already is?

These two questions were extensively discussed by the Chief Justice because they were the corner-stone of his award; and in the award it was necessary to declare that the entire boundary line on the Atlantic side was outside the disputed territory, for which reason he withdrew the line to the extreme limits of the disputed territory.

The Arbitrator, acting within the limits of his powers, decided that question in the negative; and it is evident that in taking cognizance thereof he did not exceed the limits of his jurisdiction, as is plainly shown in the text reproduced above.

The first and third clauses of point “(h)” are amply answered in the foregoing. The second clause, namely that in the opinion of your excellency’s Government, “if for any reason the Arbitrator found the award inapplicable he should abstain from rendering a decision on the essence of the controversy “, is, permit me to say, an alarming novelty in general jurisprudence. The true doctrine is precisely the contrary; it is the unavoidable duty of the Arbitrator to decide every point comprised by the litigation to the limit of his jurisdiction, even if an applicable law be lacking or other difficulties arise. Panama specifically recognized this doctrine during the arbitration, in the statement of its distinguished representative, who said: It was rcognized that some part of the description of the line in the award might not be in exact accordanee with the physical character of the territory involved. Therefore the Arbitrator might not find the precise geographic accidents described by President Loubet, or assumed by him perhaps, as the basis of his award. In such a case it is provided that the Arbitrator may have recourse not only to an interpretation of the language of the award, but also to its true intention; and if he cannot fix a line exactly the same as that of the award, he must fix one not only in accordance with the correct interpretation but also with the true intention of the Loubet Award.

In no part of the statement of the case of Panama so frequently quoted above does there appear the idea of an abstention from judgment in relation to questions stated and argued in the case.

The idea that the Arbitrator should abstain from rendering a decision on argued points is, as above shown, absolutely unsustainable.

Finally, if there is any point extensively considered and wisely decided in the Award of September 12, last, that point is precisely the one relative to the determination of the territory comprised in the decision in regard to frontiers in the case argued before the President of France. The objections made under points “(i)” and “(j)” have no weight at all in the opinion of my Government. And the supposed incompatibility between the opinion and the decision of the Chief Justice I consider entirely unfounded. Even on the inadmissible supposition that such an incompatibility existed, it would not suffice to warrant a disregard of what is clearly and categorically settled, according to the commonest rules of judicial procedure and the agreement of the parties set forth in Article VII of the treaty, above quoted.

Such, Mr. Minister, are the solid reasons on which my Government relies for rejecting, as with great regret it does reject, the final declarations of the important note under acknowledgment, as follows: 1. That the Arbitrator, Mr. Justice White, in his decision and award of September 12, 1914, exceeded the powers conferred upon him by the Anderson-Porras Treaty;

2. That the award made by him is therefore null; and

3. That the Republic of Panama considers itself not obliged to comply with that award.

Having thus replied to your excellency’s note, it is highly gratifying to me to say that my Government most sincerely deplores, in company with your excellency’s Government, that the unexpected and grave contention now raised should have interrupted the harmony that has happily existed and exists between Costa Rica and Panama; and trusts that this difficulty may find a prompt and satisfactory solution by legal channels in keeping with the firm friendship of the two countries.

I avail [etc.]

Manuel Castro Quesada.

The Minister of Costa Rica to the Secretary of State. File No. 718.1915/226.

[Document 1745]

The Minister of Costa Rica to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Costa Rica,
Washington, November 25, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: I have the honor to transmit to your excellency a translation of the reply which the Government of Costa Rica made to the note8 of the Government of Panama, in which the Minister for Foreign Affairs of this country sets forth the reasons that move it to reject the Award of the Chief Justice of the United States.

While taking the liberty of calling your excellency’s attention to the arguments made by my Government, I avail [etc.]

[Unsigned] [ R. Brenes Mesén.]

8 The same as Inclosure 2 with Mr. Cresson’s despatch No. 331 of November 18.

The Secretary of State to Chargé Cresson. File No. 718.1915/226a.

[Document 1746]

The Secretary of State to Chargé Cresson.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, November 25, 1914.

We are informed there is some danger of collision between Panama and Costa Rica over the disputed boundary which has recently been in arbitration. You will use your good offices to urge that no action be taken which could provoke hostilities until an amicable adjustment of the differences can be reached. We are sending a similar telegram to Costa Rica, being desirous of doing what we can to secure an amicable settlement of this dispute which has for so long threatened the friendly relations of these sister Republics.9

It is reported here that a rumor has reached Costa Rica to the effect that Panama has sent civil authorities into the disputed territory. We hope that this is not true and that if the report is true they will be withdrawn so that no cause may be given for counter action on the part of Costa Rica. It would seem impossible that the possession of so small an area of land should become a cause of friction between the countries.

W. J. Bryan.

9 This paragraph telegraphed, mutatis mutandis, to the American Legation at San José

Chargé Cresson to the Secretary of State. File No. 718.1915/224.

[Document 1747]

Chargé Cresson to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Panama, November 27, 1914.

Department’s telegram November 25. I have received from the Minister of Foreign Affairs assurances no change in status quo has occurred or is contemplated on Costa Rican boundary. New officials instructed to this effect were lately on Pacific side but no newly created offices.

Cresson.

Chargé Cresson to the Secretary of State. File No. 718.1915/227.

[Document 1748]

Chargé Cresson to the Secretary of State.

No. 347.] American Legation,
Panama, November 27, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to report that following the Department’s cable instructions of November 25, 1914, with respect to a rumored collision between the authorities of Panama and Costa Rica in the disputed territory along the frontier, I called this morning on the Secretary of Foreign Affairs and communicated to Sr. Lefevre the great desire of the United States to learn that every effort was, as a matter of course, being made by the Panaman Government to refrain from acts tending to alter the status quo in the disputed territory. I also pointed out that in order to bring the matters pending between the sister republics to a happy conclusion, such conduct was of obvious propriety and importance.

Sr. Lefevre, answering these representations in the same cordial spirit in which they were made, assured me that he had no news of any collision or any direct cause of complaint from the Costa Rican Government. The only steps taken in the territory in dispute had been to change the corregidores in two towns in order that more responsible officials might occupy these important posts during this critical period. He also said that strict orders had been issued to these officials not to assert the authority of Panama in any of the territory not previously occupied by Panamans.

He also informed me that he had communicated with respect to this matter at length with Dr. Morales in Washington, who was in possession of all the facts of the case. In order to verify the statement made by Sr. Lefevre, I had a conversation with Mr. William Bardy, a Hungarian subject who recently applied for, and is actually exploiting, some concession which extends as far as Punta Burica. As his land extends into the disputed territory I considered that he would have an early report on this matter. He assured me that nothing of the kind has occurred and did not believe it possible that any important measures could be taken without the news reaching him almost immediately.* * *

I have [etc.]

Wm. P. Cresson.

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Costa Rica. File No. 718.1915/226.

[Document 1749]

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Costa Rica.

Department of State,
Washington, December 2, 1914.

My dear Mr. Minister: The Department acknowledges, with thanks, the receipt of your note of November 25, 1914, with which you enclose a translation of the reply of your Government to the note from the Government of Panama setting forth the reasons which induced the latter not to accept the arbitral award of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States, in the Costa Rica-Panama boundary dispute.

Both your note and its enclosure have been read with great interest by the Department of State.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

Minister Hale to the Secretary of State. File No. 718.1915/230.

[Document 1750]

Minister Hale to the Secretary of State.

No. 49.] American Legation,
San José, December 5, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s telegram of November 25, and to enclose copy of a letter which I sent to the Foreign Office on November 30.

I have not yet received a reply to my letter, but will forward copy of that as soon as it comes to hand.

I have [etc.]

E. J. Hale.

[Inclosure.]

Minister Hale to the Minister of Foreign Affairs.

No. 59.] American Legation,
San José, November 30, 1914

Excellency: I have the honor to represent to your excellency that my Government has heard that there is some danger from collision between Costa Rica and Panama over the disputed boundary which has recently been in arbitration. I am instructed to use my good offices with your excellency’s Government to urge that no action be taken which could provoke hostilities until an amicable adjustment of the differences can be reached.

A similar instruction has been sent to our Minister at Panama, as the Government of the United States is desirous of doing all that it can do to secure an amicable settlement of a dispute which has for so long a time threatened the friendly relations of these neighbor countries.

Trusting that the offer of my good offices in this important matter may be acceptable to your excellency’s Government,

I have [etc.]

E. J. Hale.

The Minister of Costa Rica to the Secretary of State. File No. 718.1915/229.

[Document 1751]

The Minister of Costa Rica to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Legation of Costa Rica,
Washington, December 7, 1914.

Mr. Secretary of State: I have great pleasure in confirming to your excellency the brief explanation I had the honor to offer to you respecting the boundary dispute between Costa Rica and Panama, happily and finally settled by the unappealable award of the Chief Justice of the United States.

I first reiterate the expressions of cordial gratitude of my Government for the friendly intervention of the Department of State in the conclusion of the Treaty of March 17, 1910, which placed in the able hands of that high functionary the final decision that was to constitute, under the terms of that instrument, a perfect and binding treaty between the high contracting parties, thus removing the one cause of difference between the two neighboring nations made sisters by blood, tongue and history.

May I be permitted next to assure your excellency that this last, this ending forever a state of affairs that might at any moment turn into a cause of controversy, was the thing that brought the deepest satisfaction to the officials and leading minds of our country. To this was added the admiration aroused by the very eminent judge who in a comparatively short time managed to master all the details of so vast a question. Hence, Mr. Secretary, the surprise caused by the note of the Panaman Government taking exception to the award of the Chief Justice of the United States, forgetting at one and the same time both the authority and integrity of the judge and the binding promise to accept the award, whatever it might be, resulting from article 7 of the treaty herein referred to.

In response to the interest in the conclusion of that treaty evidenced by the Department of State, I took the liberty of putting your excellency in possession, first, of the Panaman note, and, soon thereafter, of Costa Rica’s answer. The oral explanations to which your excellency was pleased to lend so attentive an ear were in response to the interest your excellency shows in the perfect mastery of the boundary question, which interest I highly appreciate and for which I extend to your excellency my most heartfelt thanks in behalf of my Government.

And I shall be glad to furnish to your excellency all the data you may need about that very question which, though Costa Rica takes it to be res judicata, might nevertheless bring about some further development.

I avail [etc.]

R. Brenes Mesen.

The Legation of Panama to the Department of State. File No. 718.1915/228.

[Document 1752]

The Legation of Panama to the Department of State.

memorandum.

The arbitration treaty entered into between Colombia and Costa Rica on the 21st of January 1886, for submitting to His Majesty Alphonse XII, King of Spain, the boundary controversy pending between the two countries, contains the following article: II. The territorial limit which the Republic of Costa Rica claims on the Atlantic side, reaches as far as the Island Escudo de Veraguas, and the River Chiriquí (Calobebora) inclusive; and on the Pacific side, as far as the River Chiriquí Viejo, inclusive, to the east of Point Burica.

The territorial limit which the United States of Colombia claims, reaches, on the Atlantic side, as far as Cape Gracias a Dios, inclusive, and on the Pacific side as far as the mouth of River Golfito and in Gulf Dulce.

Later on the two countries agreed, in an additional treaty dated November 4, 1886, to appoint as Arbitrator the President of the French Republic. This treaty contains in its Article IV the following paragraph, which is its last one, and says: The Award of the Arbitrator, no matter what [it] may be, shall be considered as a perfect and binding treaty as between the high contracting parties and shall not admit of any appeal. Both parties bind themselves to its faithful fulfillment, and they waive any appeal against the decision, pledging thereto their national honor.

The decision was rendered on the 11th of September 1900 and during fourteen years Costa Rica has declined and avoided the faithful fulfillment of the award.

Since 1880 according to the first treaty of arbitration (25 Dec. 1880) Colombia and Costa Rica had entered into a temporary arrangement called a statu quo [sic], according to which the two countries would exercise jurisdiction on parts of the territories in dispute as follows: Colombia would continue in possession of the territory on the Pacific side up to the river Golfito in Gulf Dulce and on the Atlantic side up to the right bank of Sixaola River. Costa Rica on the Atlantic side would continue in possession of the left bank of the Sixaola River.

The award rendered by President Loubet established the following continental boundary between Colombia and Costa Rica: The Frontier between the Republics of Colombia and Costa Rica shall be formed by the counterfort of the Cordillera which starts from Cape Mona, on the Atlantic Ocean, and closes on the north the Valley of the Tariare or Rio Sixola; then by the chain of division of waters between the Atlantic and Pacific, to nine degrees, about, of latitude; it will follow then the line of division of waters between the Cheriqui Viejo and the affluents of Gulf Dulce, to end at Point Burica on the Pacific Ocean.

Costa Rica declined to fulfill her promise of accepting the award as a binding treaty and continued and is now in possession of the left bank of the Sixaola River, claiming that possession as per the statu quo referred to, and consequently Panama claims the possession of the territory up to Golfito in the Pacific.

The Secretary of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Panama states the position of Panama in the following cable communication: Statu quo claimed by Costa Rica after and notwithstanding the Loubet Award established a line of jurisdiction for the Republic of Panama on the Pacific side from the mouth of River Golfito in Gulf Dulce up to the main cordillera and on the Atlantic side from the mouth of the river Sixaola up to the cordillera. And as Costa Rica has maintained and is maintaining authorities on the left bank of the River Sixaola Panama has claimed and claims her right to maintain her authorities in the territory from the right bank of the River Golfito in an eastern direction and in all the eastern coast of Gulf Dulce up to Point Burica.

Costa Rica claims that the Loubet award did not alter the statu quo and as Panama has not accepted the award of Chief Justice White she has the same right to claim the statu quo as binding. Consequently Panama considers herself with right to maintain her authorities in the territories bound by the lines of the statu quo on the Pacific side from the left bank of River Golfito in an eastern direction by the eastern bank of said river and from Gulf Dulce south of the Golfito River to Point Burica.

The position of Costa Rica is untenable. If she wants Panama to abandon the line of the statu quo on the Pacific side and abide by the Loubet Award she cannot claim the statu quo on the Atlantic side and disregard the Loubet Award which gives Panama the whole drainage area of river Sixaola starting from Punta Mona.

Eusebio A. Morales.
Legation of Panama,
Washington , December 8, 1914.

Minister Rale to the Secretary of State. File No. 718.1915/232.

[Document 1753]

Minister Rale to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 50.] American Legation,
San José, Costa Rica, December 18, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to report as follows: On November 26 I received Department’s telegram of November 25, instructing me to tender good offices in the Panama boundary controversy. On November 30 I addressed a note to the Foreign Office in accordance with Department’s instructions; and on December 14 I received the Foreign Office reply, which I inclose. I also inclose a pamphlet in Spanish, which is the judgment (of Chief Justice White) referred to in the translation of the Foreign Office’s letter.9a

E. J. Hale.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Minister Hale.

No. 221 B.] Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
San José, December 12, 1914.

Mr. Minister: I have had the honor to receive the valuable communication of the 20th [30th] of last month, in which your excellency is pleased to inform me that there has been brought to the knowledge of your Government the possibility of collision between Costa Rica and Panama over the boundary dispute which was recently the subject of arbitration between the two countries; and that therefore your excellency has received instructions to offer your good offices to my Government in order that any action likely to provoke hostilities may be avoided until it is possible to arrive at an amicable settlement of the existing controversies.

Your excellency is pleased to add that similar instructions have been sent to his excellency the Minister of the United States in Panama, as your excellency’s Government is desirous of doing everything in its power toward the amicable settlement of a dispute which has long been a menace to the preservation of good relations between the two contiguous countries.

Duly authorized by the President of the Republic I have the satisfaction of replying to your excellency’s aforesaid communication as follows:

The event of hostilities between my Government and the Government of the Republic of Panama is, I can assure your excellency, a danger in the highest degree remote, inasmuch as both Governments have exchanged mutual, ample and effective assurances that the unexpected discussion provoked on the side of Panama, subsequent to the handing down of the final decision delivered by the Honorable Chief Justice of the United States in the arbitral boundary suit of the two countries—a decision which put an end to the controversy under debate for so many years—shall not be determined except by measures of a peaceful nature consistent with the close and sincere friendship which happily binds both countries and their Governments.

Your excellency will please find inclosed a copy of the correspondence exchanged in this connection between the two cabinets9a ; and I am glad to say to your excellency that my Government has no desire to depart in the slightest degree from that line of conduct, and that it entertains the firm conviction that like sentiments obtain in Panama.

By the same correspondence to which I have just referred your excellency will be convinced that the ancient boundary question, so long discussed between Costa Rica and Panama, was settled on the 12th of September last by virtue of the judgment which I have previously mentioned, of which I have the pleasure to inclose a copy.9a

Such is the point of view which, in accordance with the sanctity of pledges given, prevails throughout Costa Rica; and from that point of view my Government considers that it would not be possible for it to deviate in any way.

Unfortunately, Panama, departing from the purely speculative ground, to which, from the tenor of its notes, it would appear to desire to have the discussion confined, has lately committed acts of veritable aggression against the integrity of this Republic, such as placing administrative authorities at different points on the coast situated to the north of Punta Burica, a region which, as your excellency is well aware, belongs clearly and unquestionably to Costa Rica since the conclusion of the Anderson-Porras Convention signed at Washington March 17, 1910.

The profound surprise which the news of such an aggression produced in the mind of my Government prevented it from adopting at the outset the repulsory measures which the case demanded, inasmuch as it wished, before taking any step of the slightest nature, to obtain the information necessary to convince itself of the certainty of so unexpected and grave a resolution on the part of Panama.

The generous offer of mediation which your excellency has been pleased to propose to my Government could not have come, therefore, at a more opportune moment, and my Government hereby and with profound and heartfelt gratitude accepts it, with the conviction that it will suffice to prevent the arising of any serious difficulty in the carrying out of a judgment resulting from a treaty which both nations have pledged their honor to observe, and which possibly would not have been celebrated without the discreet, impartial and most valuable mediation of the United States.

With the assurance that the legitimate and unquestionable rights of Costa Rica will meet, on this and on every occasion, with favorable reception in the mind of your excellency’s enlightened and equitable Government,

I have [etc.]

Manuel Castro Quesada.

9a Printed ante.

9a Printed ante.

9a Printed ante.

The Department of State to the Legation of Panama. File No. 718.1915/228.

[Document 1754]

The Department of State to the Legation of Panama.

The Department of State has received the memorandum of the Panaman Legation, dated December 8, 1914, setting forth the present status of the boundary controversy between Panama and Costa Rica, growing out of the treaty between Colombia and Costa Rica of January 21, 1886, submitting the question to the arbitration of His Majesty the King of Spain, and of the later treaty between the same parties of November 4, 1886, appointing as the arbitrator the President of the French Republic, as well as the agreement between Panama and Costa Rica submitting the matter to the decision of the Chief Justice of the United States.

The memorandum of the Panaman Legation appears to communicate no matter requiring the present attention of the Department of State, and it is assumed that the paper is furnished for the Department’s information only. Nevertheless, due note has been taken of its contents for any pertinent purposes.

Robert Lansing.
Department of State,
Washington , December 19, 1914.

Railroad construction in Panama; attitude of the United StatesRailroad construction in Panama; attitude of the United States10

10 Continued from For. Rel. 1913, pp. 1081–1104.

[1755] Consul General Snyder to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General, Panama, April 2, 1913.

File No. 819.77/165.

[1756] Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, February 4, 1914.

File No. 819.77/173.

[1757] The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

Department of State, Washington, February 7, 1914.

File No. 819.77/173.

[1758] Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, February 9, 1914.

File No. 819.77/174.

[1759] The Secretary of War to the Secretary of State.

War Department, Washington, April 4, 1914.

File No. 819.77/181.

[1760] The Panama Railroad Company to the Minister of Panama.

New York, March 28, 1914.

[1761] The Secretary of State to the Minister of Panama.

Department of State, Washington, June 29, 1914.

File No. 819.77/201a.

[1762] Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, October 10, 1914.

File No. 819.77/208.

[1763] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Price.

Department of State, Washington, October 15, 1914.

File No. 819.77/204.

[1764] Chargé Cresson to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, October 21, 1914.

File No. 819.77/207.

[1765] The Minister of Panama to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Panama, Washington, November 2, 1914.

File No. 819.77/212.

[1766] The Secretary of State to the Minister of Panama.

Department of State, Washington, November 7, 1914.

File No. 819.77/212.

Consul General Snyder to the Secretary of State. File No. 819.77/165.

[Document 1755]

Consul General Snyder to the Secretary of State.

American Consulate General,
Panama, April 2, 1913.

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy and translation of Law 29 of 1913, authorizing the Executive Power to make the studies necessary to determine what railroads should be constructed in the Republic, etc.

In conformity with the law, the Minister of Public Works has signed a contract with Messrs. R. W. Hebard & Co. of this city, to make the necessary surveys, reports, etc.

I have [etc.]

Alban G. Snyder.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

Law 29 of 1913, on the construction of railroads and authorization to the Executive Power to contract a loan.

The National Assembly of Panama decrees: Article 1. The Executive Power is authorized to carry through the studies necessary to determine the number of miles of railroad that should be constructed in the Republic, the location of these, and, the order in which they should be constructed, taking into account the resources which the country can dispose of, and the greatest benefits for the same.

Article 2. The Executive Power will submit the data obtained as a result of the studies mentioned in the previous article to a commission of competent engineers, named by himself, and in view of the report of that commission, will determine the railroads and branches which he may deem it convenient to construct, as well as the preference in the execution of the works.

Article 3. The Executive Power is authorized to contract a loan for the amount which may be necessary for the construction of the railroads to which the previous articles refer, under the following conditions: a. That the interest on the capital may not be greater than 6 per cent, a year.

b. That the amortization fund must be arranged on the best conditions it is possible to secure.

c. That the time for the total amortization shall not be less than fifty years.

d. That in order to guarantee the payment of the capital and interests, the revenue or revenues of the Nation, that may be necessary, may be compromised (guaranteed).

Article 4. The negotiations for the loan once concluded, the Executive Power will put up to public bid the execution of the work, under the conditions and specifications arranged by the Government, always taking into account the best interests of the country.

Article 5. The Executive Power is authorized, in case he considers it more convenient for the Republic, to contract directly with any person or responsible company the construction of the railroads as treated of in this law, provided that, for the payment to the contractor of the capital and interest, the Government does not acquire compromises more onerous than those contained in Article 3 for the case of a loan.

Given in Panama, February 18, 1913. The President,
Ciro L. Urriola.
The Secretary,
Anto. Alberto Valdés.

National Executive Power,
Panama , February 19, 1913.

Let it be published and executed.

Belisario Porras.

The Secretary of Public Works.

R. F. Acevedo.

Minister Price to the Secretary of State. File No. 819.77/173.

[Document 1756]

Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Panama, February 4, 1914.

Panaman President signed, to-day, contract with Hebard and Company, to construct railway in the province adjoining Costa Rica. Cost estimated at million dollars and a half. Details of bond issue left for consultation with State Department, Washington. It is contemplated encumbering income from six million loan in New York City.

Price.

The Secretary of State to Minister Price. File No. 819.77/173.

[Document 1757]

The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 7, 1914.

Consult freely with Colonel Goethals and discuss with him all details of the Hebard railway contract. You should bear in mind that the three points to which the Department objects are (1) contravention of Article 5 of the Canal Convention (2) features objectionable from military standpoint (3) pledging annuity of $250,000 or income from six million dollars permanently invested.

Report fully, by cable, if necessary, conclusions reached at this conference.

Department desires duplicate copies with translations of proposed contract with Hebard and Company. State if this is ad referendum.

Bryan.

Minister Price to the Secretary of State. File No. 819.77/174.

[Document 1758]

Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Panama, February 9, 1914.

Your February 7. After a consultation with Colonel Goethals the railway under the Hebard contract is not objectionable from a military standpoint. Contract provides for issue of bonds of the Republic of Panama whose value will be arranged by mutual agreement. While it does not pledge the annuity of the two hundred and fifty thousand dollars or income from six million dollars permanently invested undoubtedly an effort will be made to accomplish this. Hebard leaves for United States to-morrow to take up the matter with the Department of State having the foregoing in view. We agree that the Department of State should require the bonds to be floated in the United States and should continue in its stand relative to the annuity and interest heretofore mentioned. Contract forwarded by last mail is complete and final except financiering. Railway is a government project and Panama assumes control on completion by contractors.

Price.

The Secretary of War to the Secretary of State. File No. 819.77/181.

[Document 1759]

The Secretary of War to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

War Department,
Washington, April 4, 1914.

Sir: I inclose, for your information, a copy of the following self-explanatory correspondence relative to the consent which has been granted by the Panama Railroad Company, under Article II of the contract between the United States of Colombia and the Panama Railroad Company of 1867, to the construction by the Government of the Republic of Panama of two lines of railroad, namely: one in the Province of Chiriquí from the port of Pedregal to Boquete, 28 miles, with a branch to La Concepción, 23 miles; and one in the Province of Los Santos from the port of Mensabe to the town of Macaracas:

Article II of the contract between the United States of Colombia and the Panama Railroad Company reads as follows: Article II. The Government of the Republic binds itself, during the time that the exclusive privilege which is conceded to the company for the working of the railroad remains in force, not to contract for itself, nor to concede to any person or company, by any title whatever, the power to establish any other railroad on the Isthmus of Panama; and it also stipulates that, while the said, privilege continues in force, the Government shall not have the power of undertaking for itself, nor permitting any person to undertake, without the concurrence and consent of said company, the opening or working of any maritime canal which may unite the two oceans across the said Isthmus of Panama to the west of the line of Cape Tiburon on the Atlantic and Point Garachine on the Pacific.* * *

I presume that Señor Morales, the Panaman Minister at this capital, referred this matter to the Panama Railroad Company through me as he knew I, as Secretary of War, hold the majority of the stock of the Panama Railroad Company, which stock, as you are aware, is now owned by the United States Government. I would invite your particular attention, however, to that part of my letter to Senor Morales11 in which I advise him that it is presumed that the question of the approval by the United States of the contracts for the construction of the above-mentioned railroads will be taken up by his Government in the usual way through diplomatic channels.

In this connection, I would invite your attention to the fact that it has heretofore been customary for the Panaman Government to submit through diplomatic channels contracts for the construction of railroads in its territory to the United States for approval, and that your Department has usually submitted such contracts to the Secretary of War with a view to having them examined regarding the technical merits of the projects, as well as in reference to their desirability from a strategic viewpoint.

Lindley M. Garrison.

11 Not printed.

The Panama Railroad Company to the Minister of Panama. [Inclosure.]

[Document 1760]

The Panama Railroad Company to the Minister of Panama.

New York, March 28, 1914.

Dear Sir: We acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 20th instant requesting the approval of this Company under Article II of the Contract of 1867 between the Panama Railroad Co. and the United States of Colombia to the construction by the Government of the Republic of Panama of a railroad in the Province of Chiriquí and another in the Province of Los Santos.

We take pleasure in advising that at a meeting of the board of directors of our Company held on the 25th instant, the following resolution was unanimously adopted: Resolved that the Panama Railroad Company hereby consents to the construction by the Government of the Republic of Panama of the following lines of railroad:

One in the Province of Chiriquí, from the port of Pedregal to Boquete, 28 miles, with a branch to La Concepción, 23 miles.

One in the Province of Los Santos, from the port of Mensabe to the town of Macaracas.

E. A. Drake.

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Panama. File No. 819.77/201a.

[Document 1761]

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Panama.

Department of State,
Washington, June 29, 1914.

Sir: Referring to verbal conferences which we have held regarding the construction of a railroad in the Province of Chiriquí, Republic of Panama, I wish to state the Department’s position in response to your solicitations of its approval of the contemplated loan:

Investigation has convinced the Department that an issue of your Government’s bonds could not, without some form of special and acceptable guarantee, be sold at a price consistent with good financing. Therefore, on account of the treaty obligations of the United States with respect to the Republic of Panama, and on account of the present favorable financial condition of the Republic of Panama, the Department will approve an issue by your Government of Panaman Government five per cent, bonds to the amount of three million dollars ($3,000,000) provided that adequate provision be made for the retirement of these bonds within thirty (30) years from the date of their issue; and, provided also that only seven hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($750,000) of that amount shall be delivered at this time, at a price not less than ninety-seven per cent, of the par value, and that future deliveries of the issue shall be made with the approval of the Government of the United States only when additional money is required for such enterprise; and as the United States desires in every way to assist in the material development of your country and to facilitate this enterprise and loan, the Department will approve the hypothecation of so much of the income from the six million dollars ($6,000,000) belonging to the Republic of Panama, now permanently invested in New York, as may be necessary to secure payment of interest and amortization of this bond issue.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

Minister Price to the Secretary of State. File No. 819.77/208.

[Document 1762]

Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

No. 302.] American Legation,
Panama, October 10, 1914.

Sir: Adverting to previous communications with respect to the Chiriquí railway and to loans connected therewith, I now have the honor to enclose the translation in full of certain documents not available at the time my previous report was made. These consist of the message of President Porras to the Assembly transmitting a proposal to revise law 29, following which, action was taken accordingly; and correspondence11 between the Executive Panaman Legation and the National City Bank, with respect to the loan of $3,000,000 required to build the above-mentioned railway. These were not given to the public in printed form until the appearance of the second issue under date of October 2 of the “Anales de la Asamblea.”

I have [etc.]

Wm. Jennings Price.

[Inclosure—Translation—Extract.]

Message No. 1, dated 2nd September 1914, addressed by President Porras to the Deputies.

Honorable Deputies: In view of its urgent character, I today submit to your patriotic consideration a project of law reforming that of 1913, No. 29, with regard to the construction of railways and the authorization of the Executive to contract a loan; and I hope that, given the importance and usefulness of what is proposed, you will give it the most prompt and favorable attention.

The project in question, which in reality will do nothing more than correct a simple error of the pen or the printer which had passed unnoticed, is, notwithstanding, of exceptional importance. To approve it or not approve, and even to do it, depends, Honorable Deputies, on the promptness with which the Assembly acts, which is the desire of all patriotic Panamans.

The previous Legislature, in Law 29, Art. 3, while authorizing the President to negotiate a loan for the sum necessary to construct and equip the railways referred to in former articles, gave the following conditions: That the interest on the capital be not greater than 6 per cent per annum;

That the fund of amortization be arranged under the best conditions possible to secure;

That the term for total amortization be not less than fifty years;

And that, to guarantee the payment of the capital and the interest, the revenues of the Nation may be hypothecated to the necessary extent.

As regards the period of time specified, an error in editing was undoubtedly made and passed unnoticed. “Not less than 50 years “was written instead of “Not greater than 50 years.” And that error has turned out to be entirely prejudicial in the negotiations.

The Executive Power has had an option from the National City Bank of New York, to supply the sum necessary to construct the railways of Chiriquí and Los Santos under the most favorable conditions that can be secured. To wit: 5 per cent annual interest, instead of 6 per cent, and an initial discount of 3 per cent, instead of 10 per cent, and 15 per cent, proposed by other banks. But the National City Bank, stipulates that the period for amortization in totality be not greater than 50 years, but allowing it to be twenty, fifteen or thirty years.

As the law already mentioned established that the period should not be less than 50 years, the necessity will be seen of converting into law the project which I am presenting to you, reforming the other law in order to maintain the spirit in which it was passed by the National Assembly.

* * * The betterment of the rudimentary ways of communications of the country, tending always to the development of its richest lands, has been the field of my greatest effort from the first moment when I ascended to the Presidency. The railways of Chiriquí and Los Santos, for our pride and for the benefit of the fatherland, must be the first to be constructed and encouraged. The matter is now in your hands.

Belisario Porras.

Secretary of Commerce,
R. F. Acevedo.

[Inclosure 2—Translation.]

Law 1 of 1914, September 4, 1914, in which Law No. 29 of 1913 is reformed.

The National Assembly of Panama decrees:

Article 1. Article 3 of Law 29 of 1913 is modified as follows: The Executive Power is authorized to contract the loans which may be necessary for the construction and equipping of the railroads to which the previous articles refer, under the following conditions: 1. That the interest on the capital be not greater than 6 per cent per annum.

2. That the fund of amortization be arranged under the best conditions possible to secure.

3. That the term for total amortization be not greater than fifty years.

4. That, to guarantee the payment of the capital and interest, the revenues of the Nation may be hypothecated to the necessary extent.

Given in Panama on the fourth day of September 1914.

The President,
Ramon M. Values.
The Secretary,
J. M. Fernandez.
Let it be published executed:
Belisario Porras,
President of Panama.
R. F. Acevedo,
Secretary of Promotion.

11 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Price. File No. 819.77/204.

[Document 1763]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Price.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 15, 1914.

Discreetly inform Panaman Government that Department’s approval of loan based on hypothecation of income of six million dollars permanently invested in New York, was based on the understanding that this money would be used only for building railroads in Province of Chiriquí.

Continue to keep Department fully informed and report by cable.

Lansing.

Chargé Cresson to the Secretary of State. File No. 819.77/207.

[Document 1764]

Chargé Cresson to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Panama, October 21, 1914.

Department’s telegram October 15. Minister Price before leaving conveyed to Panaman President sense of above. He regrets that Santos Railway could not be included but expressed willingness to meet Department’s position. No further developments.

Cresson.

The Minister of Panama to the Secretary of State. File No. 819.77/212.

[Document 1765]

The Minister of Panama to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Panama,
Washington, November 2, 1914.

Your Excellency: We, the Republic of Panama, beg leave to advise you that we have arranged for the creation and issue of a series of five per cent sinking fund, thirty year, gold bonds of the Republic, dated November 2, 1914, maturing November 1, 1944, and for the amount in the aggregate of $3,000,000. The purpose of the bond issue is the construction and equipment by the Government of railways within the Republic, and the amount to be issued at this time is $750,000.

All the bonds of the series are to be issued under and secured by an indenture of trust to The Farmers’ Loan and Trust Company of New York and William Nelson Cromwell as trustees (a copy of which is herewith submitted); and to secure the payment of the interest and sinking fund of said series, the Republic has set aside annually for the period of thirty consecutive years, commencing February 26, 1915, and ending February 26, 1944, the sum of $63,125 out of the annuity of $250,000 in gold coin of the United States of America which, pursuant to the terms of the “Convention between the United States and the Republic of Panama for the construction of a ship canal to connect the waters of the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans “ratified and proclaimed on February 26, 1904, the United States of America has agreed to pay in perpetuity to the Republic of Panama.

The Republic accordingly appropriates, transfers and sets over said sum to the said trustees and hereby appoints The Farmers’ Loan and Trust Company of the City of New York, one of the said trustees, the agent and attorney-in-fact of the Republic of Panama, to receive payment of and give acquittance for the said sum of $63,125 out of the $250,000 to fall due to the Republic of Panama under said treaty on the 26th day of February, 1915, and a like sum on each 26th day of February thereafter until and including February 26, 1944, and we hereby agree, authorize and request that your excellency’s Government pay over said several sums of $63,125 to The Farmers’ Loan and Trust Company of the City of New York, during the period and as above provided.

Eusebio A. Morales.

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Panama. File No. 819.77/212.

[Document 1766]

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Panama.

Department of State,
Washington, November 7, 1914.

Dear Mr. Minister: I have examined the indenture dated November 2, 1914, proposed to be entered into between the Panama Government and the Farmers’ Loan and Trust Company and William Nelson Cromwell, trustees, arranging for the issue of a series of five per cent sinking fund, thirty year, gold bonds of the Republic of Panama, for an aggregate amount of $3,000,000, of which $750,000 only are now to be issued, the interest and sinking fund of which is to be met out of the annual treaty payments due to the Government of Panama by the Government of the United States under the Canal Convention; and as the proposed arrangement does not appear to contravene any treaty, convention or arrangement between the Governments of Panama and the United States, I see no occasion for any objection on the part of the Government of the United States and I, consequently, have the honor to inform you of the Department’s acquiescence in the arrangements.

In this relation, I desire to direct attention to the Department’s note to you of June 29, 1914, relating to this same matter, which note I desire now to renew, so far as it may be applicable to the present arrangement, and to inform your Government that any right which might hereafter arise or accrue to the Government of the United States to retain or decline payment of the treaty payments, or any part thereof, is reserved to this Government.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan.

Control by the United States of wireless telegraph stations in PanamaControl by the United States of wireless telegraph stations in Panama12

12 Continued from For. Rel. 1912, pp. 1206–1240.

[1767] The Acting Secretary of War to the Secretary of State.

War Department, Washington, August 26, 1913.

File No. 819.74/30.

[1768] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War.

Department of State, Washington, August 29, 1913.

File No. 819.74/30.

[1769] The Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State.

Navy Department, Washington, November 22, 1913.

File No. 819.74/35.

[1770] Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Washington, January 16, 1914.

File No. 819.74/37.

[1771] The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

Department of State, Washington, January 29, 1914.

File No. 819.74/37.

[1772] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, February 4, 1914.

File No. 819.74/37.

[1773] [Untitled]

Department of State, Washington, April 29, 1914.

File No. 819.74/40.

[1774] The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

Department of State, Washington, May 11, 1914.

File No. 574.C1/112a.

[1775] Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, May 19, 1914.

File No. 819.74/44.

[1776] [Untitled]

American Legation, Panama, July 8, 1914.

File No. 819.77/202.

[1777] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Price.

Department of State, Washington, July 12, 1914.

File No. 819.74/48.

[1778] Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, July 25, 1914.

File No. 819.74/51.

[1779] The Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State.

Navy Department, Washington, August 12, 1914.

File No. 819.74/55.

[1780] The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

Department of State, Washington, August 13, 1914.

File No. 819.74/55a.

[1781] Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, August 14, 1914.

File No. 819.74/56.

[1782] Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, August 14, 1914.

File No. 819.74/58.

[1783] The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

Department of State, Washington, August 17, 1914.

File No. 819.74/56.

[1784] Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, August 23, 1914.

File No. 819.74/57.

[1785] Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, August 27, 1914.

File No. 819.74/61.

[1786] Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Panama, August 29, 1914.

File No. 819.74/59.

[1787] [Untitled]

American Legation, Panama, September 2, 1914.

File No. 819.74/62.

[1788] The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

Department of State, Washington, September 15, 1914.

File No. 819.74/62.

The Acting Secretary of War to the Secretary of State. File No. 819.74/30.

[Document 1767]

The Acting Secretary of War to the Secretary of State.

War Department,
Washington, August 26, 1913.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: The then President approved recommendations of the Joint Board of Army and Navy in 1911 that no private or commercial wireless installations be permitted in the Canal Zone, and that an understanding be reached with Panama to prevent the establishment of private and commercial wireless installations in its territory.13 To what extent any such understanding has been reached with Panama I do not know, but I do know that Colonel Goethals and the Isthmian Canal Commission, along with the Navy, are strongly of the opinion that no commercial wireless installations should be permitted within the Republic of Panama, and that the wireless installations in that territory should be erected by the United States Government and controlled thereby; giving to the people of Panama, however, facilities for private and commercial use.

On June 14, 1913, the Republic of Panama made a contract with the United Fruit Company for the establishment of a wireless telegraphy plant in Colon. At this time the Marconi Company of America is seeking a franchise from the Republic of Panama for the installation of a wireless outfit. It is the opinion of this Department that the effort of the Marconi Company should be frustrated and the arrangement approved by the President be carried out with the Republic of Panama whereby private wireless installations should be prohibited from the Zone and from the territory of the Republic of Panama.

Will you be so kind as to advise me of the status of this matter in your Department and of your intentions in the premises.

With great respect [etc.]

Henry Breckinridge.

13  Id. 1206.

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War. File No. 819.74/30.

[Document 1768]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War.

Department of State,
Washington, August 29, 1913.

Sir: The Department has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the letters of the Acting Secretary of War, dated the 7th,14 9th14 and 26th instant, regarding the establishment of wireless stations in the Canal Zone and the Republic of Panama.

The Acting Secretary enclosed correspondence of the War Department with the American Marconi Company and with the United States authorities on the Isthmus in reference to the desire of the American Marconi Company to establish a wireless telegraph station on the Island of Taboquilla. It appears from this correspondence that the establishment of a station in this Island would interfere with the operation of the United States station now in use at Ancon, Canal Zone, and that as Taboquilla Island is situated outside of the Canal Zone and belongs to the Republic of Panama the proposed station does not fall under the prohibitions of the Act to regulate radio communication, approved August 13, 1912.

The Acting Secretary, therefore, requests that if in the opinion of this Department, the Panama Canal Act of August 24, 1912, authorizes the President so to do— the necessary steps be taken to enter into an agreement relative to the establishment of wireless telegraph stations so that there will be no danger of the Republic of Panama granting any concession for the erection of such wireless stations which would interfere with the operation of the Government plants on the Canal Zone.

By Section 6 of the Panama Canal Act of August 24, 1912, the President is authorized: 1. “To cause to be erected, maintained, and operated,” subject to the international convention and the Act of Congress to regulate radio communication, “at suitable places along the Panama Canal and the coast adjacent to its two terminals, in connection with the operation of said Canal, such wireless telegraphic installations as he may deem necessary for the operation, maintenance, sanitation and protection of said canal, and for other purposes”;

2. To make such agreements with the Government of Panama as may be requested for necessary installations upon the territory of that Republic and to provide for the trasmission of private and commercial messsages as well as of those of the Government of Panama on such terms as he may prescribe, the messages of the United States to have precedence; and also

3. “In his discretion, to enter into such operating agreements or leases with any private wireless company or companies as may best insure freedom from interference with the wireless telegraphic installations established by the United States.”

The Department is of opinion that these provisions authorize the President not only to make agreements with the Government of Panama for the establishment of wireless telegraph installations within the territory of that Republic, but also, as an incident of the exercise of such power, to agree with the Government of Panama that the latter shall not do anything, either directly or by contract with governments, companies, or individuals which may interfere with the operation of the stations established or to be established by the United States within the Canal Zone or upon the territory of the Republic.

It is the opinion of the Department that an agreement to this effect, entered into with the Government of Panama under section 6 of the Act above quoted, is not a treaty and consequently would not have to be submitted to the Senate of the United States for its approval.

In this relation it is proper to advert to the fact that the Panama Government has heretofore appeared to admit that wireless installations were not to be permitted in its territory that conflict with those established by the United States and has, since 1910, repeatedly given oral assurances that it would not allow further installations of wireless plants within its territory without the consent of the United States. But, as the correspondence indicates that it would be desirable to have a definite agreement on the subject, this Department will be prepared to undertake negotiations with the Government of Panama to that end. Inasmuch, however, as the establishment and operation of wireless stations along the Canal are under the control of the War and Navy Departments, these Departments are in a better position than the Department of State to indicate what provisions it is necessary and advisable to include in an agreement with Panama on this subject. It is, therefore, suggested that the War and Navy Departments agree upon a draft of proposals which this Department may submit to the Government of Panama as the basis of an agreement. This suggestion has also been made to the Navy Department.

The Acting Secretary’s letter of the 26th instant states that on the 14th of June last the Republic of Panama made a contract with the United Fruit Company for the establishment of a wireless telegraph plant in Colon. It appears from the files of this Department that the United Fruit Company had previously, on December 27, 1910, concluded a contract with the Government of Panama for a wireless plant at Colon, copy of which contract is on record in this Department. In order to form the basis of a protest against this apparent infraction of the understanding between the two Governments, this Department would be glad to be furnished with the terms of the contract of June 14 last, mentioned above, as well as with a statement of the reasons to be urged upon Panama for the acceptance by her of the proposals which the War and Navy Departments may desire us to present.

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
J. B. Moore.

Note.—A letter similar to the above was sent to the Secretary of the Navy, August 29, 1913.

14 Not printed.

14 Not printed.

The Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State. File No. 819.74/35.

[Document 1769]

The Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State.

Navy Department,
Washington, November 22, 1913.

Sir: The subject of an agreement with the Republic of Panama concerning the establishment of radio telegraph stations in the territory of that Republic, referred to in the State Department’s letter of August 29, 1913, has been considered by the Joint Army and Navy Board. The report of that board was approved by the Secretary of War November 15, 1913, by the Secretary of the Navy November 15, 1913, and by the President November 17, 1913.

The Joint Board recommends as the attitude of the War and Navy Departments that the proposed agreement shall include the following engagements—

On the part of Panama: (a) To give to the United States Government the monopoly of all means of radio communication within its territory, and to cancel all concessions for stations not at this time in actual operation, if such exist.

(b) To forbid the operation of any station on board a ship that is within the harbors or territorial waters of Panama unless such ship be actually underway and making bona fide passage to or from port, and the station of a ship so making passage to port shall be required to communicate with the nearest coast station until such time as the ship shall have come to anchor or moored to the shore, as the case may be, after which the ship shall be required not to use its radio installation until it gets underway to make passage to sea; except that a ship at anchor in quarantine, or not yet having received pratique, may request permission to send messages to the nearest coast station, which permission may be granted, under conditions imposed by the Coast Station, until pratique is granted, when it shall terminate.

(c) To connect its land telegraph system to, and exchange business with, any station now or hereafter operated by the United States Government in the Republic of Panama, and in the Canal Zone.

(d) To become a signatory to the London Radio-Telegraphic Convention of 1912.

(e) To regulate the existing private station or stations in the territory of Panama, according to the London Convention, and to license it or them according to the terms of the Radio Act of the United States of August 13, 1912, with the additional proviso that the physical control and operation shall pass to the United States Government whenever that Government may elect.

On the part of the United States:

(f) To give official and commercial radio telegraphic service with all shipping within the radius of operation of U. S. stations in the Canal Zone or the territory of Panama, without other limitations than those governing their ordinary operation.

(g) To transmit and receive at its stations established under this agreement, free of all station radio charges, official messages to or from the Government of Panama, and to give them precedence over private or commercial messages.

(h) To erect upon sites turned over free of all expense by the Government of Panama to the U. S. Government, and to operate under the regulations of the U. S. Naval Radio Service, other stations not to exceed four in number (exclusive of the two at the entrances of the Canal) as may be demanded by the exigencies of the shipping in the vicinity of the Republic of Panama consequent upon the opening of the Canal, such exigencies to be determined jointly by the Government of the United States and Panama.

The fundamental reason why the United States Government should have a monopoly of all means of radio communication in the Republic of Panama lies in the fact that the United States is the sole guarantor of the independence of Panama and of the protection of the Canal. To fulfill these obligations it is militarily essential that the United States shall have actual physical control of all radio stations, not only in the Canal Zone, but in the Republic of Panama, at a time when the independence of Panama may be in jeopardy or the United States may be at war or be threatened with war. The one sure way to attain this end is to have the stations owned and operated at all times by the United States Government. Then in emergencies the trained operators, under military discipline, and familiar with both languages, will be on the spot and actually at work in their usual places, with no necessity for replacement at a critical time. Other provisions of the proposed engagements provide for all the necessary ordinary requirements of the Government of Panama and of commercial interests, which will therefore not suffer.

The United States Government having all the military responsibility, will expect to fix the sites of future radio stations so that they can best serve military as well as commercial needs. At the same time the interest of Panama in radio stations in her own territory is recognized in proposed engagement (h).

For reasons connected with certainty of operation it is very undesirable to have an unnecessary number of stations in the same locality. The monopoly desired for the United States Government is the surest way of obviating such a condition.

The reasons for the other proposed engagements of Panama, where not obvious, are to be found in conditions about the Isthmus where a state of radio lawlessness outside the limits of the Canal Zone has already been a source of great annoyance. Panama is not a signatory of the London Convention and exercises no control over the radio operations of ships within her jurisdiction. The proposed engagements of the United States are suggested in a spirit of both comity and self-interest.

Sincerely yours,

Josephus Daniels.

Minister Price to the Secretary of State. File No. 819.74/37.

[Document 1770]

Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 69.] American Legation,
Washington, January 16, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to report that on this day I am in receipt of a Foreign Office note from Señor Lefevre, Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Panama, in which he states that his Government is anxious to enter into an agreement as promptly as possible for the interchange of wireless messages.

A copy of said note and its translation in duplicate are enclosed.

It will be noted that Señor Lefevre in his note makes the impression that his Government has in view the establishment by it of wireless stations in the Republic, and that he names the coasts of San Bias and Bocas del Toro on the Atlantic side and the Darien on the Pacific side as the locations, where his country is urgently in need of wireless stations.

In asking recently if I had heard from Washington regarding the plans of our Government with respect to establishing its wireless stations here, Señor Lefevre remarked that his Government would want to have its own employees in charge of the stations in the Republic of Panama and that this would be a necessity in the San Bias region, inhabited by uncivilized Indians.

I have [etc.]

Wm. Jennings Price.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Minister Price.

Panama, January 14, 1914.

Mr. Minister: I have the honor to address your excellency with reference to your kind note No. 8 of last month and to inform you that my Government desires to enter into an agreement with that of the United States at the earliest possible moment for the interchange of wireless messages between the stations which the Republic has in view of establishing and those actually operating and which shall be operated in the Canal Zone.

As I informed his excellency the Secretary of War of the United States, at an interview held in Culebra during his recent visit to Panama, my Government is urgently in need of establishing wireless stations on the coast of San Bias and Bocas del Toro, on the Atlantic, and in the Darien, on the Pacific.

The development of these rich regions, as well as the police patrolling of these coasts to prevent contraband, demands imperatively the establishment of wireless stations above referred to and which my Government wishes to carry out in accord with your excellency’s Government.

Thanking your excellency for a definite answer on this important affair,

I avail [etc.]

E. T. Lefevre.

The Secretary of State to Minister Price. File No. 819.74/37.

[Document 1771]

The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Department of State,
Washington, January 29, 1914.

Your despatch No. 69. Subject of agreement with Panama concerning the establishment of radio telegraph stations in territory of that Republic has been considered by the Joint Army and Navy Board. The report of that board was approved by the President November 17, 1913.

The first paragraph of this report provides for giving to United States Government the monopoly of all means of radio communication within the Panaman territory and cancelling of all concessions for stations not at this time in actual operation, if such exist.

You are instructed to inform the Government of Panama in this sense in an informal manner.

Further instructions will be sent in near future.

Bryan.

[Untitled] File No. 819.74/37.

[Document 1772]

[Untitled]

Department of State,
Washington, February 4, 1914.

Sir: With reference to your despatch No. 69, dated January 16, 1914, and to the Department’s telegram of January 29, there is enclosed herewith, for your information, a copy of a letter dated November 22, 1913, from the Navy Department to the Secretary of State, in regard to the proposed agreement between the United States and Panama concerning the establishment of radio telegraph stations in the Republic of Panama.

You are instructed to communicate the recommendations of the Joint Board to the Government of Panama as a basis for the proposed agreement, and to report fully to the Department the views of the Panaman Government with reference to the different points mentioned in the recommendations of the Joint Board.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
J. B. Moore.

[Untitled] File No. 819.74/40.

[Document 1773]

[Untitled]

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 29, 1914.

Refer to Panama Canal Treaty of 1903, Article 2, last sentence of first paragraph; Article 3; Article 6; Article 7, first sentence; and Article 24. Department believes that under these provisions the United States may, by due process, take over and control all wireless stations within the territory of Panama which tend to interfere with the United States radio system established for the construction, maintenance, operation, sanitation and protection of the Canal, or of any auxiliary canals or other works, notwithstanding the Constitution, laws or treaties of Panama. Any stations so taken over may, in the view of the Department, be operated under any system of charges and rules of transmission, not conflicting with Article 11, which may be determined by this Government. The procedure under the treaty of acquiring such Panaman stations, however, is likely to prove to be not only dilatory and expensive but inconvenient and may cause irritation and friction.

It would seem therefore more feasible for both Governments to enter upon an agreement for the conduct of radio communication with the Canal Zone and the territory of the Republic of Panama in order to avoid future difficulties, and it is for this purpose that it desired to enter into a radio agreement with Panama.

Evidently in case of war or other necessity the United States should not be hampered in its efforts to operate, maintain or protect the Canal, as contemplated by the Treaty of 1903, by any possibility of the hostile or lawless use of radio telegraphy on the Isthmus. Moreover, the United States, under Article 1, “guarantees and will maintain the independence of the Republic of Panama.” It is therefore indispensable that the United States should be in a position to carry out with the utmost despatch and without interference by radio stations not under its control, its obligations under the treaty not only in respect to the Canal, but in respect to the independence of Panama itself.

The approaching completion of the Canal and of the powerful wireless station in the Zone as well as the possibility of using the Canal in the immediate future, show the urgency or concluding a radio agreement with Panama at the earliest possible moment.

You will immediately bring these views to the attention of the Panama Government and courteously but firmly urge upon the Foreign Minister the necessity of proceeding with the negotiations with the greatest possible despatch to the end that an agreement containing substantially the stipulations set forth in the Navy Department’s letter of November 22, 1913, may be consummated. You will add that the insistence of the United States in this matter grows out of no unfriendliness on its part toward the Government of Panama but is based upon the obvious necessity of establishing immediately on the Isthmus a complete system of radio telegraphy under the absolute and unhampered control of the United States Government in order that it may perform its treaty obligations and protect its interests.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Minister Price. File No. 574.C1/112a.

[Document 1774]

The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 11, 1914.

You are instructed to take up the matter of the adhesion of the Republic of Panama to the International Radio Telegraph Convention of London and to press the matter actively in the endeavor to have this agreement ratified as soon as possible, on account of the early opening of the Panama Canal to traffic. Report by telegraph.

Bryan.

Minister Price to the Secretary of State. File No. 819.74/44.

[Document 1775]

Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams—Extracts.]

American Legation,
Panama, May 19, 1914.

Referring to the Department’s telegram of May 11, Panaman Minister for Foreign Affairs after a conference today states that the chief reason they have not signed the London Radio Convention is that they feel that it would be {improper to become a signatory in view of their contemplating conceding to us the monopoly of wireless telegraphy in Panama. He states further it would be impossible to make response to my two notes within less than thirty days and that while they had nearly concluded to grant the monopoly of the wireless to us their action might have to be ratified by the National Assembly which does not meet until September. I asserted that this could not be under our treaty. He stated that Panama would not accept proposal (h) limiting the United States Government to erect only the four stations therein described.

Price.

[Untitled] File No. 819.77/202.

[Document 1776]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Panama, July 8, 1914.

In answer to another and insistent request for an answer in the matter of wireless telegraph agreement, Panaman Minister for Foreign Affairs states that he has forwarded to Panaman Minister at Washington all the papers and told him to discuss direct with the Department.

Price.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Price. File No. 819.74/48.

[Document 1777]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Price.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 12, 1914.

Your July 8. You are instructed to inform Minister for Foreign Affairs that as the American Minister at Panama is fully conversant with all details of the wireless telegraph agreement and is able to communicate promptly with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, this Government feels it more desirable to continue to handle the matter through the American Legation at Panama.

You may add that the Department will, of course, always be pleased to consider any comments that Doctor Morales may care to make.

You are instructed to request formally again a written reply from Señor Lefevre to your notes on the wireless telegraph agreement. Continue to report by cable.

John E. Osborne.

Minister Price to the Secretary of State. File No. 819.74/51.

[Document 1778]

Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Panama, July 25, 1914.

The following formal answer received from Panaman Minister for Foreign Affairs in the matter of wireless telegraphy: My Government accepts in general terms the proposal the United States makes to it with reference to establishment of wireless telegraph stations within the territory of the Republic provided that the number be six instead of four and the location of first four be agreed upon at once.

I wish to hold a conference with your excellency, Doctor Valdes, legal adviser of this Department, attending, for the purpose of arranging a definite convention in the matter in accordance with legal requirements of Panama as well as satisfying needs of the [Canal] for military defense.

Amplifying this answer and following a discussion Panaman Minister for Foreign Affairs states that he is uncertain as to whether Panama would now prefer to construct and own the stations in its territory, giving us control in case of war or threatened war, or to let us construct and own them and have control and jurisdiction at all times but that he will confer later as to the matter; that if latter course is adopted Panama now will be content with the construction of only two stations promptly, the same to be located on the Atlantic and Pacific coast of the Darien region, and the agreement by the United States to construct as many as four more when our two Governments agree as to the general needs of Panama calling for them as distinguished from needs of shipping. He states that Panama is willing to grant the United States the monopoly of the situation in either case mentioned but claims that such a grant of itself will require a treaty and its ratification by the National Assembly of Panama.

Price.

The Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State. File No. 819.74/55.

[Document 1779]

The Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State.

Navy Department,
Washington, August 12, 1914.

Sir: Receipt is acknowledged of your communications dated July 3014 and August 5,14 with inclosures from the American Minister at Panama relative to the control of radio communication in the Republic of Panama.

After again carefully considering the provisions of the proposed agreement as drawn up by the Joint Army and Navy Board under date of October 17, 1913, this Department is of the opinion that the terms outlined therein should be insisted upon unconditionally in any representations made to the Panama Government in regard to the control of radio matters in the Republic of Panama. Any proposal looking to any permanent or even temporary control and management of radio stations within the territory of Panama, except by the United States Government, should not, as viewed from the standpoint of this Department, be given favorable consideration. A thorough understanding and appreciation of the duties devolving upon the Navy and its obligations in relation to the proper security and operation of the canal, in addition to the orderly transaction of radio business in that locality, leads to such a view on the part of this Department.

The contention of the Panama Government, as expressed in the letter of the Secretary of Foreign Affairs to the American Minister, that the number of stations be increased to six instead of four, which latter number was originally proposed in the plan of the Joint Army and Navy Board, is not considered as being justified in view of the lack of necessity for such extra stations either for commercial or military purposes. The erection of two radio stations promptly as asked by the Panama Government cannot be arranged for at present, but it is hoped that this may not be an obstacle in the way of accomplishing the desired end, i. e., Panama’s full agreement to the terms proposed, as suitable arrangements can doubtless be made in connection with this feature of the agreement which will be satisfactory both to the Panama and our own Government.

The opening of the canal to shipping necessitating, as it will, the absolute control of radio in that locality by this Department, it is particularly to be desired that the consent of the Panama Government to such control be obtained at the earliest practicable moment, in order to prevent unnecessary interference in radio in that vicinity and thereby insure, to a great extent, efficiency in radio communication which will be so closely affiliated with the management of traffic passing through the canal.

The matter of taking over the control of radio communication in the Canal Zone and adjoining harbors immediately, is of such urgent importance that it is suggested that the Panama Government be asked to consent to such control immediately, the control to be exercised by this Department, leaving those features involving the necessity of a convention or treaty, if such necessity exists, to be decided upon at the earliest practicable time, and in accordance with the provisions of the agreement outlined by the Joint Army and Navy Board, under date of October 17, 1913.

Very respectfully,

Josephus Daniels.

14 Not printed.

14 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to Minister Price. File No. 819.74/55a.

[Document 1780]

The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 13, 1914.

On account of the war in Europe and the possibility of the Canal Zone being drawn into the sphere of active operations, it is absolutely essential that the United States exercise immediate monopoly of all wireless stations in the Republic of Panama and control the radio equipment of all ships in the territorial waters of Panama.

You are instructed to bring the importance of this matter to the attention of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and to request that the Panaman Government issue immediate orders in this sense.

Bryan.

Minister Price to the Secretary of State. File No. 819.74/56.

[Document 1781]

Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Panama, August 14, 1914.

Your instructions August 13 complied with. Panaman Minister for Foreign Affairs agreed this morning that the United States should take complete control of wireless telegraph situation in both the Republic of Panama and its territorial waters. I at once notified Governor Goethals and he notified Lieut. Crenshaw, who has taken charge of the situation.

Panaman President then issued a decree carrying out said agreement.

Price.

Minister Price to the Secretary of State. File No. 819.74/58.

[Document 1782]

Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 253.] American Legation,
Panama, August 14, 1914.

Sir: Supplementing my telegram of July 25, 1914, * * * I have the honor to report that Sr. Lefevre a few days ago stated that Panama would agree to whatever we might demand in this matter * * * and promised to give me a formal note to this effect. This note came this afternoon and a copy of it and its translation are herewith enclosed. The note, however, is quite different from what I was led to expect. * * *

I have [etc.]

Wm. Jennings Price.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Minister Price.

Foreign Office,
Panama, August 14, 1914.

Mr. Minister: In order to comply with the wishes of your excellency, I now have the honor to confirm the matters brought to your excellency’s attention during the cordial interview which took place yesterday in my office.

When I had the honor to discuss with his excellency the Secretary of War, Mr. Garrison, the installation of wireless stations in the territory of the Republic, I suggested the propriety of coming to an agreement respecting the exchange of service between the stations of the Canal Zone and those later to be established by Panama.

My Government, in view of the military necessities of the defense of the Canal and the wishes expressed by your excellency and his distinguished predecessor, has resolved not only to forbid the erection of private wireless stations but also to abstain from establishing the indispensable Government stations until such a time as an arrangement may be made satisfying the needs of both Governments.

As your excellency is aware, the Atlantic coast of the Isthmus is uninhabited for nearly its entire extent, and it is only between Portobello and Colon and in the neighborhood of Bocas del Toro that small settlements are to be found. These extraordinarily fertile regions, rich in mineral resources, are shunned by the white race on account of their fear of the semi-civilized Indians who are today the proprietors in control of this country.

The present administration, anxious to civilize the Indians and to open these fine lands to civilization, has obtained from the Indian chieftains consent to the presence of a few missionaries and even the introduction of elementary education. Certain chiefs have offered their support to the reclaiming efforts the Government proposes to inaugurate at the entrance of the Gulf of San Bias in the form of an agricultural colony under the protection of a military police, which will serve as a nucleus for others that will doubtless be established later.

But in order that the support and protection of the Government may be effective and in order to protect from an Indian massacre the troops and colonists who are to bring life to this region, it is indispensable that the means of communication with Golon should be rapid; and this can be brought about only by means of radiotelegraphy. The same conditions exist at Puerto Obaldia on the Colombian frontier, in which place the colony already established is facing failure on account of difficulties of communication with the capital.

These vast regions, unprotected by the Government, are also infested by foreign smugglers who defraud the nation of its customs dues, and often offer a serious menace to the public health on account of their violation of the quarantine laws, because of the fact that it is difficult for the Panaman authorities to exercise control. For this purpose it would be necessary to employ armed forces of considerable strength, which in the present conditions would be a great burden on the Treasury.

On the Pacific side, or Darien, there exists a very rich section, also isolated from the rest of the Republic. Here are prosperous settlements and the celebrated gold mines of Darien. At present this country has no telegraphic communication with the capital, and between it and this city lies a great expanse of almost impenetrable forest. The only economical way of establishing communication is by means of wireless.

It will be seen that the needs of the Republic for a wireless system are not for maritime communication, but rather for land communication; and as the distances separating the projected stations are relatively short, the cost of installation will be small.

The plan recommended by the commission which studied the project is that of installing as many as six stations, those of San Bias, Puerto Obaldia and Darien being urgently needed.

The cost of these should not exceed $20,000 each, and my Government sees no objection to the work being carried out by the United States at the expense of (“por cuenta de”) Panama, whose Government is disposed to administer and maintain them at its cost, adopting for this administration the same rules as those governing the stations of the Zone.

I would ask your excellency to present to the consideration of the Secretary of State the urgent necessity which confronts my Government of establishing radiotelegraphic offices in certain points of the Republic in order to introduce into one of the richest sections the benefits of justice, education, religion and progress.

I thank you [etc.]

E. T. Lefevre.

The Secretary of State to Minister Price. File No. 819.74/56.

[Document 1783]

The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, August 17, 1914.

Your August 14. You are instructed to convey to the Minister for Foreign Affairs the gratification of this Government at the prompt manner in which Panama acceded to the request of the United States for control of radio communication. Department desires duplicate copies and translation of decree of Panaman President granting this control.

Bryan.

Minister Price to the Secretary of State. File No. 819.74/57.

[Document 1784]

Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Panama, August 23, 1914.

Referring to my cable of August 14, Department’s telegram August 17. We have taken and are exercising complete control of wireless pursuant to verbal authority from Panama; but the decree of Panaman President assured me for August 14 was submitted only last Tuesday. It gave only temporary control during the crisis in Europe. Under my protest its publication was withheld and Panaman Minister for Foreign Affairs agreed to have it reformed, granting complete and permanent control in accordance with prior assurances.

Price.

Minister Price to the Secretary of State. File No. 819.74/61.

[Document 1785]

Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 263.] American Legation,
Panama, August 27, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to report that on August 22 * * * I made another visit to the office of Sr. Lefevre * * * and the conversation led me to transmit the telegram sent August 23. He stated that he wanted to know the sense in which I had used the word “control” in these negotiations and particularly in the suggested decree. When I replied that it was meant to be used according to its plain and usual significance and that, in connection with the adjective “complete,” it was intended to give us control to the exclusion of all the world, he replied that that would take away from Panama its rights in reference to installations in its territory for interior communication. I answered that on the occasion of my application to him for this decree on the 14th instant he had assured me that the United States should have complete control in this matter and that it might be considered permanent and for the future, and that the words incorporated in my submitted draft of a decree were a part of the exact words used by him, upon which I felt that I had a right to rely and did rely; that nothing short of this would satisfy the requirements of the United States. Sr. Lefevre then undertook to claim that he had understood me differently from what I was now claiming in this matter and, stating that there was only one radio station in the Republic—the one at Bocas del Toro—he proceeded to attempt to claim that the assurances he gave applied only to the radio situation as it at present existed in Panama; that the complete and permanent control referred to by him was meant to apply to the existing stations and conditions and not to what might be developed in the future. I replied to him with all earnestness and emphasis and with perhaps more than the hint referred to in Department’s telegram of August 13.* * *

On August 24 Sr. Lefevre sent to the Legation a draft of two portions of the proposed amended decree. In this text he had incorporated a reference to the negotiations pending regarding the installation of stations in Panama for interior communication, requiring a recognition on our part of their claim to have same brought to a satisfactory conclusion; and in the decretal part he had expressly left out granting complete control. * * *

We drafted a full text of a decree for submission to Sr. Lefevre in return. I took our draft of the amendment to Sr. Lefevre promptly. To his complaint that the leaving out of any reference to negotiations regarding installations in Panama for interior communication would be unfair to them, inasmuch as it would leave them without any assurance of our intentions in that regard, I replied that I was willing to give voluntarily and without any authority from my Government a statement in writing that the consideration by my Government of the question of erection of or permitting to be erected such stations in Panama would be continued after this decree might be issued; that, however, I neither could nor would assure him of any outcome of said negotiations; that the Department had not as yet had the opportunity to respond to his last note in the matter.* * *

I would not state that on this occasion Sr. Lefevre gave again assurance of the issual of the decree in the terms now asked, yet he left that impression, saying he would like for me in an informal note to make a statement to him as to our continuing the consideration of the question of installations in Panama, as stated above, and in the same note I might point out the changes desired in his submitted amendment as shown by our amendment submitted in return.* * *

I enclose copy of my note just mentioned, of date of August 25.* * *

I have [etc.]

Wm. Jennings Price.

[Inclosure.]

Mr. Price to Mr. Lefevre.

American Legation,
Panama, August 25, 1914.

My dear Mr. Lefevre: I have the honor to thank you for the submission to me yesterday for our consideration of portions of the proposed amended decree in the matter of wireless control by my Government in Panama.

I must respectfully ask that the paragraph be left out referring to negotiations regarding the construction and operation of radio stations within the territory of Panama, which you state Panama needs for interior communication; and further that small modifications and additions to the balance of said text be made in order to resolve clearly and indisputably said decree into the meaning that you have been kind enough to assure me said decree should be made to convey to the satisfaction of my Government. I therefore transmit a draft which I am impelled earnestly to insist shall be adopted in this important matter.

I can say to you voluntarily, without authority from my Government, because I have not asked such authority, depending as I have been on the assurances heretofore given me as to this decree, and feeling in view of same that such authority ought not properly to be asked, that my Government will continue to consider with your Government the question of the erection or permitting to be erected radio stations within Panaman territory for the purposes stated by you, as far as same may not be incompatible with the assurances given my Government regarding said decree. This statement is made, however, not as a consideration for the issual of the said decree. Said decree my Government feels entitled to as a matter of right under the Canal Treaty, which the pending war situation in Europe made so clear that you were good enough to recognize and pursuant thereto to give me the assurances heretofore mentioned.

To be now formally placed by Panama in a position regarding this matter of radio stations and communication which my Government has for a number of months been asking and which this decree, as assured by you and as now resubmitted, will do, will be gratifying to my Government, and same is as much relied upon as it is earnestly insisted upon.

I am [etc.]

Wm. Jennings Price.

Minister Price to the Secretary of State. File No. 819.74/59.

[Document 1786]

Minister Price to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Panama, August 29, 1914.

Panaman President this afternoon signed decree conceding the United States complete and permanent control of wireless telegraph reading as follows: It is decreed from this date the radio telegraphic stations fixed and movable and everything relating to wireless communication in the territory and waters of Panama shall be under the complete and permanent control of the United States of America and in order to assure this end said Government will take the measures it deems necessary.

Price.

[Untitled] File No. 819.74/62.

[Document 1787]

[Untitled]

[Extract]

No. 265.] American Legation,
Panama, September 2, 1914.

Sir: Referring to my telegram of date of August 29, which reported the signing by the President of Panama on that date of a satisfactory decree conceding permanent and complete control to the United States of the radio telegraph situation in the territory and territorial waters of Panama, I have the honor to enclose herewith a certified copy of said decree (being No. 130 of 1914) and its translation.

On last Monday I transmitted a note to Sr. Lefevre, Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Panama, expressing to him and through him to his Government gratification and appreciation for this action on the part of Panama.

I have [etc.]

Wm. Jennings Price.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

[Untitled]

Decree Number 130 of 1914, by which an authorization is ceded to the United States of America for the control of radio-telegraphic communication.

The President of the Republic in the exercise of his legal powers, and considering:

That by the terms of the Bunau-Varilla-Hay Treaty the Republic of Panama is obliged to assist the United States by all necessary and suitable measures for the conservation, protection and defense of the Interoceanic Canal constructed across the Isthmus;

That the said Government considers it indispensable to this end that it shall assume from now on permanent and complete control of the wireless telegraphic stations, fixed and movable, in all the territory and territorial waters of the Republic of Panama; and

That it is to the interest and for the safety of the Republic of Panama that wireless communication be controlled and regulated by the nation which by a solemn pact has guaranteed its independence;

It is decreed: From this date the radio-telegraphic stations fixed and movable and everything relating to wireless communications in the territory and territorial waters of Panama shall be under the complete and permanent control of the United States of America; and to attain that end said Government will take the measures which it deems necessary.

Let it be communicated and published.

Done at Panama this 29th day of August nineteen hundred and fourteen.

Belisario Porras.

The Secretary of Government and Justice,
Juan B. Sosa.

The Secretary of State to Minister Price. File No. 819.74/62.

[Document 1788]

The Secretary of State to Minister Price.

No. 66.] Department of State,
Washington, September 15, 1914.

Sir: The Department of State acknowledges the receipt of your despatch No. 265, dated September 2, 1914, in which you report the signing by the President of Panama, on August 29, of a satisfactory decree conceding control to the United States of the radio telegraph in the Republic of Panama.

The Department desires to express to you its gratification at the successful termination of this matter, which has for so long been the subject of negotiations between the two Governments.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Panama Canal tolls.Panama Canal tolls.

(See Great Britain.)

Paraguay:Paraguay:

Contents

Boundary agreement between Bolivia and ParaguayBoundary agreement between Bolivia and Paraguay

(See Bolivia

Extradition treaty between the United States and ParaguayExtradition treaty between the United States and Paraguay

Signed at Asuncion, March 26, 1913; ratification advised by the Senate, June 5, 1913; ratified by the President, October 16, 1913; ratified by Paraguay July 16, 1913; ratifications exchanged at Asuncion, January 17, 1914; proclaimed, January 24, 1914.

[1789] By the President of the United States of America.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this twenty-fourth day of January in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty eighth.

Treaty Series No. 584.]

By the President of the United States of America. Treaty Series No. 584.]

[Document 1789]

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas a Treaty between the United States of America and the Republic of Paraguay providing for the mutual extradition of fugitives from justice was conducted and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at the City of Asuncion, on the twenty-sixth day of March, one thousand nine hundred and thirteen, the original of which Treaty, being in the English and Spanish languages is word for word as follows:

Extradition Treaty between the United States of America and the Republic of Paraguay.

The United States America and the Republic of Paraguay, desiring to strengthen their friendly relations and to promote the cause of justice, have resolved to conclude a treaty for the extradition of fugitives from justice, between the United States of America and the Republic of Paraguay, and have appointed for that purpose the following Plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States of America, Nicolay A. Grevstad, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States of America to the Republic of Paraguay; and

The President of Paraguay, Doctor Eusebio Ayala, Minister for Foreign Affairs of The Republic of Paraguay;

Who, after having communicated to each other their respective full powers, found in good and due form, have agreed upon and concluded the following articles:

Article I.

It is agreed that the Government of the United States and the Government of Paraguay shall, upon mutual requisition duly made as herein provided, deliver up to justice any person who may be charged with, or may have been convicted of any of the crimes specified in Article II of this Convention committed within the jurisdiction of one of the Contracting Parties while said person was actually within such jurisdiction when the crime was committed, and who shall seek an asylum or shall be found within the territories of the other, provided that such surrender shall take place only upon such evidence of criminality, as according to the laws of the place where the fugitive or person so charged shall be found, would justify his apprehension and commitment for trial if the crime or offense had been there committed.

Article II.

Persons shall be delivered up according to the provisions of this Convention, who shall have been charged with or convicted of any of the following crimes: 1. Murder, comprehending the crimes designated by the terms parricide, assassination, manslaughter, when voluntary; poisoning or infanticide.

2. The attempt to commit murder.

3. Rape, abortion, carnal knowledge of children under the age of twelve years.

4. Bigamy.

5. Arson.

6. Wilful and unlawful destruction or obstruction of railroads, which endangers human life.

7. Crimes committed at sea: a) Piracy, as commonly known and defined by the law of nations, or by statute;

b) Wrongfully sinking or destroying a vessel at sea or attempting to do so;

c) Mutiny or conspiracy by two or more members of the crew or other persons on board of a vessel on the high seas, for the purpose of rebelling against the authority of the Captain or Commander of such vessel, or by fraud or violence taking possession of such vessel;

d) Assault on board ship upon the high seas with intent to do bodily harm.

8. Burglary, defined to be the act of breaking into and entering the house of another in the night time with intent to commit a felony therein.

9. The act of breaking into and entering the offices of the Government and public authorities, or the offices of banks, banking houses, savings banks, trust companies, insurance companies, or other buildings not dwellings with intent to commit a felony therein.

10. Robbery, defined to be the act of feloniously and forcibly taking from the person of another goods or money by violence or by putting him in fear.

11. Forgery or the utterance of forged papers.

12. The forgery or falsification of the official acts of the Government or public authority, including Courts of Justice, or the uttering or fraudulent use of any of the same.

13. The fabrication of counterfeit money, whether coin or paper, counterfeit titles or coupons of public debt, created by National, State, Provincial, Territorial, Local or Municipal Governments, bank notes or other instruments of public credit, counterfeit seals, stamps dies and marks of State or public administrations, and the utterance, circulation or fraudulent use of the above mentioned objects.

14. Embezzlement or criminal malversation committed within the jurisdiction of one or the other party by public officers or depositaries, where the amount embezzled exceeds two hundred dollars or Paraguayan equivalent.

15. Embezzlement by any person or persons hired, salaried or employed, to the detriment of their employers or principals, when the crime or offence is punishable by imprisonment or other corporal punishment by the laws of both countries, and where the amount embezzled exceeds two hundred dollars or Paraguayan equivalent.

16. Kidnapping of minors or adults, defined to be the abduction or detention of a person or persons, in order to exact money from them or their families, or for any other unlawful end.

17. Larceny, defined to be the theft of effects, personal property, or money, of the value of twenty-five dollars or more, or Paraguayan equivalent.

18. Obtaining money, valuable securities or other property by false pretences or receiving any money, valuable securities or other property knowing the same to have been unlawfully obtained, where the amount of money or the value of the property so obtained or received exceeds two hundred dollars or Paraguayan equivalent.

19. Perjury or subornation of perjury.

20. Fraud or breach of trust by a bailee, banker, agent, factor, trustee, executor, administrator, guardian, director or officer of any Company or Corporation, or by any one in any fiduciary position, where the amount of money or the value of the property misappropriated exceeds two hundred dollars or Paraguayan equivalent.

21. Crimes and offences against the laws of both countries for the suppression of slavery and slave trading.

22. The extradition is also to take place for participation in any of the aforesaid crimes as an accessory before or after the fact, provided such participation be punishable by imprisonment by the laws of both Contracting Parties.

Article III

The provisions of this Convention shall not import claim of extradition for any crime or offence of a political character, nor for acts connected with such crimes or offences; and no person surrendered by or to either of the Contracting Parties in virtue of this Convention shall be tried or punished for a political crime or offence. When the offence charged comprises the act either of murder or assassination or of poisoning, either consummated or attempted, the fact that the offence was committed or attempted against the life of the Sovereign or Head of a foreign State or against the life of any member of his family, shall not be deemed sufficient to sustain that such crime or offence was of a political character; or was an act connected with crimes or offences of a political character.

Article IV.

No person shall be tried for any crime or offence other than that for which he was surrendered.

Article V.

A fugitive criminal shall not be surrendered under the provisions hereof, when, from lapse of time or other lawful cause, according to the laws of the place within the jurisdiction of which the crime was committed, the criminal is exempt from prosecution or punishment for the offense for which the surrender is asked.

Article VI.

If a fugitive criminal whose surrender may be claimed pursuant to the stipulations hereof, be actually under prosecution, out on bail or in custody, for a crime or offence committed in the country where he has sought asylum, or shall have been convicted thereof, his extradition may be deferred until such proceedings be determined, and until he shall have been set at liberty in due course of law.

Article VII.

If a fugitive criminal claimed by one of the parties hereto, shall be also claimed by one or more powers pursuant to treaty provisions, on account of crimes committed within their jurisdiction, such criminal shall be delivered to that State whose demand is first received.

Article VIII.

Under the stipulations of this Convention, neither of the Contracting Parties shall be bound to deliver up its own citizens.

Article IX.

The expense of arrest, detention, examination and transportation of the accused shall be paid by the Government which has preferred the demand for extradition.

Article X.

Everything found in the possession of the fugitive criminal at the time of his arrest, whether being the proceeds of the crime or offence, or which may be material as evidence in making proof of the crime, shall so far as practicable, according to the laws of either of the Contracting Parties, be delivered up with his person at the time of surrender. Nevertheless, the rights of a third party with regard to the articles aforesaid, shall be duly respected.

Article XI.

The stipulations of this Convention shall be applicable to all territory wherever situated, belonging to either of the Contracting Parties or in the occupancy and under the control of either of them, during such occupancy or control.

Requisitions for the surrender of fugitives from justice shall be made by the respective diplomatic agents of the Contracting Parties. In the event of the absence of such agents from the country or its seat of Government, or where extradition is sought from a colonial possession of Paraguay or from territory included in the preceding paragraphs, other than the United States, requisitions may be made by superior Consular officers. It shall be competent for such diplomatic or superior consular officers to ask and obtain a mandate or preliminary warrant of arrest for the person whose surrender is sought, whereupon the judges and magistrates of the two Governments shall respectively have power and authority, upon complaint made under oath, to issue a warrant for the apprehension of the person charged, in order that he or she may be brought before such judge or magistrate, that the evidence of criminality may be heard and considered and if, on such hearing, the evidence be deemed sufficient to sustain the charge, it shall be the duty of the examining judge or magistrate to certify the same to the proper executive authority, that a warrant may issue for the surrender of the fugitive.

If the fugitive criminal shall have been convicted of the crime for which his surrender is asked, a copy of the sentence of the Court before which such conviction took place, duly authenticated, shall be produced. If, however, the fugitive is merely charged with crime, a duly authenticated copy of the warrant of arrest in the country where the crime was committed, and of the depositions upon which such warrant may have been issued, shall be produced, with such other evidence or proof as may be deemed competent in the case.

Article XII.

If when a person accused shall have been arrested in virtue of the mandate or preliminary warrant of arrest, issued by the competent authority as provided in Article XI hereof, and been brought before a judge or magistrate to the end that the evidence of his or her guilt may be heard and examined as hereinbefore provided, it shall appear that the mandate or preliminary warrant of arrest has been issued in pursuance of a request or declaration received by telegraph from the Government asking for the extradition, it shall be competent for the judge or magistrate at his discretion to hold the accused for a period not exceeding two months, so that the demanding Government may have opportunity to lay before such judge or magistrate legal evidence of the guilt of the accused and if at the expiration of said period of two months, such legal evidence shall not have been produced before such judge or magistrate, the person arrested shall be released, provided that the examination of the charges preferred against such accused person shall not be actually going on.

Article XIII.

In every case of a request made by either of the two Contracting Parties for the arrest, detention or extradition of fugitive criminals, the legal officers or fiscal Ministry of the country where the proceedings of extradition are had, shall assist the officers of the Government demanding the extradition before the respective judges and magistrates, by every legal means within their or its power; and no claim whatever for compensation for any of the services so rendered shall be made against the Government demanding the extradition, provided, however, that any officer or officers of the surrendering Government so giving assistance, who shall, in the usual course of their duty, receive no salary or compensation other than specific fees for services performed, shall be entitled to receive from the Government demanding the extradition the customary fees for the acts or services performed by them, in the same manner and to the same amount as though such acts or services had been performed in ordinary criminal proceedings under the laws of the country of which they are officers.

Article XIV

This Convention shall take effect from the day of the exchange of the ratifications thereof; but either Contracting Party may at any time terminate the same on giving to the other six months notice of its intention to do so.

The ratifications of the present treaty shall be exchanged in the city of Asuncion as soon as possible.

In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed this treaty and have affixed thereto their respective seals.

Done at Asuncion this twenty-sixth day of March, in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and thirteen.

Nicolay A. Grevstad. [seal.]

Eusebio Ayala. [seal.]

And whereas the said Treaty has been duly ratified on both parts, and the ratifications of the two governments were exchanged in the City of Asuncion, on the seventeenth day of January, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Treaty to be made public, to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this twenty-fourth day of January in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty eighth.
Woodrow Wilson

By the President:
W. J. Bryan,
Secretary of State.

Persia:Persia:

Contents

Coronation of Sultan Ahmad Kadjar, Shah of Persia (Documents 1790-1794)

Coronation of Sultan Ahmad Kadjar, Shah of PersiaCoronation of Sultan Ahmad Kadjar, Shah of Persia

[1790] The Persian Chargé Affaires to the Secretary of State.

Persian Legation, Washington, February 14, 1914.

File No. 891.001/23.

[1791] Minister Russell to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Teheran, July 14, 1914.

File No. 891.001/30.

[1792] The Secretary of State to Minister Russell.

Department of State, Washington, July 21, 1914.

File No. 891.001/30.

[1793] The President to the Shah.

The White House, Washington, July 23, 1914.

File No. 891.001/30.

[1794] The Shah to the President.

Teheran, July 28, 1914.

File No. 891.001/33.

The Persian Chargé Affaires to the Secretary of State. File No. 891.001/23.

[Document 1790]

The Persian Chargé Affaires to the Secretary of State.

Persian Legation,
Washington, February 14, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to submit, for your excellency’s information, the translation of a cipher despatch which I have received from Vossoughed Dovleh, the Minister of Foreign Affairs at Teheran. The message follows: On the twenty-seventh £ay of Shaban 1332 (July 1914), in accordance with Article 38 of the Fundamental Law, the coronation of His Imperial Majesty the Shah will take place, and His Majesty will take the reins of the affairs of the Government and the Empire in his own hands. On this day the seventeenth of Rabiol Aval (February 13, 1914), His Highness the Regent will make a formal proclamation to the above effect, which will be communicated to all the provinces as well as to the other countries. Please duly advise the official sources concerning this message. No. 529.

Accept [etc.]

Mirza Ali Kuli Khan.

Minister Russell to the Secretary of State. File No. 891.001/30.

[Document 1791]

Minister Russell to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Teheran, July 14, 1914.

Ministry for Foreign Affairs wants you to telegraph constituting me a Special Ambassador at the coronation of the Shah same as the other Ministers.

Russell.

The Secretary of State to Minister Russell. File No. 891.001/30.

[Document 1792]

The Secretary of State to Minister Russell.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, July 21, 1914.

You are accredited as Special Representative of the President at coronation. This gives you rank of Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary.

Bryan.

The President to the Shah. File No. 891.001/30.

[Document 1793]

The President to the Shah.

[Telegram.]

The White House,
Washington, July 23, 1914.

On this felicitous occasion of the accession of Your Majesty to the throne of Persia I extend to you the earnest hope that your beneficent reign will mark an era of great prosperity and offer to Your Majesty the assurances of my highest regards and good wishes.

Woodrow Wilson.

The Shah to the President. File No. 891.001/33.

[Document 1794]

The Shah to the President.

[Telegram—Translation]

Teheran, July 28, 1914.

With high appreciation of the kind wishes Your Excellency sends me on the occasion of my coronation, I wish to thank you sincerely. In taking hold of the reins of government my first duty will be to draw closer the ties of friendship which so happily subsist between the two peoples.

Sultan Ahmad Kadjar.

Peru:Peru:

Contents

Political affairs: Revolution; resignation of President Billinghurst; recognition by the United States of the Government Junta and of the Provisional President, Oscar Benavides (Documents 1795-1813)

Political affairs: Revolution; resignation of President Billinghurst; recognition by the United States of the Government Junta and of the Provisional President, Oscar BenavidesPolitical affairs: Revolution; resignation of President Billinghurst; recognition by the United States of the Government Junta and of the Provisional President, Oscar Benavides

[1795] Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Lima, February 4, 1914.

File No. 823.00/116.

[1796] Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Lima, February 5, 1914.

File No. 823.00/117.

[1797] The Peruvian Minister to the Secretary of State.

Peruvian Legation, Washington, February 5, 1914.

File No. 823.00/118.

[1798] Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Lima, February 8, 1914.

File No. 823.00/121.

[1799] The Secretary of State to Minister McMillin.

Department of State, Washington, February 12, 1914.

File No. 823.00/127a.

[1800] Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Lima, February 13, 1914.

File No. 823.00/129.

[1801] [Untitled]

American Legation, Lima, February 18, 1914.

File No. 823.00/132.

[1802] The Secretary of State to the Peruvian Minister.

Department of State, Washington, February 21, 1914.

File No. 823.00/118.

[1803] Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Lima, March 2, 1914.

File No. 823.00/135.

[1804] [Untitled]

American Legation, Lima, March 26, 1914.

File No. 823.00/146

[1805] The Secretary of State to Minister McMillin.

Department of State, Washington, March 27, 1914.

File No. 823.00/146.

[1806] Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Lima, March 27, 1914.

File No. 823.00/147.

[1807] [Untitled]

American Legation, Lima, May 13, 1914.

File No. 823.00/162.

[1808] The Secretary of State to Minister McMillin.

Department of State, Washington, May 14, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 823.00/162.

[1809] Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Lima, May 15, 1914.

File No. 823.00/164.

[1810] The Peruvian Minister to the Secretary of State.

Peruvian Legation, Washington, May 16, 1914.

File No. 823.00/168.

[1811] Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Lima, May 19, 1914.

File No. 823.00/169.

[1812] The Secretary of State to Minister McMillin.

Department of State, Washington, May 26, 1914.

File No. 823.00/178a.

[1813] Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Lima, May 27, 1914.

File No. 823.00/181.

Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State. File No. 823.00/116.

[Document 1795]

Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Lima, February 4, 1914.

A revolutionary movement headed by Augusto Durand, supported by the army and a very large part of Congress, broke out this morning between four and five o’clock. It took possession of the Government, arrested the President in the Palace and forced him to sign his resignation. He is now in the penitentiary.

The Palace is held by some three hundred troops under the command of the ex-chief of staff, who resigned last night before assuming control of the revolutionary forces. The Minister of War has been killed and the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Finance both resigned last night. Much indiscriminate firing, confined chiefly to the troops, continued for some hours in the city. The jails were opened, the military hospital receives civilians, and the Red Cross service has been organized; all business is closed, but the city is now quiet.

The revolutionary party has issued a manifesto on the following lines: The presidential decision to dissolve Congress and hold new elections is declared to be unconstitutional and despotic.

Congress no longer recognizes the President’s authority and places all responsibility for the revolution on his [omission] to dissolve Congress; calls upon the nation to help it save the country; considers that the army and navy in remaining faithful to a government which had violated the constitution, became criminal, and itself assumes the defense of the Republic.

It declares vacant the presidency; places the President outside the [omission] and constitution; absolves the army and navy from obedience to him; and while it is determining what course to take in regard to the executive power, it places that authority necessary for the reestablishment of a constitutional order in a Junta presided over by Augusto Durand and enjoins obedience to its dictates upon all public officials.

This manifesto is signed by twenty-eight senators and sixty-three deputies. The President’s family with the exception of his eldest son who was in his father’s government, have taken sanctuary in the Legation.

McMillin.

Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State. File No. 823.00/117.

[Document 1796]

Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Lima, February 5, 1914.

The situation is improved and complete order exists in the city. Those members of Congress now in town met last night, appointed a junta consisting of a member from each political party, and formed the governing junta under the presidency of Benavides, ex-chief of staff, who has appointed Colonel Gonzales Prefect of Lima.

A proclamation signed by him was posted last night assuring all of complete safety and a return to normal conditions and to-day business has been fully resumed.

There was slight trouble in Cuzco as to the recognition of the new government, but elsewhere it seems to have been accepted at once.

The various portfolios of state have already been filled by the junta. [Omission], it appears, has also cabled Leguia offering him the presidency. The President is still in prison but in no danger. So far no concerted action has been taken among the Diplomatic Corps

McMillin.

The Peruvian Minister to the Secretary of State. File No. 823.00/118.

[Document 1797]

The Peruvian Minister to the Secretary of State.

Peruvian Legation,
Washington, February 5, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that I am in receipt of a cable despatch from Lima stating that public opinion and the action of the army in enforcing respect to the Constitution had brought about a change in the Government; that President Billinghurst had resigned the presidency; and that the Senate and House of Deputies jointly by an unanimous vote had entrusted the Executive power to a Provisional Junta of Government composed of the following personnel: President of the Junta and Minister of War and Marine, Colonel Oscar Benavides; Minister of the Interior, Señor Arturo Osores; Minister of Finance, Señor José Balta; Minister of Justice and Education, Senor Rafael Grau; Minister of Public Works, Senor Benjamín Boza; Minister of Foreign Affairs, Senor Jose Matfas Manzanilla.

The Junta has sworn allegiance to the Constitution, and entered upon its duties as the Executive Power of the Republic; the situation is once more normal and general confidence prevails.

The members of the Provisional Junta represent the different political parties in Congress, and consequently its constitution will be well received by the nation.

Accept [etc.]

F. A. Pezet.

Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State. File No. 823.00/121.

[Document 1798]

Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Lima, February 8, 1914.

First Vice President has been out of Peru for many months; Second Vice President has resigned, leaving no official of old government to assume or claim the right to executive power in the new. No other change in the situation since my last. The question of recognition is now being raised by other legations and am informed that in certain cases only they await American action. Papal Legate and Italian, Brazilian and Argentine Ministers favor recognition. French Minister undecided. No evidence of organized opposition to present régime, nor does any seem probable. Believe ultimate recognition inevitable. Request instruction.

McMillin.

The Secretary of State to Minister McMillin. File No. 823.00/127a.

[Document 1799]

The Secretary of State to Minister McMillin.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 12, 1914.

The Junta created by the Congress being in uncontested exercise of executive power and such exercise being freely acquiesced in by the people, you are instructed to recognize the Junta as a Provisional Government pending the establishment of a permanent executive.

Bryan.

Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State. File No. 823.00/129.

[Document 1800]

Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Lima, February 13, 1914.

Your telegram February 12. I today answered the note of Minister for Foreign Affairs. A majority of the countries represented here have taken similar action, and others will now. French Minister had determined to act with the United States. China and Colombia manifested same intention.

McMillin.

[Untitled] File No. 823.00/132.

[Document 1801]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Lima, February 18, 1914.

Following my previous cables on condition here I report that pursuant resolutions adopted by the Junta ex-President Billinghurst was removed from the penitentiary at midnight last night, transferred to Peruvian war vessel, which sailed north with him at four o’clock to-day. Reported he will be released, but not to go south of Peru.

The Junta Government highly appreciates Washington’s action, drawing distinction between this and Mexican situation, expressing most cordial sentiments for our country.

After a week at the Legation Mrs. Billinghurst and daughters left, renting a house in the city.

McMillin.

The Secretary of State to the Peruvian Minister. File No. 823.00/118.

[Document 1802]

The Secretary of State to the Peruvian Minister.

No. 35.] Department of State,
Washington, February 21, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 5th instant in which you advise the Department that you have received a cable despatch from Lima stating that public opinion and the action of the Peruvian army in forcing respect for the constitution had brought about a change in the government; that President Billinghurst had resigned the Presidency; and that the Senate and House of Deputies jointly, by unanimous vote, had entrusted the executive power to a Provisional Junta of Government, the names of the members of which you furnish.

In reply I have the honor to say that the United States Minister at Lima was, on the 12th instant, instructed by telegraph to the effect that, as the Junta created by the Congress was in full exercise of the executive power and as its exercise of such power was freely acquiesced in by the people, he should recognize it as a provisional government pending the establishment of a permanent executive.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
J. B. Moore.

Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State. File No. 823.00/135.

[Document 1803]

Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Lima, March 2, 1914.

Effort to convoke Congress yesterday failed for want of quorum in both Houses, anti-Leguia elements thus manifesting opposition to his reappointment. The Junta expects to call extra session about March 11.

McMillin.

[Untitled] File No. 823.00/146

[Document 1804]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Lima, March 26, 1914.

I have reliable information Leguistas have considered having him sworn in as President and seek asylum at the Legation. Under such tactical move should it be given? Conference failed to reach an understanding; proposals discussed include resignation of both Leguia and Junta and general elections; negotiations continue.

McMillin.

The Secretary of State to Minister McMillin. File No. 823.00/146.

[Document 1805]

The Secretary of State to Minister McMillin.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, March 27, 1914.

Your March 26th. Discreetly inform interested parties that Legation can not be in any way party to schemes of any political faction and that under circumstances mentioned asylum would be refused.

Bryan.

Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State. File No. 823.00/147.

[Document 1806]

Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Lima, March 27, 1914.

Conferences ineffectual in reaching final agreement. Decree again convening Congress in extra session May 15 issued five o’clock this morning.

McMillin.

[Untitled] File No. 823.00/162.

[Document 1807]

[Untitled]

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Lima, May 13, 1914.

No threats against foreigners or their property.

McMillin.

The Secretary of State to Minister McMillin. File No. 823.00/162.

[Document 1808]

The Secretary of State to Minister McMillin.

[Telegram—Extract.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 14, 1914, 6 p.m.

Your May 13, 10 p.m. Glad to learn there are no threats of disturbances. Use your influence to the uttermost to secure peaceful adjustment of difference and establishment of government on per manent basis.

Bryan.

Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State. File No. 823.00/164.

[Document 1809]

Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Lima, May 15, 1914.

Congress met this afternoon with but little disturbance. Benavides was escorted to Congress and sworn in as Provisional President.

McMillin.

The Peruvian Minister to the Secretary of State. File No. 823.00/168.

[Document 1810]

The Peruvian Minister to the Secretary of State.

Peruvian Legation,
Washington, May 16, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to inform yon that Congress met yesterday and that it elected a Provisional President, whose duty it will be to call for an election of Constitutional President of the Republic.

The Provisional Junta of Government, that has held executive power in Peru since February 4, relinquished its mandate to Congress, and in consequence a Provisional President has been elected, in the person of Colonel Oscar Benavides.

President Benavides was sworn in by Congress, and has constituted the Cabinet with the following personnel: Premier and Minister of War and Marine, General Pedro Muñiz; Minister of the Interior, Senor Hildebrando Fuentes; Minister of Justice and Instruction, Señor Luis Julio Menendez; Minister of Commerce and Finance, Señor Luis Felipe Villaran; Minister of Fomento and Public Works, Senor Joaquin Capelo; Minister of Foreign Affairs, Sefior Fernando Gazzani.

Accept [etc.]

F. A. Pezet.

Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State. File No. 823.00/169.

[Document 1811]

Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Extract.]

American Legation,
Lima, May 19, 1914.

Supreme and superior courts united with army, navy, Archbishop of Lima and many business firms make official calls on Benavides today. Strong French banks telegraph support. Congress expected to meet again this week to confirm Friday’s action.

McMillin.

The Secretary of State to Minister McMillin. File No. 823.00/178a.

[Document 1812]

The Secretary of State to Minister McMillin.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, May 26, 1914.

You are instructed to call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs on May 27 and inform him that the United States recognizes the Government of Colonel Benavides as the Provisional Government of Peru. Inform diplomatic representatives of Argentina, Brazil and Chile at Lima, in order that they may recognize at the same time.

Bryan.

Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State. File No. 823.00/181.

[Document 1813]

Minister McMillin to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
Lima, May 27, 1914.

Your telegram of May 26. I called upon Minister for Foreign Affairs to-day with the Argentine and Brazilian Ministers and informed him the United States recognizes the Government of Peru. Argentina and Brazil recognized at same time. Joint action was appreciated. Chile has no representative here. News of proposed recognition was telegraphed from Chile, appearing in this morning’s papers. /

McMillin.

Portugal:Portugal:

Contents

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, concluded between the United States and PortugalTreaty for the advancement of general peace, concluded between the United States and Portugal

Signed at Lisbon, February 4, 1914; ratification advised by the Senate, August 13, 1914; ratified by the President, October 21, 1914; ratified by Portugal, September 26, 1914; ratifications exchanged at Washington, October 2%, 1914; proclaimed, October 27, 1914.

[1814] By the President of the United States of America.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this twenty-seventh day of October in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.

Treaty Series No. 600.]

By the President of the United States of America. Treaty Series No. 600.]

[Document 1814]

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas, a Treaty between the United States of America and the Portuguese Republic looking to the advancement of the cause of general peace was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Lisbon on the fourth day of February, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, the original of which Treaty, being in the English and Portuguese languages, is word for word as follows:

The President of the United States of America and the President of the Portuguese Republic, being desirous to strengthen the bonds of amity that bind them together and also to advance the cause of general peace, have resolved to enter into a treaty for that purpose, and to that end have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States of America: His Excellency Colonel Thomas H. Birch, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States of America near the Portuguese Republic;

The President of the Portuguese Republic: His Excellency Dr. António Caetano Macieira Júnior, Minister for Foreign Affairs;

Who, after having communicated to each other their respective full powers, found to be in proper form, have agreed upon and concluded the following articles:

Article I.

The High Contracting Parties agree that all disputes between them, of every nature whatsoever, to the settlement of which previous arbitration treaties or agreements do not apply in their terms or are not applied in fact, shall, when diplomatic methods of adjustment have failed, be referred for investigation and report to a permanent International Commission, to be constituted in the manner prescribed in the next succeeding article; and they agree not to declare war or begin hostilities during such investigation and before the report is submitted.

Article II.

The International Commission shall be composed of five members, to be appointed as follows: One member shall be chosen from each country, by the Government thereof; one member shall be chosen by each Government from some third country; the fifth member shall be chosen by common agreement between the two Governments, it being understood that he shall not be a citizen of either country. The expenses of the Commission shall be paid by the two Governments in equal proportion.

The International Commission shall be appointed within six months after the exchange of the ratifications of this treaty; and vacancies shall be filled according to the manner of the original appointment.

Article III.

In case the High Contracting Parties shall have failed to adjust a dispute by diplomatic methods, they shall at once refer it to the International Commission for investigation and report. The International Commission may, however, spontaneously offer its services to that effect, and in such case it shall notify both Governments and request their cooperation in the investigation.

The High Contracting Parties agree to furnish the Permanent International Commission with all the means and facilities required for its investigation and report.

The report of the International Commission shall be completed within one year after the date on which it shall declare its investigation to have begun, unless the High Contracting Parties shall limit or extend the time by mutual agreement. The report shall be prepared in triplicate; one copy shall be presented to each Government, and the third retained by the Commission for its files.

The High Contracting Parties reserve the right to act independently on the subject matter of the dispute after the report of the Commission shall have been submitted.

Article IV.

The present treaty shall be ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof; and by the President of the Portuguese Republic in accordance with the constitutional laws of the Republic; and the ratifications shall be exchanged as soon as possible. It shall take effect immediately after the exchange of ratifications, and shall continue in force for a period of five years; and it shall thereafter remain in force until twelve months after one of the High Contracting Parties have given notice to the other of an intention to terminate it.

In witness whereof the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present treaty and have affixed thereunto their seals.

Done in duplicate, in the English and Portuguese languages, at Lisbon, this 4th day of February one thousand nine hundred and fourteen.

[seal.] Thos. H. Birch

[seal.] Antonio Caetano Macieira Júnior

And whereas, the said Treaty has been duly ratified on both parts, and the ratifications of the two governments were exchanged in the City of Washington, on the twenty-fourth day of October, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Treaty to be made public, to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this twenty-seventh day of October in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.
Woodrow Wilson

By the President:
Robert Lansing,
Acting Secretary of State.

Arbitration agreement between the United States and Portugal, extending the duration of the Convention of April 6, 1908Arbitration agreement between the United States and Portugal, extending the duration of the Convention of April 6, 1908

Signed at Washington, June 28, 1913; ratification advised by the Senate, February 21, 1914; ratified by the President, April 14, 1914; ratified by Portugal, September 26, 1914; ratifications exchanged at Washington, October 24, 1914; proclaimed, October 27, 1914.

[1815] By the President of the United States of America.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this twenty-seventh day of October in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.

Treaty Series No. 601.]

By the President of the United States of America. Treaty Series No. 601.]

[Document 1815]

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas, an Agreement between the United States of America and the Portuguese Republic extending for a further period of five years the arbitration convention concluded between them on April 6, 1908, was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Washington on the twenty-eighth day of June, one thousand nine hundred and thirteen, the original of which Agreement, being in the English and Portuguese languages, is word for word as follows:

The Government of the United States of America and the Government of the Portuguese Republic, being desirous of extending the period of five years during which the Arbitration Convention concluded between them on April 6, 1908, is to remain in force, which period is about to expire, have authorized the undersigned to conclude the following agreement:

Article I.

The Convention of Arbitration of April 6, 1908, between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of Portugal, the duration of which by Article III thereof was fixed at a period of five years from the day of the exchange of its ratifications, which period will terminate on November 14, 1913, is hereby extended and continued in force for a further period of five years from November 14, 1913.

Article II.

The present Agreement shall be ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by the President of the Portuguese Republic, in accordance with the constitutional laws of the Republic, and it shall become effective upon the date of the exchange of ratifications, which shall take place at Washington as soon as possible.

Done in duplicate, in the English and Portuguese languages, at Washington this 28th day of June one thousand nine hundred and thirteen.

William Jennings Bryan [seal.]

Alte [seal.]

And whereas, the said Agreement has been duly ratified on both parts, and the ratifications of the two governments were exchanged at the City of Washington, on the twenty-fourth day of October, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen.

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Agreement to be made public, to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal.] Done at the City of Washington this twenty-seventh day of October in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth. Woodrow Wilson.

By the President:
Robert Lansing,
Acting Secretary of State.

Roumania:Roumania:

Contents

Death of King Carol I and accession to the throne of King Ferdinand I (Documents 1816-1822)

Death of King Carol I and accession to the throne of King Ferdinand IDeath of King Carol I and accession to the throne of King Ferdinand I

[1816] Minister Vopicka to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bucharest, October 10, 1914.

File No. 87.1.001/6.

[1817] [Untitled]

American Legation, Bucharest, October 11, 1914.

File No. 871.001F37.

[1818] President Wilson to Queen Elizabeth.

The White House, Washington, October 12, 1914.

File No. 871.001/6.

[1819] The Secretary of State to Minister Vopicka.

Department of State, Washington, October 12, 1914.

File No. 871.001/6.

[1820] President Wilson to King Ferdinand.

The White House, Washington, October 12, 1914.

File No. 871.001/6.

[1821] Minister Vopicka to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Bucharest, October 24, 1914.

File No. 871.001F37/3

[1822] The Secretary of State to Minister Vopicka.

Department of State, Washington, December 23, 1914.

File No. 871.001F37/3.

Minister Vopicka to the Secretary of State. File No. 87.1.001/6.

[Document 1816]

Minister Vopicka to the Secretary of State.

[Telegrams.]

American Legation,
Bucharest, October 10, 1914.

The King of Roumania died early this morning.

Vopicka.

[Untitled] File No. 871.001F37.

[Document 1817]

[Untitled]

American Legation,
Bucharest, October 11, 1914.

Ferdinand, Prince of Roumania, was at two o’clock this afternoon proclaimed King of Roumania with title of Ferdinand first. Date and particulars of funeral of late King not yet fixed.

Vopicka.

President Wilson to Queen Elizabeth. File No. 871.001/6.

[Document 1818]

President Wilson to Queen Elizabeth.

[Telegram.]

The White House,
Washington, October 12, 1914.

I am deeply grieved to learn of the death of His Majesty and I offer to Your Majesty, to the royal family and to the Roumanian nation the sincere condolences of the Government and people of the United States and the expression of my own deep sympathy in your great sorrow.

Woodrow Wilson.

The Secretary of State to Minister Vopicka. File No. 871.001/6.

[Document 1819]

The Secretary of State to Minister Vopicka.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, October 12, 1914.

The President is cabling to Queen Elizabeth appropriate condolence on death of the King. You will convey to the Council of Ministers for Foreign Affairs the sorrow felt by the Government of the United States on the lamentable death of his Majesty, the King, and my own personal sympathy in this great bereavement which has befallen Roumania.

Bryan.

President Wilson to King Ferdinand. File No. 871.001/6.

[Document 1820]

President Wilson to King Ferdinand.

[Telegram.]

The White House,
Washington, October 12, 1914.

On this sad occasion of the death of your illustrious uncle, I wish to express the earnest hope that Your Majesty’s reign will mark an era of great prosperity. I also offer to Your Majesty the assurances of my highest regards and good wishes.

Woodrow Wilson.

Minister Vopicka to the Secretary of State. File No. 871.001F37/3

[Document 1821]

Minister Vopicka to the Secretary of State.

No. 143.] American Legation,
Bucharest, October 24, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith a letter sent to the President of the United States by King Ferdinand of Roumania.

I also enclose an office copy of said letter together with English translation of same.

I have [etc.]

Charles J. Vopicka.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

King Ferdinand to President Wilson.

Very Dear and Great Friend: I fulfill a very painful duty in announcing to you the cruel loss which Roumania has just experienced in the person of its venerated Sovereign, His Majesty King Carol I, my beloved Uncle, who expired at Pelesh Castle on Saturday October 10th last. The good relations which have always existed between our two countries gives me the assurance that you will share the profound sorrow into which this sad event plunges me and the whole of the Roumanian people.

Called by the order of succession to the throne of Roumania, I inform you that I have taken the constitutional oath and ask you to be assured that all my efforts will tend to the cultivation of the good relations that exist between the United States of America and Roumania. I seize with eagerness this circumstance to offer to you, Mr. President, the expression of the sentiments of sincere esteem and of high consideration with which I am,

Very dear and great friend,

Your Good Friend,

Ferdinand.
Bucharest Palace,
This 17 October, 1914.
E. Porumbaro.

The Secretary of State to Minister Vopicka. File No. 871.001F37/3.

[Document 1822]

The Secretary of State to Minister Vopicka.

No. 35.] Department of State,
Washington, December 23, 1914.

Sir: The Department acknowledges the receipt of your despatch No. 143, Roumanian Series, of October 24 last, enclosing a letter addressed to the President by His Majesty Ferdinand in which he announced the death on October 10, 1914, of His Majesty Carol I and his accession to the throne of Roumania.

The Department encloses herewith, with office copy, a letter addressed by the President to His Majesty Ferdinand, King of Roumania, acknowledging the letter transmitted with your despatch of the 24th of October.

You will forward the copy to the Foreign Office and deliver the original in the manner most agreeable to His Majesty.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

[Inclosure.]

President Wilson to King Ferdinand.

Great and Good Friend: I have received the letter of the 17th of October last in which Your Majesty informed me of the death, on the 10th of the same month, of your beloved uncle, His Majesty Carol I, and your accession to the throne of Roumania.

In expressing my sincere and heartfelt sympathy for Your Majesty and the people of Roumania in their bereavement, I must at the same time give utterance to the satisfaction with which I received the announcement that you had ascended the throne, and assure Your Majesty that your wishes for the continuance of the friendly relations subsisting between the two countries are fully appreciated and cordially reciprocated.

May God have Your Majesty in His safe and holy Keeping.

Your Good Friend,

Woodrow Wilson.

By the President:
W. J. Bryan,
Secretary of State.

Washington , December 17, 1914.

Salvador:Salvador:

Contents

Message of the President, Carlos Meléndez, to the National AssemblyMessage of the President, Carlos Meléndez, to the National Assembly

[1823] [Untitled]

February 20, 1914

File No. 816.032/11.

[Untitled] File No. 816.032/11.

[Document 1823]

[Untitled]

February 20, 1914

[The message was read to the National Assembly by President Carlos Meléndez February 20, 1914, and was transmitted to the Department February 25, 1914, by the American Minister, Mr. Wm. Heimke. The following is the only passage referring to the United States:]

[Translation.]

You are well aware, Messrs. Deputies, of the great change of spirit that is to be noted throughout the Isthmus regarding the difficult Nicaraguan problem.

Here in Salvador, where law and liberty rule, strongly maintained by the Government which I have the honor to guide, all sorts of manifestations have been held which clearly demonstrate the state of inquietude of the people, inspired by fear of the consummation of acts which may impair the sovereignty and independence that were bequeathed to us by our forefathers.

There is about to be submitted to the American Senate the ratification of a convention in which the Government of Nicaragua acquires the protection of that Government, to which in recompense it cedes certain rights and privileges in the Gulf of Fonseca.

The Government of Salvador, through its Legation in Washington, submitted a note protesting to the Department of State, which note was published in the Official Gazette on October 23.1

This resolution, taken by the Government in accordance with public opinion, is in obedience to the sacred duty of maintaining unharmed the sovereign rights of the Salvador an nation in the Gulf of Fonseca, and because of the evident danger which such an act threatens us, since it is not permitted to any State to carry out measures prejudicial to a third State, even though such measures might be characterized as internal.

The reply2 of the American Government is still being awaited to the civil and courteous terms of our note of protest above mentioned, and we are confident that that illustrious Government, convinced of the justice which is on our side, and inspired by noble purposes, will resolve its action with a view to safeguard our rights in the Gulf.

1  For. Rel. 1913, p. 1027.

2  Page 954 [Pg. 954 includes portions of Doc. 1687 and Doc. 1688] of this volume.

Arbitration agreement between the United States and Salvador, extending the duration of the Convention of December 21, 1908Arbitration agreement between the United States and Salvador, extending the duration of the Convention of December 21, 1908

Signed at Washington, May 13, 1914; ratification advised by the Senate, May 20, 1914; ratified by the President, June 2, 1914; ratified by Salvador, July 6, 1914; ratifications exchanged at Washington, August 21, 1914; proclaimed, August 21, 1914.

[1824] By the President of the United States of America.

[seal.]Done at the City of Washington this twenty-first day of August in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.

Treaty Series No: 596:]

By the President of the United States of America. Treaty Series No: 596:]

[Document 1824]

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas, an Agreement between the United States of America and the Republic of Salvador extending, for a further period of five years, the arbitration convention concluded between them on December 21, 1908, was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Washington on the thirteenth day of May, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, the original of which Agreement, being in the English and Spanish languages, is word for word as follows:

The Government of the United States of America and the Government of Salvador, being desirous of extending the period of five years during which the Arbitration Convention concluded between them on December 21, 1908, is to remain in force, which period is about to expire, have authorized the undersigned, to wit: The Honorable William Jennings Bryan, Secretary of State of the United States, and Doctor Don Carlos A. Meza, Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of Salvador at Washington, to conclude the following agreement:

Article I.

The Convention of Arbitration of December 21, 1908, between the Government of the United States and the Government of Salvador, the duration of which by Article III thereof was fixed at a period of five years from the date of the exchange of ratifications, which period will terminate on July 3, 1914, is hereby extended and continued in force for a further period of five years from July 3, 1914.

Article II.

The present Agreement shall be ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and approved by the President of Salvador and ratified by the National Assembly, and it shall become effective upon the date of the exchange of ratifications, which shall take place at Washington as soon as possible.

Done in duplicate at Washington, in the English and Spanish languages, this 13th day of May, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen.

William Jennings Bryan [seal.]

Carlos A. Meza [seal]

And whereas, the said Agreement has been duly ratified on both parts, and the ratifications of the two Governments were exchanged in City of Washington, on the twenty-first day of August, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Agreement to be made public, to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal.]Done at the City of Washington this twenty-first day of August in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.
Woodrow Wilson

By the President:
William Jennings Bryan
Secretary of State.

Transfer of the presidency by President Meléndez to the First Designado, Alfonso QuiñónezTransfer of the presidency by President Meléndez to the First Designado, Alfonso Quiñónez

[1825] Chargé Tennant to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, San Salvador, June 30, 1914.

File No. 816.00/192.

[1826] [Untitled]

American Legation, San Salvador, August 29, 1914.

File No. 816.001/6.

[1827] The Minister of Salvador to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Salvador, Washington, August 30, 1914.

File No. 816.001/7.

[1828] The Secretary of State to the Minister of Salvador.

Department of State, Washington, September 4, 1914.

File No. 816.001/7.

[1829] The Minister of Salvador to the Secretary of State.

Legation of Salvador, Washington, September 23, 1914.

File No. 816.001 Q4/1.

[1830] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister of Salvador.

Department of State, Washington, October 3, 1914.

File No. 816.001Q4/1.

[1831] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Long.

Department of State, Washington, October 17, 1914.

File No. 816.001Q4/1.

Chargé Tennant to the Secretary of State. File No. 816.00/192.

[Document 1825]

Chargé Tennant to the Secretary of State.

No. 364.] American Legation,
San Salvador, June 30, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith a copy and translation of a clipping from the Diario de El Salvador, of a report of the Committee on Powers and Excuses of the National Legislative Assembly of Salvador,3 relative to the request of the President of Salvador, don Carlos Melendez, for permission to resign the Presidency of the Republic in order to comply with the Constitution and legally become candidate for the Presidency for the ensuing term of four years.

I have [etc.]

Henry F. Tennant.

3 Not printed.

[Untitled] File No. 816.001/6.

[Document 1826]

[Untitled]

[Telegram.]

American Legation,
San Salvador, August 29, 1914.

This morning at nine o’clock in the National Palace President Meléndez turned over the Executive power to the First Designate, Dr. Alfonso Quiñónez M.

Tennant.

The Minister of Salvador to the Secretary of State. File No. 816.001/7.

[Document 1827]

The Minister of Salvador to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Legation of Salvador,
Washington, August 30, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to inform your excellency that on yesterday Senor Don Carlos Melendez delivered, as required by our political Constitution, the Presidency of the Republic to First Designado Dr. Don Alfonso Quiñónez, who will discharge its duties until the 1st of March of the coming year 1915, the time set by law for the induction into the Chief Magistracy of the citizen who is elected at the Presidential elections that will begin on the second Sunday of January next.

Asking your excellency kindly to take note of the foregoing,

I have [etc.]

Francisco Dueñas.

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Salvador. File No. 816.001/7.

[Document 1828]

The Secretary of State to the Minister of Salvador.

Department of State,
Washington, September 4, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of August 30, by which you inform the Department that, [etc.]

Thanking you for this information, of which due note has been taken, I avail [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

The Minister of Salvador to the Secretary of State. File No. 816.001 Q4/1.

[Document 1829]

The Minister of Salvador to the Secretary of State.

[Translation.]

Legation of Salvador,
Washington, September 23, 1914.

Mr. Secretary: I have the honor to inclose to your excellency the autographic letter which Dr. Alfonso Quiñónez M., President of Salvador, sends to His Excellency the President of the United States of America, informing him of the fact that he has assumed the office of Chief Executive of the Republic by virtue of the leave of absence granted by the National Assembly to Mr. Carlos Meléndez.

While requesting your excellency to be so kind as to deliver the said autograph letter to His Excellency President Wilson,

I take [etc.]

Francisco Dueñas.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

President Quiñónez M. to President Wilson.

Great and Good Friend: By virtue of a leave of absence granted by the Honorable Legislative Assembly to President Carlos Meléndez, I have to-day received, before the committee appointed by the said Supreme Body, the Office of Chief Magistrate of the Republic, in my capacity as First Official Designated to receive the Presidency.

While informing Your Excellency of this event, I take pleasure in assuring you that in discharging the high duties which devolve upon me during the remainder of the presidential term I shall make great endeavor to preserve, as did my predecessor, the cordial relations of friendship existing between the Government of Salvador and that of the United States of America.

With wishes for Your Excellency’s personal happiness and for the prosperity and greatness of your noble nation, I have the high honor to remain Your Great and good Friend,

Alfonso Q.

Francisco Martínez S.

Written in the National Palace, San Salvador, August 29, 1914.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister of Salvador. File No. 816.001Q4/1.

[Document 1830]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister of Salvador.

Department of State,
Washington, October 3, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 23rd ultimo, with which you enclose an autograph letter from Dr. Alfonso Quiñonez M., announcing to the President his assumption of the Chief Magistracy of the Republic of Salvador, by reason of the leave of absence granted to Señor Don Carlos Melendez by the National Assembly.

I have taken pleasure in forwarding the letter to the President, whose reply will be delivered through the American Minister at San Salvador.

Accept [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Long. File No. 816.001Q4/1.

[Document 1831]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Long.

No. 2.] Department of State,
Washington, October 17, 1914.

Sir: I enclose, with office copy, a letter addressed by the President to His Excellency Alfonso Quinonez Molina, acknowledging his letter of August 29 last in which he announced his assumption of the Presidency of the Republic of Salvador and his entrance upon the duties of that office.

You will forward the copy to the foreign office and deliver the original in the manner most agreeable to His Excellency.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing.

[Inclosure.]

President Wilson to President Quinóñez.

Great and Good Friend: I have received your letter of the 29th of August last, in which you announced your assumption of the Presidency of the Republic of Salvador and your entrance upon the duties of the office.

I cordially reciprocate the sentiments you express for the continuance of the friendly relations which have heretofore existed between the United States and Salvador, and I assure Your Excellency of my best wishes for your personal welfare and for the prosperity of the Republic over which you have been called to preside.

Your Good Friend,

Woodrow Wilson.

By the President:
W. J. Bryan,
Secretary of State.

Washington, October 5, 1914.

Protest of Salvador in relation to a proposed Nicaraguan canal.Protest of Salvador in relation to a proposed Nicaraguan canal.

(See Nicaragua: Proposed interoceanic canal treaty, etc.)

Spain:Spain:

Contents

Arbitration agreement between the United States and Spain, extending the duration of the Convention of April 20, 1908Arbitration agreement between the United States and Spain, extending the duration of the Convention of April 20, 1908

Signed at Washington, May 29, 1913; ratification advised by the Senate, February 21, 1914; ratified by the President, March 9, 1914; ratified by Spain, March 2, 1914; ratifications exchanged at Washington, March 21, 1914; proclaimed, March 23, 1914.

[1832] By the President of the United States of America.

[seal.]Done at the City of Washington this twenty-third day of March in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-eighth.

Treaty Series No. 586.]

By the President of the United States of America. Treaty Series No. 586.]

[Document 1832]

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas an Agreement between the United States of America and the Government of His Majesty the King of Spain extending, for a further period of five years, the arbitration convention signed between them on April 20, 1908, was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Washington on the twenty-ninth day of May, one thousand nine hundred and thirteen, the original of which Agreement, being in the English and Spanish languages is word for word as follows:

Agreement extending the duration of the Arbitration Convention of April 20, 1908.

The Government of the United States of America and the Government of His Majesty the King of Spain, being desirous of extending the period of five years during which the Arbitration Convention concluded between them on April 20, 1908, is to remain in force, which period is about to expire, have authorized the undersigned, to wit: The Honorable William Jennings Bryan, Secretary of State of the United States, and Señor Don Juan Riaño y Gayangos, Chamberlain to His Majesty the King of Spain, His Majesty’s Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary at Washington, to conclude the following agreement:

Article I.

The Convention of Arbitration of April 20, 1908, between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of His Majesty the King of Spain, the duration of which by Article III thereof was fixed at a period of five years from the date of the exchange of ratifications of said Convention, which period will terminate on June 2, 1913, is hereby extended and continued in force for a further period of five years from June 2, 1913.

Article II.

The present Agreement shall be ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by the Government of His Majesty the King of Spain, in accordance with its Constitution and laws, and it shall become effective upon the date of the exchange of ratifications, which shall take place at Washington as soon as possible.

Done in duplicate, in the English and Spanish languages, at Washington, this twenty-ninth day of May, one thousand nine hundred and thirteen.

[seal.] William Jennings Bryan

[seal.] Juan Riano y Gayangos.

And whereas the said Agreement has been duly ratified on both parts, and the ratifications of the two governments were exchanged in the City of Washington, on the twenty-first day of March, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Agreement to be made public, to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal.]Done at the City of Washington this twenty-third day of March in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-eighth.
Woodrow Wilson

By the President:
W. J. Bryan,
Secretary of State.

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, concluded between the United States and SpainTreaty for the advancement of general peace, concluded between the United States and Spain

Signed at Washington, September 15, 1914; ratification advised by the Senate, September 25, 1914; ratified by the President, November 23, 1914; ratified by Spain, November 23, 1914; ratifications exchanged at Washington, December 21, 1914; proclaimed, December 23, 1914.

[1833] By the President of the United States of America.

[seal Done at the City of Washington this twenty-third day of December in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.

Treaty Series No. 605.]

By the President of the United States of America. Treaty Series No. 605.]

[Document 1833]

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas a Treaty between the United States of America and Spain looking to the advancement of the cause of general peace was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Washington on the fifteenth day of September, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, the original of which Treaty, being in the English and Spanish languages, is word for word as follows:

Treaty for the Settlement of Disputes between the Two Countries.

The President of the United States of America and His Majesty the King of Spain, desiring to strengthen the friendly relations which unite their two countries and to serve the cause of general peace, have decided to conclude a treaty for these purposes and have consequently appointed the plenipotentiaries designated hereinafter, to wit: The President of the United States of America, the Honorable William Jennings Bryan, Secretary of State of the United Stages; and

His Majesty the King of Spain, His Excellency Señor Don Juan Riaño y Gayangos, His Ambassador in Washington;

Who, after exhibiting to each other their full powers, found to be in due and proper form, have agreed upon the following articles:

Article 1.

Any disputes arising between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of Spain, of whatever nature they may be, shall, when ordinary diplomatic proceedings have failed and the High Contracting Parties do not have recourse to arbitration, be submitted for investigation and report to a Permanent International Commission constituted in the manner prescribed in the following article.

The High Contracting Parties agree not to resort, with respect to each other, to any act of force during the investigation to be made by the Commission and before its report is handed in.

Article 2.

The International Commission shall be composed of five members appointed as follows: Each Government shall designate two members, only one of whom shall be of its own nationality; the fifth member shall be designated by common consent and shall not belong to any of the nationalities already represented on the Commission; he shall perform the duties of President.

In case the two Governments should be unable to agree on the choice of the fifth commissioner, the other four shall be called upon to designate him, and failing an understanding between them, the provisions of article 45 of The Hague Convention of 1907 shall be applied.

The Commission shall be organized within six months from the exchange of ratifications of the present convention.

The members shall be appointed for one year and their appointment may be renewed. They shall remain in office until superseded or reappointed, or until the work on which they are engaged at the time their office expires is completed.

Any vacancies which may arise (from death, resignation, or cases of physical or moral incapacity) shall be filled within the shortest possible period in the manner followed for the original appointment.

The High Contracting Parties shall, before designating the Commissioners, reach an understanding in regard to their compensation. They shall bear by halves the expenses incident to the meeting of the Commission.

Article 3.

In case a dispute should arise between the High Contracting Parties which is not settled by the ordinary methods, each Party shall have a right to ask that the investigation thereof be intrusted to the International Commission charged with making a report. Notice shall be given to the President of the International Commission, who shall at once communicate with his colleagues.

In the same case the President may, after consulting his colleagues and upon receiving the consent of a majority of the members of the Commission, offer the services of the latter to each of the Contracting Parties. Acceptance of that offer declared by one of the two Governments shall be sufficient to give jurisdiction of the case to the Commission in accordance with the foregoing paragraph.

The place of meeting shall be determined by the Commission itself.

Article 4.

The two High Contracting Parties shall have a right, each on its own part, to state to the President of the Commission what is the subject-matter of the controversy. No difference in these statements, which shall be furnished by way of suggestion, shall arrest the action of the Commission.

Article 5.

As regards the procedure which it is to follow, the Commission shall as far as possible be guided by the provisions contained in articles 9 to 36 of Convention 1 of The Hague of 1907.

The High Contracting Parties agree to afford the Commission all means and all necessary facilities for its investigation and report.

The work of the Commission shall be completed within one year from the date on which it has taken jurisdiction of the case, unless the High Contracting Parties should agree to set a different period.

The conclusion of the Commission and the terms of its report shall be adopted by a majority. The report, signed only by the President acting by virtue of his office, shall be transmitted by him to each of the Contracting Parties.

The High Contracting Parties reserve full liberty as to the action to be taken on the report of the Commission.

Article 6.

The present treaty shall be ratified by the President of the United States of America, with the advice and consent of the Senate of the United States, and by His Majesty the King of Spain.

It shall go into force immediately after the exchange of ratifications and shall last five years.

Unless denounced six months at least before the expiration of the said period of five years, it shall remain in force until the expiration of a period of twelve months after either party shall have notified the other of its intention to terminate it.

In witness whereof the respective plenipotentiaries have signed the present treaty and have affixed thereunto their seals.

Done at Washington this 15th day of September, in the year nineteen hundred and fourteen.

[seal.] William Jennings Bryan

[seal.] Juan Riaño y Gayangos.

And whereas, the said Treaty has been duly ratified on both parts and the ratifications were exchanged in the City of Washington on the twenty-first day of December, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Treaty to be made public to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal Done at the City of Washington this twenty-third day of December in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.
Woodrow Wilson

By the President:
W. J. Bryan
Secretary of State.

Protection by the United States of Spanish interests in Mexico.Protection by the United States of Spanish interests in Mexico.

(See Mexico.)

Sweden:Sweden:

Contents

Arbitration agreement between the United States and Sweden, extending the duration of the Convention of May 2, 1908 (Documents 1834-1834)

Arbitration agreement between the United States and Sweden, extending the duration of the Convention of May 2, 1908Arbitration agreement between the United States and Sweden, extending the duration of the Convention of May 2, 1908

Signed at Washington, June 28, 1913; ratification advised by the Senate, February 21, 1914; ratified by the President, March 2, 1914; ratified by Sweden, August 29, 1913; ratifications exchanged at Washington, March 6, 1914; proclaimed, March 6, 1914.

[1834] By the President of the United States of America.

[seal.]Done at the City of Washington this sixth day of March in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-eighth.

Treaty Series No. 585.]

By the President of the United States of America. Treaty Series No. 585.]

[Document 1834]

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas an Agreement between the United States of America and Sweden extending, for a further period of five years, the Arbitration Convention concluded between them on May 2, 1908, was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Washington, on the twenty-eighth day of June, one thousand nine hundred and thirteen, the original of which Agreement, being in the English and French languages, is word for word as follows:

The Government of the United States of America and the Government of His Majesty the King of Sweden, being desirous of extending the period of five years during which the Arbitration Convention concluded between them on May 2, 1908, is to remain in force, which period is about to expire, have authorized the undersigned, to wit: William Jennings Bryan, Secretary of State of the United States, and W. A. F. Ekengren, His Majesty’s Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary at Washington, to conclude the following agreement:

Article I.

The Convention of Arbitration of May 2, 1908, between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of His Majesty the King of Sweden, the duration of which by Article IV thereof was fixed at a period of five years from the date of the exchange of ratifications, which period will terminate on August 18, 1913, is hereby extended and continued in force for a further period of five years from August 18, 1913.

Article II.

The present Agreement shall be ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by His Majesty the King of Sweden, and it shall become effective upon the date of the exchange of ratifications, which shall take place at Washington as soon as possible.

Done in duplicate in the English and French languages, at Washington this 28th day of June, one thousand nine hundred and thirteen.

[seal.] William Jennings Bryan

[seal.] W. A. F. Ekengren

And whereas, the said Agreement has been duly ratified on both parts, and the ratifications of the two Governments were exchanged in the City of Washington, on the sixth day of March, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Agreement to be made public, to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal.]Done at the City of Washington this sixth day of March in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-eighth.
Woodrow Wilson.

By the President:
W. J. Bryan
Secretary of State.

Switzerland:Switzerland:

Contents

Arbitration agreement between the United States and Switzerland, extending the duration of the Convention of February 29, 1908 (Documents 1835-1835)

Arbitration agreement between the United States and Switzerland, extending the duration of the Convention of February 29, 1908Arbitration agreement between the United States and Switzerland, extending the duration of the Convention of February 29, 1908

Signed at Washington, November 3, 1913; ratification advised by the Senate, February 21, 1914; ratified by the President, March 23, 1914; ratified by Switzerland, March 10, 1914; ratifications exchanged at Washington, April 27, 1914; proclaimed, April 28, 1914.

[1835] By the President of the United States of America.

[seal.]Done at the City of Washington this twenty-eighth day of April in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-eighth.

Treaty Series No. 590.]

By the President of the United States of America. Treaty Series No. 590.]

[Document 1835]

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas an Agreement between the United States of America and the Swiss Confederation extending, for a further period of five years, the arbitration convention concluded between them on February 29, 1908, was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Washington on the third day of November, one thousand nine hundred and thirteen, the original of which Agreement, being in the English and French languages, is word for word as follows:

Agreement extending the duration of the Arbitration Convention of February 29, 1908.

The Government of the United States of America and the Government of the Swiss Confederation, being desirous of extending the period of five years during which the Arbitration Convention concluded between them on February 29, 1908, is to remain in force, which period expires on December 23, 1913, have authorized the undersigned, to wit: William Jennings Bryan, Secretary of State of the United States, and Ernest 3aumann, Chargé d’Affaires of the Swiss Confederation to the United States, to conclude the following agreement:

Article I.

The Convention of Arbitration of February 29, 1908, between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of the Swiss Confederation, the duration of which by Article III thereof was fixed at a period of five years from the day of the exchange of the ratifications, which period will terminate on December 23, 1913, is hereby extended and continued in force for a further period of five years from December 23, 1913.

Article II.

The present agreement shall be ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by the Federal” Council of the Swiss Confederation, conforming to the constitution and the laws of Switzerland, and it shall become effective upon the date of the exchange of ratifications, which shall take place at Washington as soon as possible.

Done in duplicate, in the English and French languages, at Washington this 3rd day of November one thousand nine hundred and thirteen.

William Jennings Bryan [seal.]

Ernest Baumann [seal.]

And whereas the said Agreement has been duly ratified on both parts, and the ratifications of the two governments were exchanged in the City of Washington, on the twenty-seventh day of April, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Agreement to be made public, to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal.]Done at the City of Washington this twenty-eighth day of April in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-eighth.
Woodrow Wilson

By the President:
W. J. Bryan
Secretary of State.

Turkey:Turkey:

Contents

Treaty of peace between Turkey and SerbiaTreaty of peace between Turkey and Serbia

[1836] Ambassador Morgenthau to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Constantinople, March 17, 1914.

File No. 767.70/441.

Ambassador Morgenthau to the Secretary of State. File No. 767.70/441.

[Document 1836]

Ambassador Morgenthau to the Secretary of State.

No. 37.] American Embassy,
Constantinople, March 17, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith in duplicate, copy, with translation, of the Turco-Servian Treaty which was signed by the plenipotentiaries of the respective countries on the 14th instant.1 In addition to the treaty, I have the honor to transmit the letter exchanged by the signatories on the subject of mosques in the ceded territories.2 Diplomatic relations between Servia and Turkey have been resumed and Mr. Georgevitch has been nominated Servian Chargé d’Affaires.

I have [etc.]

H. Morgenthau.

1 Not printed. It ratifies the Treaty of London of May 30, 1913. (See For. Rel. 1913, p. 1309.)

2 Not printed.

Abrogation by Turkey of the Capitulations. Refusal of the United States to recognize executory force thereinAbrogation by Turkey of the Capitulations. Refusal of the United States to recognize executory force therein

[1837] The Turkish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Ottoman Embassy, Washington, September 10, 1914.

File No. 711.673/33.

[1838] Ambassador Morgenthau to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Constantinople, September 10, 1914.

File No. 711.673/34.

[1839] Ambassador Morgenthau to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Constantinople, September 11, 1914.

File No. 711.673/49.

[1840] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Morgenthau.

Department of State, Washington, September 16, 1914.

File No. 711.673/62a.

[1841] The Secretary of State to the Turkish Ambassador.

Department of State, Washington, September 16, 1914.

File No. 711.673/33.

[1842] The Turkish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Ottoman Embassy, Washington, September 17, 1914.

File No. 711.673/40.

The Turkish Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.673/33.

[Document 1837]

The Turkish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

No. 41.] Ottoman Embassy,
Washington, September 10, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that by Imperial Irade the Ottoman Government has abrogated as from the first of October next the conventions known as the Capitulations restricting the sovereignty of Turkey in her relations with certain Powers. All privileges and immunities accessory to these conventions or issuing therefrom are equally repealed. Having thus freed itself from what was an intolerable obstacle to all progress in the Empire, the Imperial Government has adopted as basis of its relations with the other Powers the general principles of international law.

Accept [etc.]

A. Rustem.

Ambassador Morgenthau to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.673/34.

[Document 1838]

Ambassador Morgenthau to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

American Embassy,
Constantinople, September 10, 1914.

The Sublime Porte notifies all Embassies today that Ottoman Government had decided to abrogate all capitulations—judiciary, economic and administrative—from October 1. The Sublime Porte states that it has taken this step inspired by higher interests of Ottoman Fatherland and that in doing so it cherishes no unfriendly feeling against any Power whatever and that it is disposed to start negotiations with view of concluding with the American Government treaties of commerce on the basis of the general principles of public international law. Turkish officials admit choosing this time for their emancipation because five big Powers are at war and can not unite against them. Italian Ambassador acting as intermediary has arranged that the six Powers today hand identic protest to the Sublime Porte. They did not await instructions from their respective Governments. The form of the protest is weak. It merely states that capitulations are the result of bilateral agreements and therefore can not be modified or abrogated by one of the contracting parties without a previous understanding with the other parties. I deemed best not to send similar protest as it will be ineffective, and should like instructions by September 12 to protest most emphatically against abrogation of the judicial and administrative capitulations while being permitted to intimate that we have no serious objections to the abrogation of the economic capitulations.

Most of the Ambassadors frankly admit that little can be done to induce Ottoman Government to reverse their decision. In long interview today with Minister of Interior I protested vigorously against this attempt to abrogate judicial and administrative capitulations, which would interfere with personal liberty and inviolability of domicile. Ottoman Government considers abrogation an accomplished fact and organized public demonstrations to celebrate event and has had city decorated with flags and ordered the press to write long favorable editorials.

American Ambassador.

Ambassador Morgenthau to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.673/49.

[Document 1839]

Ambassador Morgenthau to the Secretary of State.

[Extract]

No. 115.] American Embassy,
Constantinople, September 11, 1914.

Sir: Referring to my telegram of September 10, I have the honor to inform you that all the Embassies received yesterday notification of the abrogation of Capitulations, of which I herewith enclose a copy with translation. It naturally caused great excitement amongst the Ambassadors, and through the help of the Italian Ambassador, the representatives of the six Great Powers agreed upon an identic protest to be handed to the Grand Vizier, of which I enclose a copy and translation.

I declined sending a similar note, as I considered it entirely too weak to suit our case, and preferred to make a much more vigorous protest after receiving your instructions in answer to my above-mentioned telegram.

It is well to remember in connection, with the matter that three of the nations are already committed to consent to or assist in the procuration of changes in the capitulatory arrangement: Austria, under Convention of 1909, when Bosnia and Herzegovina were annexed; Italy, under Treaty of Lausanne 1912, by which, under Article 8, they agreed to assist, etc.; France, under the recent arrangement made in the Spring of 1914.

I have [etc.]

H. Morgenthau.

[Inclosure 1—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Ambassador Morgenthau.

No. 53699/89.] Sublime Porte, Ministry for Foreign Affairs,
Constantinople, September 9, 1914.

Mr. Ambassador: The Imperial Ottoman Government, in its sentiments of hospitality and sympathy towards the subjects of the friendly Powers, had in former times determined in a special manner the rules to which foreigners coming to the Orient to trade there should be subject, and had communicated those rules to the Powers. Subsequently those rules, which the Sublime Porte had decreed entirely of its own accord, were interpreted as privileges, corroborated and extended by certain practices, and were maintained down to our days under the name of ancient treaties (or Capitulations). Meanwhile these privileges, which on the one hand were found to be in complete opposition to the juridical rules of the century and to the principle of national sovereignty, constituted on the other hand an impediment to the progress and the development of the Ottoman Empire, just as they gave birth to certain misunderstandings in its relations with the foreign Powers; and thus they form an obstacle to the attainment of the desired degree of cordiality and sincerity in those relations.

The Ottoman Empire, surmounting all resistance, continues to march in the path of renaissance and reform which it entered upon in 1255 by the Hatti-Humayoun of Gul-Hané and, in order to assure for itself the place which was due it in the family of the civilized peoples of Europe, it accepted the most modern juridical principles and did not deviate from the program of supporting the edifice of the State on these foundations. The establishment of the constitutional regime demonstrates with what happy success the efforts of the Ottoman Government in the way of progress were crowned.

However, as consequences deduced from the Capitulations, the intervention of foreigners in the exercise of judiciary power, which constitutes the most important basis of the sovereignty of the State; the limitation of the legislative power, by the claim put forth that many laws could not be applied to foreigners; the fact that a criminal who has committed an offense against public security is screened from the application of the laws on the sole ground of his being of foreign nationality; or again the fact that public action is compromised by the necessity of respecting in regard to the foreign delinquent all sorts of restrictions and conditions; the fact finally that, according to the nationality of the contracting parties, a difference arising from a single contract admits of a different forum and mode of procedure—all these facts and other similar restrictive privileges constitute an insurmountable barrier to all organization of tribunals begun with a view to assuring in the country the perfect working of justice.

Likewise, that consequence of the Capitulations which renders foreigners exempt and free from taxes in the Ottoman Empire renders the Sublime Porte powerless not only to procure the necessary means for providing for the carrying out of reforms, but even for satisfying current administrative needs, without having recourse to a loan. In the same order of ideas, the obstacles raised to the increase of indirect taxes result in raising the quota of direct taxes and in overburdening the Ottoman taxpayers. The fact that foreigners trading in the Ottoman Empire and enjoying there all sorts of immunities and privileges are less heavily taxed than Ottomans constitutes at the same time a manifest injustice and an infringement of the independence and dignity of the State. The Imperial Government, in spite of all these obstacles, was zealously pursuing its efforts at reform when the unforeseen outbreak of the general war brought the financial difficulties in the country to the last degree of acuteness, endangering the accomplishment of all the work which had been begun or the undertaking of which had been decided upon. Now the Sublime Porte is convinced that the only means of salvation for Turkey is to bring into being this work of reform and of development as soon as possible, and it is likewise convinced that all the steps that it takes in this direction will meet with the encouragement of all the friendly Powers.

It is on the basis of this conviction that the decision has been taken to abrogate, reckoning from October 1, 1914, the Capitulations, which up to the present have constituted a hindrance to all progress in the Empire, as well as all privileges and toleration accessory to these Capitulations or resulting from them, and to adopt as the basis of relations with all States the general principles of international law.

While having the honor of communicating the present decision, which as it is to open an era of happiness for the Ottoman Empire will for this reason, I have no doubt, be received with satisfaction by the American Government, I consider it my duty to add that the Sublime Porte, inspired exclusively in its decision by the higher interests of the Ottoman land, does not nourish, in abrogating the Capitulations, any unfriendly thought in regard to any Power and that it is quite disposed to enter upon negotiations with a view to concluding with the American Government treaties of commerce on the basis of the general principles of public international law.

Kindly accept [etc.]

Said Halim.

[Inclosure 2—Translation.]

Ambassador Morgenthau to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

American Embassy,
Therapia, September 10, 1914.

Highness: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Your Highness’s letter of the 9th instant by which you kindly informed me of the decision taken by the Imperial Government to suppress the Capitulations in Turkey from October 1st next.

I will not fail to bring this decision and the considerations upon which it is based to the knowledge of my Government, but I consider it my duty at this time to point out to Your Highness, in contradiction to the beginning of your statement, that the capitulary regime, as it exists in Turkey, is not an autonomous institution of the Empire, but the result of international treaties, of diplomatic agreements and of contractual acts of various sorts. This regime, consequently, cannot be modified in any of its parts and still less be suppressed in its entirety by the Ottoman Government except in consequence of an understanding with the contracting Powers.

In the absence, therefore, of the arrival at such an understanding before October 1st next between the Ottoman Government and my own Government, it would be impossible for me to recognize executory force, after that date, in the unilateral decision of the Sublime Porte.

H. Morgenthau.

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Morgenthau. File No. 711.673/62a.

[Document 1840]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Morgenthau.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, September 16, 1914.

You are instructed to notify the Ottoman Government that this Government does not acquiesce in the attempt of the Ottoman Government to abrogate the Capitulations, and does not recognize that it has a right to do so or that its action, being unilateral, has any effect upon the rights and privileges enjoyed under those conventions. You will further state that this Government reserves for the present the consideration of the grounds for its refusal to acquiesce in the action of the Ottoman Government, and the right to make further representations later.

Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Turkish Ambassador. File No. 711.673/33.

[Document 1841]

The Secretary of State to the Turkish Ambassador.

Department of State,
Washington, September 16, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your note of the 10th instant in which you inform me that by Imperial Irade the Ottoman Government has abrogated as from the 1st of October next the conventions known as the Capitulations. In reply I have the honor to state that the Government of the United States does not acquiesce in the endeavor of the Imperial Government to set aside the Capitulations, and does not recognize that the Ottoman Government has a right so to do, or that its action to this end, being unilateral, can have any effect upon the rights and privileges enjoyed by American citizens under the Capitulatory Conventions. The Government of the United States reserves for the present the discussion of the grounds upon which its refusal to acquiesce in the action of the Ottoman Government is based, and reserves the right to make further representations in this matter at a later date.

I have the honor to inclose for your information a paraphrase of a telegram on this subject sent today to the American Ambassador at Constantinople.

Accept [etc.].

W. J. Bryan.

The Turkish Ambassador to the Secretary of State. File No. 711.673/40.

[Document 1842]

The Turkish Ambassador to the Secretary of State.

Ottoman Embassy,
Washington, September 17, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your note of yesterday’s date replying to my note of the 10th inst informing the Government of the United States of the decision of the Sublime Porte to abrogate the Capitulations as from the 1st of October next.

I notice that at the same time as the Government of the United States does not recognize the right of the Ottoman Government to set aside the Capitulations it does not acquiesce in the latter’s endeavour to free itself from them. This I take to mean that the principle itself of the removal of these restrictions on Turkish sovereignty is to be opposed by the United States.

Accept [etc.].

A. Rustem.

Protection of American educational institutions.Protection of American educational institutions.

See For. Rel.: History of the World War.)

Agreement of the Powers to the increase of the Turkish customs tariff.Agreement of the Powers to the increase of the Turkish customs tariff.

See For. Rel.: History of the World War.)

Venezuela:Venezuela:

Contents

Constitution of VenezuelaConstitution of Venezuela

[1843] Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Caracas, June 12, 1914.

File No. 831.011.

Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State. File No. 831.011.

[Document 1843]

Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State.

[Extract]

No. 184.] American Legation,
Caracas, June 12, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith a translation in duplicate of the recently enacted Constitution of Venezuela.1 Most of the States have formally ratified the same and final action will have to be taken by the remaining States within the next few days.

There are several changes, more or less significant, from the Constitution of 1909, as well as from the provisory constitutional statute of April, 1914. The most noteworthy of these are the following: 1. Establishing the presidential term (to begin April 19, 1915) at seven years—formerly four years.

2. Eliminating the prohibition of the incumbent’s reelection at the expiration of the term.

3. Abolition of the Council of Government.

4. Abolition of the office of Vice President, as fixed by the statute of April 19, 1914.

5. Authorizing the President to appoint any Cabinet Minister to act temporarily in his office, in case of his absence or disability.

6. Reinvesting the President with the right to command the armed forces of the nation. This authority was taken from him and vested in the “Commander-in-Chief” of the army, by the statute of April 19, 1914.

7. Fixing the terms of office of members of Congress, the Attorney General and State officers (see Article 105) at three years. Members of Congress formerly held office four years.

I have [etc.]

Preston McGoodwin.

1 Not printed.

Authorization of American consular officers to visit vessels bound for the United States, Porto Rico, and ColonAuthorization of American consular officers to visit vessels bound for the United States, Porto Rico, and Colon

[1844] Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Caracas, July 14, 1914.

File No. 702.04/4.

[1845] The Secretary of State to Minister McGoodwin.

Department of State, Washington, September 11, 1914.

File No. 702.04/4.

Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State. File No. 702.04/4.

[Document 1844]

Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State.

No. 212.] American Legation,
Caracas, July 14, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor and the pleasure to enclose herewith translation of a note from Doctor Manuel Diaz Rodriguez, Minister for Foreign Relations, informing me that the Government of Venezuela finally has granted unrestricted and permanent permission to all salaried consular officers of the United States of America “to visit ships of whatever nationality bound for ports in the United States, Porto Rico and Colon.”

It will be observed this letter states “that no other nation doing business with Venezuelan ports now enjoys a like privilege” and that this unusual courtesy overcoming “the difficulties presented in the Code of Hacienda” is granted “upon the basis of reciprocity on the part of the American authorities toward consuls of Venezuela.” Efforts have been made to secure this privilege for many years and I would respectfully request an expression of appreciation from the Department to convey to the Venezuelan Foreign Office.

I have [etc.]

Preston McGoodwin.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Minister McGoodwin

Caracas, July 7, 1914.

Mr. Minister: I have the honor to manifest to your excellency that I have given careful attention to the reasons advanced in your note No. 163 dated the 5th ultimo, for permission for American Consuls at ports in Venezuela to visit vessels of whatever nationality bound for ports of the United States, Porto Rico and Colon.

Having heard the opinion of the Ministry of the Hacienda, to which I hastened to communicate the data in the case, I can to-day inform your excellency that the matter has been studied in the spirit of the greatest cordiality towards the United States, in an effort to overcome the difficulties presented by the Code of Hacienda; and I have to bring to your knowledge that the Federal Executive accord permission for the salaried Consuls maintained by the United States of America at La Guaira, Puerto Cabello and Maracaibo to visit, in person or by delegate, vessels of any nationality bound for ports in the United States, Porto Rico and Colon, after such vessels shall have effected the discharge of the merchandise destined for the respective Venezuelan port; all this upon the basis of reciprocity on the part of the American authorities toward Consuls of Venezuela, and provided the officials to whom such permission is granted commit no infraction of the fiscal laws.

It is not amiss to add, in testimony of the sentiments entertained by my Government toward the United States of America, that no other nation doing business with Venezuelan ports now enjoys a like privilege to that accorded to-day to the American Consuls.

I have [etc.]

Manuel Diaz Rodriguez.

The Secretary of State to Minister McGoodwin. File No. 702.04/4.

[Document 1845]

The Secretary of State to Minister McGoodwin.

No. 90.] Department of State,
Washington, September 11, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your No. 212 of July 14th last with which you enclose with translation a copy of the note from the Venezuelan Minister of Foreign Affairs advising you that the Government of Venezuela has granted unrestricted and permanent permission to all salaried consular officers of the United States to visit ships of whatever nationality bound for ports in the United States. Porto Rico and Colon.

The Department desires that you convey to the Venezuelan Foreign Office an expression of its sincere appreciation of the action taken by the Government of Venezuela.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Certificate of good conduct required of immigrants to Venezuela; protest of the United StatesCertificate of good conduct required of immigrants to Venezuela; protest of the United States

[1846] Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Caracas, January 30, 1914.

File No. 831.55/1.

[1847] The Secretary of State to Minister McGoodwin.

Department of State, Washington, February 28, 1914.

File No. 831.55/1.

[1848] Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Caracas, April 11, 1914.

File No. 831.55/3.

[1849] The Secretary of State to Minister McGoodwin.

Department of State, Washington, May 6, 1914.

File No. 831.55/3.

Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State. File No. 831.55/1.

[Document 1846]

Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State.

No. 43.] American Legation,
Caracas, January 30, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith, in duplicate, copies1 with translation of a “Resolution “issued by the Political and Administrative Bureau of the Federal District, which requires that foreigners desiring entrance to Venezuela must present “certificates of good conduct” and “documents attesting their personal status.”

This decree, issued by order of the Acting President, is designed to prevent the entry of the hordes of active Venezuelan revolutionists known to be in Trinidad, Curacao, Colombia, etc., but it can be and is being invoked at will at the various ports and especially along the Colombian frontier.

Sir Frederic D. Harford, British Minister to Venezuela, has formally notified the Venezuelan Government that his Government can not recognize the edict as applying to subjects of Great Britain. While there has been no complaint filed with this Legation by subjects of the United States, I would respectfully request instructions.

I have [etc.]

Preston McGoodwin.

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to Minister McGoodwin. File No. 831.55/1.

[Document 1847]

The Secretary of State to Minister McGoodwin.

Department of State,
Washington, February 28, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your No. 43, of the 30th ultimo, in which you enclose a copy and translation of a decree issued by the Political and Administrative Bureau of the Federal District, requiring that foreigners entering Venezuela must present “certificates of good conduct” and “documents attesting their personal status.”

You will protest against the application of the decree to American citizens on the ground that its requirements are unreasonable in their nature. In this connection you will state that under the laws of the United States there is no jurisdiction vested in the authorities to issue the certificate mentioned by the decree as a necessary prerequisite to enter into Venezuela.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
J. B. Moore.

Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State. File No. 831.55/3.

[Document 1848]

Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State.

[Extract]

American Legation,
Caracas, April 11, 1914.

Sir: With reference to the Department’s unnumbered instruction of February 28, 1914, regarding the publication of a decree [etc.], I have the honor to report that in answer to my formal protest against the application of this decree to citizens of the United States for the reason that under the laws of the United States there is no jurisdiction vested in the authorities to issue the certificate mentioned by the decree as a necessary prerequisite to enter into Venezuela, the Minister for Foreign Affairs has made reply, copy of which, with translation, is enclosed herewith.

In private conversation with the Minister for Foreign Affairs I reiterated the protest, as instructed by the Department, and was told by the Minister that the application of Article 20 of the Law upon Foreigners, first promulgated by President Ciprianao Castro, had been invoked as a precaution against the promiscuous entry of alleged revolutionary agents and that it was intended for no other purpose.

I have [etc.]

Preston McGoodwin.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Minister McGoodwin.

Caracas, April 8, 1914.

Mr. Minister: I have had the honor to receive your excellency’s official communication No. 114 of the 3rd instant.

In it I note that there exists in the United States no jurisdiction whatever to issue the certificate of good conduct referred to in the last part of Article 20 of the Law which defines the duties and rights of foreigners in Venezuela, issued and promulgated in April, 1903; on which account the Government of the United States could not accept the application of this formality to American citizens.

I have to add, however, that as it is a matter of a law of this Republic, it is not incumbent upon me to discuss the provision in question, and I limit myself to taking note of the matter and the details regarding it in the communication of your excellency.

I avail [etc.]

Manuel Diaz Rodirguez.

The Secretary of State to Minister McGoodwin. File No. 831.55/3.

[Document 1849]

The Secretary of State to Minister McGoodwin.

No. 48.] Department of State,
Washington, May 6, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your unnumbered despatch of the 11th ultimo further discussing the decree issued by the Government of Venezuela under date of January 21, 1914, requiring that foreigners entering Venezuela must present “certificates of good conduct” and “documents attesting their personal status.”

You will, of course, promptly inform the Department of any specific instance wherein the Government of Venezuela attempts to enforce as against American citizens the requirements mentioned, and you will make appropriate protest against any such attempt which shall be made known to you unless there appear to be good reasons to the contrary.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing.

Application of the law of ecclesiastical patronage to foreign missionary societiesApplication of the law of ecclesiastical patronage to foreign missionary societies

[1850] Chargé Caffery to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Caracas, October 26, 1911.

File No. 831.404/9.

[1851] Chargé Caffery to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Caracas, January 2, 1914.

File No. 831.404/10.

[1852] The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Northcott.

Department of State, Washington, February 27, 1912.

File No. 831.404/10.

[1853] The Secretary of State to Minister McGoodwin.

Department of State, Washington, April 16, 1914.

File No. 831.404/13a.

[1854] Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Caracas, May 6, 1914.

File No. 831.404/14.

[1855] Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Caracas, June 26, 1914.

File No. 831.404/15.

Chargé Caffery to the Secretary of State. File No. 831.404/9.

[Document 1850]

Chargé Caffery to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 99.] American Legation,
Caracas, October 26, 1911.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith duplicate copies,1 together with translations thereof, of a decree of the President of Venezuela, extending the provisions of the law of ecclesiastical patronage to foreign missionary societies.

The Minister of the Interior, in a letter to the Presidents of the States, Governor of the Federal District and Governors of the Territories, orders compliance with this decree. He directs them to exercise all diligence in the enforcement of the Law of Ecclesiastical Patronage, and in particular to the dispositions of that Law and of the Constitution of the Republic, which reserve to the National Congress the right to establish missions; to the Executive that of regulating them, of engaging missionaries and sending them to the points where there are natives to be civilized; and to the Chief Magistrate that of prohibiting the entry of strangers consecrated especially to the service of one cult.

This decree, together with its interpretation by the Minister of the Interior, subjects foreign missionary societies, with establishments in Venezuela, to direct supervision by the Government, which thus acquires the right of intermeddling in their affairs.

I have [etc.]

Jefferson Caffery.

1 Not printed.

Chargé Caffery to the Secretary of State. File No. 831.404/10.

[Document 1851]

Chargé Caffery to the Secretary of State.

No. 134.] American Legation,
Caracas, January 2, 1914.

Sir: With reference to my despatch No. 99 of October 26, 1911, in regard to the extensions of the provisions of the law of ecclesiastical patronage to foreign missionary societies, I have the honor to enclose herewith copies of a letter1 presented to me in triplicate by some of the American missionaries established in Venezuela.

I have [etc.]

Jefferson Caffery.

1 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Northcott. File No. 831.404/10.

[Document 1852]

The Acting Secretary of State to Minister Northcott.

No. 2.] Department of State,
Washington, February 27, 1912.

Sir: The Department has received the Legation’s No. 134 of the 2nd ultimo, referring to previous correspondence in regard to the extension of the provisions of the law of ecclesiastical patronage to foreign missionary societies, and enclosing copies of a letter presented to the Legation in triplicate by some of the American missonaries established in Venezuela.

The Department has made the subject of mature and careful deliberation, the protest addressed to Mr. Caffery by certain American missionaries established in Venezuela concerning the executive decree of the Venezuelan Government which is stated to apply to the religious organizations which these missonaries represent the Venezuelan Law of Ecclesiastical Patronage of 1824. The grounds of this protest seem to be in the main that the Law of Ecclesiastical Patronage was intended originally to apply only to the Roman Catholic Church, and that it is not applicable or should not be applicable to the churches or missions which these missionaries represent; that the application of this law deprives the missions of the privileges of freedom of worship guaranteed them by the Venezuelan Constitution, and finally that the decree in question is, by reason of lack of approval by the Venezuelan Congress, unconstitutional under Venezuelan law.

The Department also observes that in the promulgation and execution of this decree, the Venezuelan Government seems not to have avowed an intention to abrogate the privileges of religious freedom hitherto enjoyed in Venezuela, and apparently declares simply that the regulation in question is necessary for the due observance of existing Venezuelan law regulating the exercise of these privileges.

Concerning the possible action of this Department in response to the protest submitted to you, it should be observed, first, that while it has ever been the policy of this Government not to interfere with the internal regulations of foreign governments, more especially in questions of religion, this Government, practicing as it does at home the largest principles of freedom of thought and belief, is naturally desirous to see its citizens enjoy in other countries a reasonable freedom from restrictions or disabilities imposed by reason of religious faith. While recognizing that the determination of the internal policy of a nation is an attribute of its sovereignty, the United States has not hesitated to express this desire in considerate and friendly ways on appropriate occasions which have arisen at various times in different countries. It should be observed, however, that such representations have never been put upon a basis of strict right, for it surely will be appreciated that this Government may not, as a matter of right, demand that another government shall grant to religionists of American nationality in the territory of that government the degree of freedom or privilege which it might desire to see extended to them. This consideration is particularly applicable to the present situation, for the reason that there is at present no treaty provision in effect between the Government of the United States and that of Venezuela prescribing the rights as to religious liberty to be enjoyed by the citizens of one country in the territory of the other.

Accordingly it must be observed that with all desire to do what it properly may to assist the American missionaries who have addressed the protest to you, in view of this Government’s practice and policy as outlined above, the Department’s opportunity for affirmative action in the matter is necessarily somewhat limited.

Recurring to the specific grounds of the protest, it should be stated, first, that the arguments concerning the invalidity and unconstitutionality of the decree in question would seem to be such as should properly be addressed to the appropriate Venezuelan tribunal, should an actual case arise in which it might be maintained that action by the Venezuelan authorities had illegally abrogated privileges guaranteed the complainant by the Venezuelan laws or constitution. In this connection, it should be further observed that, according to the Department’s present information, at least, it would seem that no actual hardship or injury has yet been suffered by the individuals who have made protest. As it is the Department’s invariable rule not to take action upon hypothetical cases of anticipated injury, it would seem that no action may properly be taken by it in the present case unless a showing is made that the injury apparently anticipated by the missionaries who have solicited the Legation’s assistance, is actually sufficiently imminent and substantial to make action at this time clearly necessary. In this same connection, the Department can only say that should it eventually appear that the enforcement of the decree in question will, as a matter of fact, terminate the privileges of freedom of worship hitherto guaranteed under Venezuelan law, the Department will, of course, be glad to bring the matter to the attention of the Venezuelan Government with the expression of its hope that Venezuela will continue to exhibit the same tolerance in regard to the regulation of the practice of different religions in its territory which has previously characterized its conduct in this regard. Finally it would seem not inappropriate to observe in this connection that the final action of the responsible Venezuelan authorities, concerning the injury and inconvenience suffered by the Reverend David E. Finstrom, to which the petitioners have referred, would appear to evidence a disposition on the part of the Venezuelan Government to afford due and considerate protection to alien religionists within its territory and to promise well perhaps for its future attitude in this regard.

I am [etc.]

Huntington Wilson.

The Secretary of State to Minister McGoodwin. File No. 831.404/13a.

[Document 1853]

The Secretary of State to Minister McGoodwin.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, April 16, 1914.

You will please express the interest of the Government of the United States in obtaining permission for American clergymen to exercise the ministry in the Republic of Venezuela and the introduction of this measure into the revised Constitution.

Bryan.

Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State. File No. 831.404/14.

[Document 1854]

Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State.

No. 136.] American Legation,
Caracas, May 6, 1914.

Sir: Acknowledging receipt of the Department’s telegram of April 16, instructing me to “express the interest of the Government of the United States in obtaining permission for American clergymen to exercise the ministry in the Republic of Venezuela and the introduction of this measure into the revised constitution”, I have the honor to report that I brought this matter to the personal attention of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and of the Acting President, Dr. José Gil Fortoul, in conversation with them in their respective offices, and I enclose herewith copy of a response from the Minister for Foreign Affairs, together with translation, in duplicate.

Although Venezuela is a Catholic country, it has been many years since either the President or the Minister of the Interior, in whose ministry supervision over Catholic churches and clergymen is exercised, has been pro-Catholic in tendencies. There has been in effect in Venezuela since the organization of the Republic a statute known as the Law of Patronage (“Ley de Patronato”) which, as its name implies, accords to the Government authority to regulate the personnel of the bishops and other clergymen of the Catholic Church, their movements and general conduct. The theory of the law is that this privilege should be retained because Catholic churches derive a portion of their income from the Government. Every constitution adopted in Venezuela has made specific reference to the Law of Patronage as a modification of the article which grants religious liberty. Every effort was made by the authorities of the Federal District a few weeks ago to apply the law in question to the several Protestant missions in Caracas and La Guaira. But upon my representation to the Foreign Office that such supervision could not apply in the case of religious organizations in this country maintained wholly by contributions from the United States of America, and without financial aid from the Government of Venezuela, authority was granted immediately by the Governor of the Federal District, through the Ministry of the Interior, for suspension of the attempt. This was followed by assurances from the Government of Venezuela to this Legation that the effort to apply the Law of Patronage to Protestant missions was based upon a misunderstanding of said law on the part of petty officials.

The theory of the authorities of Venezuela in invoking the Law of Patronage upon the entry and exit of Catholic priests is for protection against the movements of revolutionists disguised as such. For the same reason the Law of Patronage requires that Catholic priests shall be citizens of Venezuela.

There have been many efforts to secure the repeal of the Law of Patronage and especially to eliminate from the constitution any reference to it. A special effort toward this end is now being made by Monsignor Pietropaoli, Apostolic Delegate to this capital. In so far as concerns the exclusion from Venezuela of Catholic priests of the United States or any of its dependencies, I am confident prompt relief can be secured when the matter is brought to the attention of the Government.

I have [etc.]

Preston McGoodwin.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to Minister McGoodwin.

Mr. Minister: I have had the honor to receive your excellency’s official communication No. 125 of the 22nd instant.

On acquainting myself with the import of said note and the cablegram addressed to the Legation by the Secretary of State of the United States, it is incumbent upon me to state, for your excellency’s information, that our fundamental charter guarantees religious liberty in accord with the law and at the same time vests in the Federal Executive supreme supervision over all cults established or which may be established in the country. By virtue of this provision said charter confers upon the Federal Executive the faculty of “permitting conditional entrance into the territory of the Republic of foreigners especially dedicated to the service of any cult or religion, whatever may be the order of hierarchy with which they are invested.”

It should be understood that the conferring by the constitution of these attributes upon the Executive is not intended to impair religious liberty but to safeguard order in the exercising of the outward cult, in accordance with the principles observed by the State in its relation to the churches. It is an administrative faculty, the exercise of which can not be interpreted as limiting religious guaranties, because, as is known, in addition to those of the Catholic cult, that of the majority, there exist other churches erected by permission of the Government, in which there is free exercise of the cult for which they are destined.

Your excellency will please take into account these observations, which convey precise intelligence of the constitutional provisions in the matter, in replying to the Secretary of State.

I avail [etc.]

Manuel Diaz Rodriguez.

Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State. File No. 831.404/15.

[Document 1855]

Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State.

No. 198.] American Legation,
Caracas, June 26, 1914.

Sir: Referring to the Department’s telegram of April 16, instructing me to “express the interest of the Government of the United States in obtaining permission for American clergymen to exercise the ministry in the Republic of Venezuela and the introduction of this measure into the revised constitution,” and also referring to my despatch No. 136 of May 16, transmitting a letter from the Minister for Foreign Affairs, I now have the honor to report that the Department’s suggestion was acted upon favorably by the National Constituent Assembly in framing the new Constitution of Venezuela by omitting therefrom any reference to the subject matter of what was article 23 in the Constitution of 1909 (under Chapter III, section 2) the text of which was as follows: Article 23. The nation guarantees to Venezuelans:* * *

13. Religious liberty, but without in any way lessening the exercise of the Law of Patronage of the Republic, which will continue to be enforced in the manner prescribed by law, and the Federal Executive will exercise supreme inspection over every cult established or which may be established in the country.

The Law of Patronage remains in force, as it has for several generations, but it is clear as to its application, as affecting only those religious organizations which accept financial support from the Government. The reference to this law in nearly every constitution has been ambiguous and its omission from the new constitution obviate likelihood of misinterpretation in future.

I have [etc.]

Preston McGoodwin.

Death of Dr. Pedro Ezequiel Rojas, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Venezuela to the United StatesDeath of Dr. Pedro Ezequiel Rojas, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Venezuela to the United States

[1856] The Venezuelan Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

Venezuelan Legation, Atlantic City, New Jersey, June 26, 1914.

File No. 701.3111/40.

[1857] The Secretary of State to Minister McGoodwin.

Department of State, Washington, June 26, 1914.

File No. 701.3111/40.

[1858] The Secretary of State to the Venezuelan Chargé d’Affaires.

Department of State, Washington, June 26, 1914.

File No. 701.3111/40.

[1859] The Secretary of State to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Venezuela.

Department of State, Washington, June 26, 1914.

File No. 701.3111/40.

[1860] The Secretary of State to Minister McGoodwin.

Department of State, Washington, June 26, 1914.

File No. 701.3111/43b.

[1861] The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Venezuela to the Secretary of State.

Caracas, July 1, 1914.

File No. 701.3111/47.

[1862] Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State.

American Legation, Caracas, July 5, 1914.

File No. 701.3111/54.

The Venezuelan Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State. File No. 701.3111/40.

[Document 1856]

The Venezuelan Chargé d’Affaires to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram.]

Venezuelan Legation,
Atlantic City, New Jersey, June 26, 1914.

It becomes my duty to inform your excellency that Senor Rojas, Minister of Venezuela, died today in this city and that in my capacity as Secretary of the Legation, I have taken charge as Chargé d’Affaires ad interim.

Luis Churion.

The Secretary of State to Minister McGoodwin. File No. 701.3111/40.

[Document 1857]

The Secretary of State to Minister McGoodwin.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 26, 1914.

The Department was grieved this morning to learn of the death of the Minister of Venezuela at this capital. Call in person at Foreign Office and express suitable condolences and say that this Government has offered its services to the Chargé d’Affaires. I have cabled condolences to Minister Foreign Affairs.

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Venezuelan Chargé d’Affaires. File No. 701.3111/40.

[Document 1858]

The Secretary of State to the Venezuelan Chargé d’Affaires.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 26, 1914.

I am shocked and grieved to learn of the lamentable death of Senor Rojas and I hasten to extend to you an expression of my profound sympathy.

The Department would like to consult with you with a view to making arrangements for the funeral service, and to affording you every possible assistance.

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Venezuela. File No. 701.3111/40.

[Document 1859]

The Secretary of State to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Venezuela.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 26, 1914.

It is with great sorrow and regret that I learn of the lamentable death of Señor Don P. Ezequiel Rojas which comes as a great shock to me. On the part of the Government of the United States, I hasten to express to you its profound sympathy on this sad occasion and am directed by the President to extend through you to the President of Venezuela his sincere condolences. High qualities of statesmanship and friendly sentiments have always marked the relations of Senor Rojas with this Government and his memory will be highly cherished in the United States.

W. J. Bryan.

The Secretary of State to Minister McGoodwin. File No. 701.3111/43b.

[Document 1860]

The Secretary of State to Minister McGoodwin.

[Telegram.]

Department of State,
Washington, June 26, 1914.

In the desire to pay every respect to the late Minister of Venezuela this Government proposes to convey the remains to La Guaira in the U. S. S. Kansas. Funeral services will be held in Washington on Tuesday morning next, immediately after which the remains will be placed on board the President’s yacht Sylph, and conveyed to the battleship awaiting off Hampton Roads. Promptly inform the Department whether these arrangements are agreeable to the Minister of Foreign Affairs.

Bryan.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Venezuela to the Secretary of State. File No. 701.3111/47.

[Document 1861]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Venezuela to the Secretary of State.

[Telegram—Translation.]

Caracas, July 1, 1914.

I hasten to express to your excellency my Government’s gratitude for the justice doing words in which your excellency feelingly evinces your own and the United States Government’s sorrow for the death of our Minister Rojas. I beg your excellency to convey to His Excellency the President of the United States the lasting appreciation with which the President of Venezuela responds to the tribute paid to the memory of one to whose gifts as a statesman and perfect gentleman our Government entrusted the duty of ever making closer and deeper the friendship that so happily binds our nations to each other.

Manuel Diaz Rodriguez.

Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State. File No. 701.3111/54.

[Document 1862]

Minister McGoodwin to the Secretary of State.

[Extract.]

No. 204.] American Legation,
Caracas, July 5, 1914.

Sir: Referring to the Department’s telegram of June 26, I have the honor to enclose herewith copy with translation of a letter from the Minister for Foreign Affairs, expressing gratitude for the marked consideration the Department has shown the Government of Venezuela in connection with the death and funeral of its late Minister to Washington, Señor Doctor Pedro Ezequiel Rojas. Complying with instructions I called at the Foreign Office and expressed condolence and later in the day paid a visit to the house of Doctor V. Márquez-Bustillos, Provisional President and intimate personal friend of the decedent. Both of these high officials called personally at the Legation on the afternoon of July 3, and manifested their sincere gratitude for the extent of the courtesies extended by the Department. They were especially impressed by the fact that the body of the lamented envoy is being conveyed in a warship. The chiefs of divisions and other employees of the Foreign Office also called and each in turn placed stress upon the generous treatment accorded by the Government of the United States. A large number of representative citizens have voiced this sentiment.

I have [etc.]

Preston McGoodwin.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs to the Secretary of State.

Caracas, July 2, 1914.

Mr. Minister: I have had the honor to receive the official note No. 176 of June 30 last, in which your excellency, with reference to the statements made to me personally the same day in the name of your Government concerning the lamented death of our Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary at Washington, Senor Pedro Ezequiel Rojas, was pleased to inform me of the measures taken by the Government of the United States for the delivery to the Government of Venezuela of the remains of the distinguished diplomat; and taking advantage of the same opportunity to renew your sentiments and esteem and appreciation for the noble qualities of Senor Rojas and phrases of condolence for so great a loss to Venezuela.

Deeply impressed by the observations of your excellency, I must express the profound gratitude with which the Government of Venezuela receives these demonstrations of the Government of the United States and of your excellency in honor of the distinguished statesman whose conduct in representing the Venezuelan nation was always an assurance of the continuance of the most cordial relations between the two countries and who won for himself the exceptional appreciation of which testimony is given on this sad occasion by the Government of your excellency.

Requesting that your excellency will convey to the Government of the United States these sentiments of my Government, it gives me pleasure to reiterate on this occasion the assurances of my high and distinguished consideration.

Manuel Diaz Rodriguez.

International conventions; texts:International conventions; texts:

Contents

Convention between the United States and other powers on literary and artistic copyright; signed at Buenos Aires, August 11, 1910Convention between the United States and other powers on literary and artistic copyright; signed at Buenos Aires, August 11, 1910

Signed at Buenos Aires, August 11, 1910, at the Fourth International American Conference; ratification advised by the Senate, February 15, 1911; ratified by the President, March 21, 1911; ratification of the United States deposited with the Government of the Argentine Republic May 1, 1911; proclaimed. July 13, 1914.

[1863] By the President of the United States of America.

[seal.]Done at the City of Washington this thirteenth day of July in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.

Treaty Series No. 593.]

By the President of the United States of America. Treaty Series No. 593.]

[Document 1863]

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas, a Convention on Literary and Artistic Copyright between the United States of America and the Argentine Republic, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Salvador, Uruguay, and Venezuela was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Buenos Aires on the eleventh day of August, one thousand nine hundred and ten, the original of which Convention, being in the Spanish, English, Portuguese and French languages, is word for word as follows:

[Here follows the text of the convention, identical with the text printed in For. Rel. 1910 at pp. 57–59.]

And whereas, the said Convention has been ratified by the Government of the United States, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by the Governments of the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Honduras, Panama, Nicaragua, and Ecuador, and the ratifications of the said Governments were, by the provisions of Article 16 of the said Convention, deposited by their respective Plenipotentiaries with the Government of the Argentine Republic;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Convention to be made public, to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal.]Done at the City of Washington this thirteenth day of July in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.
Woodrow Wilson

By the President:
W. J. Bryan
Secretary of State.

Convention between the United States and other powers for the arbitration of pecuniary claims; signed at Buenos Aires, August 11, 1910Convention between the United States and other powers for the arbitration of pecuniary claims; signed at Buenos Aires, August 11, 1910

Signed at Buenos Aires, August 11, 1910; ratification advised by the Senate, February 1, 1911; ratified by the President, March 21, 1911; ratification of the United States deposited with the Government of the Argentine Republic, May 1, 1911; proclaimed, July 29, 1914.

[1864] By the President of the United States of America.

[seal.]Done at the City of Washington this twenty-ninth day of July in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.

Treaty Series No. 594.]

By the President of the United States of America. Treaty Series No. 594.]

[Document 1864]

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas a Convention between the United States of America and the Argentine Republic, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Salvador, Uruguay and Venezuela for the arbitration of pecuniary claims, was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Buenos Aires on the eleventh day of August one thousand nine hundred and ten, the original of which Convention, being in the Spanish, English, Portuguese, and French languages, is word for word as follows:

[Here follows the text of the convention, identical with the text printed in For. Rel. 1910 at pp. 59–60.]

And whereas, the said Convention has been ratified by the Government of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by the Governments of the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Honduras, Panama, Nicaragua, and Ecuador and the ratifications of the said Governments have been deposited by their respective Plenipotentiaries with the Government of the Argentine Republic;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Convention to be made public, to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal.]Done at the City of Washington this twenty-ninth day of July in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.
Woodrow Wilson

By the President:
W. J. Bryan
Secretary of State.

Convention between the United States and other powers for the protection of inventions, patents, designs, and industrial models; signed at Buenos Aires, August 20, 1910Convention between the United States and other powers for the protection of inventions, patents, designs, and industrial models; signed at Buenos Aires, August 20, 1910

Signed at Buenos Aires, August 20, 1910; ratification advised by the Senate, February 8, 1911; ratified by the President, March 21, 1911; ratification of the United States deposited with the Government of the Argentine Republic, May 1, 1911; proclaimed, July 29, 1914.

[1865] By the President of the United States of America.

[seal.]Done at the City of Washington this twenty-ninth day of July in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen and of the Independence of the United-States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.

Treaty Series No. 595.]

By the President of the United States of America. Treaty Series No. 595.]

[Document 1865]

By the President of the United States of America.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas a Convention between the United States of America and the Argentine Republic, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Salvador, Uruguay and Venezuela for the protection of inventions, patents, designs, and industrial models, was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Buenos Aires on the twentieth day of August, one thousand nine hundred and ten, the original of which Convention, being in the Spanish, English, Portuguese, and French languages is word for word as follows:

[Here follows the text of the convention, identical with the text printed in For. Rel. 1910 at pp. 50–52.]

And whereas, the said Convention has been ratified by the Government of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by the Governments of the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Cuba, Honduras, Panama, Nicaragua and Ecuador and the ratifications of the said Governments have been deposited by their respective Plenipotentiaries with the Government of the Argentine Republic;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States of America, have caused the said Convention to be made public, to the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

[seal.]Done at the City of Washington this twenty-ninth day of July in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fourteen and of the Independence of the United-States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.
Woodrow Wilson

By the President:
W. J. Bryan
Secretary of State.

Index Index

A.

A. B. C. mediation between the United States and Mexico 145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 147]

Abrogation of the Capitulations by Turkey 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 1836, Doc. 1837, and Doc. 1838]

Admission of aliens 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2], 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8]

Address of the President to the Congress, annual xi [Pg. XI is part of Address of the President, annual] See also Messages of the President of the United States.

Agents charged with governmental functions 978 [Pg. 978 is part of Doc. 1711]

Agreements. See Treaties.

Alienation of land 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634]

Aliens: admission of adopted children of American-born Chineses 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2]

admission and return of Chinese participating in the Panama-Pacific International Exposition and the Panama-California Exposition 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8] admission and return of aliens, other than Chinese, participating in the Panama-Pacific and the Panama-California Expositions 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8]

claims presented by 912 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 1631], 919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 1636]

exclusion laws, enforcement in war time 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

land ownership by— Americans in Morocco 910 [Pg. 910 is part of Doc. 1631]

Japanese in California 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634]

persons whose American fathers have never resided in the United States 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]

See also Chinese; Citizenship.

Allegiance. See Citizenship; France: liability to French military service; Italy: liability to military service.

American citizens in— Chosen (Korea); abolition of foreign settlements 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637]

Cuba: attack on the American Chargé d’Affaires; pardon of Enrique Maza 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211]

Dominican Republic: appointment of an American as comptroller of finance 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 215]

Ecuador: Goo Kwai, exclusion of 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432]

Jones, Robert B., imprisonment of 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419]

France: liability to French military service 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 440]

Gold Coast, West Africa: colonization project of American negroes 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 468, Doc. 469, and Doc. 470]

Haiti: rights of Syrian-born citizens of the United States 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516]

Italy: liability to military service 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602]

Mexico. See Mexico: Protection of American citizens, etc.

Morocco: protection of vested rights to land tenure 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 1628 and Doc. 1629] et seq.

Nicaragua; deportation of Clifford D. Sands 940 [Pg. 940 includes portions of Doc. 1655, Doc. 1656, and Doc. 1657]

Panama: assault cases of 1912 985 [Pg. 985 includes portions of Doc. 1720, Doc. 1721, and Doc. 1722]

Spitzbergen, status in 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 1707, Doc. 1708, and Doc. 1709]

American claims. See Claims.

American consular officers: arrest and imprisonment in Mexico 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025]

authority to visit vessels in Venezuela 1095 [Pg. 1095 includes portions of Doc. 1843 and Doc. 1844] See also Consular officers.

American diplomatic officers, pardon of Enrique Maza for attack on 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211] See also Diplomatic officers.

American missionaries in— Morocco 914 [Pg. 914 includes portions of Doc. 1631 and Doc. 1632]

Venezuela 1099 [Pg. 1099 includes portions of Doc. 1849 and Doc. 1850]

American National Red Cross: Huai River (China) conservancy and prevention of famine; surveys initiated 95 [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

American protégés in Morocco 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 1628 and Doc. 1629]

Americanists, Nineteenth International Council of 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8], 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 147]

Amnesty bill, Cuban: attitude of the United States 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, and Doc. 205]

Arbitration: boundary dispute between Costa Rica and Panama 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 1735, Doc. 1736, and Doc. 1737]

claims, pecuniary: Guayaquil & Quito Railway Co. v. Ecuador 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]

Haiti: proposal of protocol 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 545, Doc. 546, Doc. 547, and Doc. 548]

international treaty, proclamation of 1109 [Pg. 1109 is part of Doc. 1864]

Colombia and the United States; desirability of a treaty of general arbitration between 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 147]

Pan American arbitration treaty, desirability of a 145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 147]

treaties and agreements. See Treaties: by subject.

Administrative Council of the Permanent Court of 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 10]

Arbitrator’s powers limited by convention 998 [Pg. 998 is part of Doc. 1740]

Archduke Franz Ferdinand, assassination of 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

Archives, inviolability of consular 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 477]

Argentina: mediation between Mexico and the United tSates. See Mexico: mediation, etc.

Plaza, succession to the Presidency of Victorino de la 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26]

Saenz Peña, death of President 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26]

Armistice distinguished from suspension of hostilities 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, and Doc. 743], 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 777, Doc. 778, and Doc. 779], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, and Doc. 849]

Arms: exportation from the United States to Mexico 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656]

Army. See United States Army.

Arrest of American citizens while within extraterritorial protection 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 705]

Arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025]

Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand and the Duchess of Hohenberg 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

Assault on American citizens in— Cuba: pardon of Enrique Maza 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211]

Panama 985 [Pg. 985 includes portions of Doc. 1720, Doc. 1721, and Doc. 1722]

Asylum. See Refuge.

Austria-Hungary: arbitration agreement 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 28]

Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand and the Duchess of Hohenberg 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

Award: boundary between Costa Rica and Panama: text of award by Chief Justice White 1000 [Pg. 1000 is part of Doc. 1742]

refusal of Panama to accept the award 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 1735, Doc. 1736, and Doc. 1737]

interpretation by an arbitrator of a previous award 996 [Pg. 996 is part of Doc. 1740]

B.

Barros Luco, Ramón, President of Chile 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 51]

Bay, territorial 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 1685, Doc. 1686, and Doc. 1687]

Belligerency 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 90]

Benavides, Oscar, President of Peru 1061 [Pg. 1061 is part of Doc. 1795]

Bertrand, Francisco, President of Honduras 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 600]

Billinghurst, Guillermo E., President of Peru 1061 [Pg. 1061 is part of Doc. 1795]

Blockade 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 298, Doc. 299, and Doc. 300], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, and Doc. 321], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, and Doc. 588]

Bolivia: boundary agreement with Paraguay; good offices of the United States 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]

Bombardment 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 310, Doc. 311, and Doc. 312], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, and Doc. 321]

Bonds. See Loans.

Boundary, firing across a 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 1012 and Doc. 1013]

Boundary of territorial waters 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 1685, Doc. 1686, and Doc. 1687]

Boundary disputes between— Bolivia and Paraguay 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]

Costa Rica and Panama 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 1735, Doc. 1736, and Doc. 1737]

Boxer indemnity payments 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and Doc. 68]

Brazil: American refugees in Mexico assisted by Brazilian diplomatic and consular officers 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 1052, Doc. 1053, and Doc. 1054]

mediation between the United States and Mexico. See Mexico: mediation.

message of the President, Marshal Hermes R. da Fonseca, to Congress 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 40]

representation of American interests in Mexico by the Brazilian Minister. See Mexico: severance of diplomatic relations.

Bulgaria: reception of the first Minister of Bulgaria to the United States 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 41, Doc. 42, and Doc. 43]

C.

California land laws, protest of Japan against certain 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634]

Canal, Panama. See Panama Canal.

Canal treaty, proposed Nicaraguan. See Nicaragua.

Capitulations, abrogation of, by Turkey 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 1836, Doc. 1837, and Doc. 1838]

Carbajal, Francisco S., President of Mexico 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 818, Doc. 819, and Doc. 820],564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, and Doc. 823],585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, and Doc. 874]

Carranza, Venustiano, President of Mexico 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 878, Doc. 879, and Doc. 880], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 896, Doc. 897, and Doc. 898]

Catholic Church, treatment of, in Mexico 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 1528], 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 1545]

Central America, restoration of the Union of the States of; allusion 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 1688], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 1690 and Doc. 1691]

Chile: mediation between the United States and Mexico. See Mexico: mediation.

message of the President, Ramón Barros Luco, to the Congress 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 51]

China: Administrative Conference 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 52]

admission into the United States of refugees from Mexico 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 1603, Doc. 1604, and Doc. 1605]

admission into the United States of adopted children of American-born Chinese 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2]

admission and return of participants in the Panama-Pacific and the Panama-California Expositions 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8]

American citizen of Chinese birth excluded from Ecuador 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432]

American Red Cross 95 [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

Boxer indemnity payments 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and Doc. 68]

claims of American citizens 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 83]

Constitutional Compact. See Revised Provisional Constitution.

Constitutional Convention 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 84]

Costa Rica, representation by American diplomatic and consular officers of Chinese in 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

Currency Law of February 7, 1914; text 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 63]

currency reform: promulgation of a currency law 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 62]

development of government organization 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 55], 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59]

extraterritoriality 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 127]

Goodnow draft of a constitution; text 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 54]

Huai River conservancy and prevention of famine 95 [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

loan negotiations 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59]

Mexico, protection by the United States of Chinese in 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 1603, Doc. 1604, and Doc. 1605]

mining regulations affecting treaty rights; objections of the United States 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 140]

moratorium, declaration of a 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65]

National Assembly 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 52]

political affairs 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 52]

Political Council 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 52]

Presidential Election Law of October 5, 1913; text 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

Provisional Constitution of March 10, 1912; text 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 52]

Red Cross, American 95 [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

Revised Provisional Constitution (Constitutional Compact) of May 1, 1914 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 55], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 55], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 56]

sovereign right of taxation 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 127]

taxation of foreigners 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

treaty ports 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

United States Army engineer to superintend surveys 95 [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

wives or widows of American citizens, status of 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 4]

Chosen. See Japan.

Circular instructions to American diplomatic and consular officers 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2]

Citizenship: adoption, Chinese who can not acquire citizenship by 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2]

alien status of persons whose American fathers have never resided in the United States 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]

Chinese wives or widows of American citizens, status of 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

Chinese-born American citizen (Goo Kwai) excluded from Ecuador 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432]

dual citizenship 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 441], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 447], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602]

French-born American citizens contemplating return to France, notice to 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455]

military service in foreign countries of persons residing in the United States, liability for 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 440], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602]

reacquisition of 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 603]

See also American citizens; France; Italy; Japan; Nationality; Naturalization; Treaties, by subject.

Civil jurisdiction. See Jurisdiction.

Claims presented by aliens 912 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 1631], 919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 1636]

Claims, international convention concerning 1109 [Pg. 1109 is part of Doc. 1864]

Claims against: China— return of unused portion of Boxer indemnity claims fund 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and Doc. 68]

revolution claims fund 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 83]

Ecuador: Guayaquil & Quito Railway Co. v. Ecuador 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]

Morocco— in general 907 [Pg. 907 includes portions of Doc. 1630 and Doc. 1631], 915 [Pg. 915 includes portions of Doc. 1632 and Doc. 1633]

case of Jacob Benatuil 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 1631], 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 1636]

case of Vacuum Oil Co 912 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 1631], 919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 1636], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 1638]

Colombia: adherence to mediation between the United States and Mexico 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 146]

arbitration treaty between the United States and Colombia, desirability of a general 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 147]

message of President Restrepo to the Congress 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 146]

report of the Minister for Foreign Affairs 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

sovereignty in the Isthmus of Panama 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 163]

Treaty of April 6, 1914, between the United States and Colombia brief history 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 146]

correspondence 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

text163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 166]

See also Panama: boundary dispute, etc.; railroad construction, etc.

Comity, arrest and imprisonment of consular officers inconsistent with 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025]

Conferences and congresses: Americanists, Nineteenth International Congress of 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8], 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 147]

Dry-farming Congress, International 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

Pan American Scientific Congress, Second 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]

Opium Conference, Second International 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 1640]

Opium Conference, Third International 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 1640]

Peace Conference, Third International 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 10]

Spitzenbergen 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 1707, Doc. 1708, and Doc. 1709]

Confiscatory taxes. See Mexico: protection of American oil interests; protection of American mining interests; confiscatory taxation of American citizens; forced loans imposed on American citizens.

Constitutions: China: Provisional Constitution of 1912 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 52]

Presidential Election Law of 1913 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

Goodnow draft of a constitution, with explanatory notes 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 54]

Venezuela 1095 [Pg. 1095 includes portions of Doc. 1843 and Doc. 1844]

Consular officers: arrest and imprisonment, inconsistent with the comity of nations 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025]

good offices in behalf of foreigners of other nationalities 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596], 793–795 [Pgs. 793–795 include portions of Doc. 1360, Doc. 1361, Doc. 1362, Doc. 1363, and Doc. 1364], 837–838 [Pgs. 837–838 include portions of Doc. 1461, Doc. 1462, Doc. 1463, Doc. 1464, and Doc. 1465], 856–857 [Pgs. 856–857 include portions of Doc. 1506, Doc. 1507, Doc. 1508, and Doc. 1509], 859–862 [Pgs. 859–862 include portions of Doc. 1512, Doc. 1513, Doc. 1514, Doc. 1515, Doc. 1516, Doc. 1517, and Doc. 1518]

inviolability of correspondence of 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 477]

jurisdiction 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 477], 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 1628 and Doc. 1629], 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 1707, Doc. 1708, and Doc. 1709], 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 1711], 1095 [Pg. 1095 includes portions of Doc. 1843 and Doc. 1844]

representations unofficially made to de facto authorities in behalf of American citizens and of other foreigners 793–795 [Pgs. 793–795 include portions of Doc. 1360, Doc. 1361, Doc. 1362, Doc. 1363, and Doc. 1364], 837–838 [Pgs. 837–838 include portions of Doc. 1461, Doc. 1462, Doc. 1463, Doc. 1464, and Doc. 1465], 856–857 [Pgs. 856–857 include portions of Doc. 1506, Doc. 1507, Doc. 1508, and Doc. 1509], 859–862 [Pgs. 859–862 include portions of Doc. 1512, Doc. 1513, Doc. 1514, Doc. 1515, Doc. 1516, Doc. 1517, and Doc. 1518] See also American consular officers; American diplomatic officers; Great Britain: jurisdiction, etc.

Conventions. See Treaties.

Copyright, international convention on literary and artistic 1108 [Pg. 1108 is part of Doc. 1863]

Corn Islands, Great and Little 966 [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 1700, Doc. 1701, and Doc. 1702]

Coronation of the Shah of Persia 1059 [Pg. 1059 includes portions of Doc. 1790, Doc. 1791, and Doc. 1792]

Costa Rica: arbitration agreement between the United States and Costa Rica, extending the duration of the convention of January 13, 1909; text 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

boundary dispute between Costa Rica and Panama 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 1735, Doc. 1736, and Doc. 1737]

Chinese interests represented by American diplomatic and consular officers 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

message of the President, Ricardo Jiménez, to the Congress 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 177]

Nicaraguan canal treaty, protest of Costa Rica against a proposed 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 1685, Doc. 1686, and Doc. 1687]

Nicaraguan revolutionists, protest of the United States against the presence in Costa Rica of 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193]

treaty for the advancement of general peace, concluded between the United States and Costa Rica; text 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 178]

Cuba: amnesty bill 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, and Doc. 205]

naval station at Guantánamo 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

pardon of Enrique Maza 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211]

Customs. See Tariff.

D.

De facto authorities, collection of taxes from foreigners by 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191]

Descent: American citizenship does not descend to persons whose American fathers have never resided in the United States 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]

Diplomatic channel the only proper course in certain controversies 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637]

Diplomatic intervention, limitations of 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 413]

Diplomatic officers: representation of signatory powers by a group of diplomatic officers organized as a governing body 978 [Pg. 978 is part of Doc. 1711] See also American diplomatic officers.

Diplomatic and consular officers: representations in behalf of foreigners of other nationalities 793–795 [Pgs. 793–795 include portions of Doc. 1360, Doc. 1361, Doc. 1362, Doc. 1363, and Doc. 1364], 837–838 [Pgs. 837–838 include portions of Doc. 1461, Doc. 1462, Doc. 1463, Doc. 1464, and Doc. 1465], 856–857 [Pgs. 856–857 include portions of Doc. 1506, Doc. 1507, Doc. 1508, and Doc. 1509], 859–862 [Pgs. 859–862 include portions of Doc. 1512, Doc. 1513, Doc. 1514, Doc. 1515, Doc. 1516, Doc. 1517, and Doc. 1518], 978 [Pg. 978 is part of Doc. 1711]

Designs, international convention concerning protection of 1110 [Pg. 1110 is part of Doc. 1865]

Discriminatory legislation against foreign interests. See Mexico: protection of American oil interests; protection of American mining interests.

Discriminatory legislation against particular classes of foreigners 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634]

Discriminatory tariffs 912 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 1631], 919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 1636]

Dominican Republic: financial affairs. See political and financial affairs.

Haitian aid to revolutionists in the Dominican Republic: attitude of the United States 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 310, Doc. 311, and Doc. 312], 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 314, Doc. 315, and Doc. 316], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, and Doc. 321], 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, and Doc. 343]

plan of President Wilson for reorganization of government 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333], 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, and Doc. 368]

political and financial affairs; revolution; resignation of President Bordas; American commission sent to establish order and observe elections; appointment of President Baez; election of President Jiménez; financial difficulties; measures taken by the United States; appointment of an American as Controller of Finance 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 215]

protection of British interests 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370]

protection of Porto Rican citizens of the United States drafted into the Dominican army 264 [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378]

recognition by the United States of the Baez provisional government 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341] et seq.; of the Jimenez government 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 350, Doc. 351, and Doc. 352] et seq.

United States Peace Commission 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334] et seq.

Dry-farming Congress, International 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

Dual citizenship 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 441], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 447], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602]

Duchess of Hohenberg, assassination of 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

Duties. See Tariff.

E.

Ecclesiastical patronage law of Venezuela applied to foreign missionary societies 1099 [Pg. 1099 includes portions of Doc. 1849 and Doc. 1850]

Exposition: Panama-California 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8]

Panama-Pacific International 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8]

Ecuador: adherence to mediation between the United States and Mexico 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 379]

American citizens— exclusion of Goo Kwai 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432]

imprisonment of Robert B. Jones 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419]

arbitration treaty with the United States discussed 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 379]

arbitration of the Guayaquil & Quito Railway Co. claim 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]

financial affairs 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]

Guayaquil, sanitation of 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 379], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, and Doc. 387]

Guayaquil & Quito Railway Co 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 379]

loan requested by Ecuador 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]

Moreno, President pro tern 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 395, Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399]

Plaza, President, message to Congress 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 379]

policy of the United States 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403], 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]

political affairs: revolution at Esmeraldas; refuge at the American Legation granted to the family of President Plaza 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 379, Doc. 380, and Doc. 381]

Estrada Cabrera, Manuel, President of Guatemala 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486]

Exclusion of an American citizen from Ecuador 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432]

Executory force of unilateral action 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 1836, Doc. 1837, and Doc. 1838]

Exemption clause of Panama Canal Act repealed 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465]

Expatriation of naturalized American citizens, presumption of 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 441]

Expatriation. See Italy: liability to military service, etc.; see also France, same subject; Citizenship.

Extraterritorial jurisdiction of the United States in— China 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 127]

Mexico 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 705]

Morocco 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 1628 and Doc. 1629], 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 1636] See also Great Britain: jurisdiction, etc.

F.

Firing across a boundary line 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 1012 and Doc. 1013]

Flag: insults to the American flag by anti-American factions in Mexico, 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658] et seq., 659 [Pg. 659 includes portions of Doc. 1027 and Doc. 1028], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, Doc. 1059, and Doc. 1060] See also Great Britain: jurisdiction, etc.

Fonseca, Gulf of: protest against proposed grant to the United States 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 1685, Doc. 1686, and Doc. 1687]

Fonseca, Marshal da, President of Brazil 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 40]

Foreigners. See Aliens.

France: assistance to Americans in Mexico by French officers. See Mexico: protection of American citizens.

liability to French military service of naturalized American citizens of French origin and of American-born persons of French parentage 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 440] See also Italy: liability to military service, etc.

Morocco, French protectorate in. See Morocco.

protection of French interests in Mexico by the United States. See Mexico: protection of French citizens.

G.

Germany: assistance to Americans in Mexico by German officers. See Mexico,

protection by the United States of German interests in Mexico. See Mexico.

Good offices of the United States. See United States: good offices.

Goo Kwai, exclusion from Ecuador 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432]

Great Britain: agreement between the United States and Great Britain in relation to oil interests in Mexico 707–708 [Pgs. 707–708 include portions of Doc. 1151, Doc. 1152, Doc. 1153, and Doc. 1154]

arbitration agreement between the United States and Great Britain 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 459]

assistance to Americans in Mexico by British officers. See Mexico: protection of American citizens, etc.; severance of diplomatic relations, etc.

colonization of the Gold Coast, West Africa, by American negroes 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 468, Doc. 469, and Doc. 470]

jurisdiction of the United States over foreign ships in American waters, and American ships in foreign waters 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461]

Panama Canal tolls: repeal of the provision of the Panama Canal

Act exempting vessels in the coastwise trade of the United States from payment of tolls 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 463]

protection by the United States of British interests in the Dominican Republic and in Mexico. See Dominican Republic and Mexico.

treaty for the advancement of general peace 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]

Washington statute presented to Great Britain by the State of Virginia 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465]

Greece: inviolability of correspondence of consular officers; interpretation of the consular convention between the United States and Greece 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 477]

Guantánamo, naval station at 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Guatemala: message of the President, Manuel Estrada Cabrera, to the Congress 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486]

treaty between the United States and Guatemala for the advancement of peace; text 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 485]

Guayaquil & Quito Railway Co. See Ecuador.

Gulf of Fonseca 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 1685, Doc. 1686, and Doc. 1687]

Gutierrez, Eulalio, President of Mexico 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948]

H.

Hague Peace Conference 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 10]

Haiti: Banque Nationale de la République d’Haiti: transfer of gold to New York on the U. S. S. Machias 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 560, Doc. 561, and Doc. 562] et seq., 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 579 and Doc. 580], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 582 and Doc. 583]

blockade of Cape Haitien 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, and Doc. 588]

convention between the United States and Haiti: text of draft submitted by Haiti, 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 525]; counterproposal of the United States 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 568]

customs control 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 525] et seq.

Dominican revolutionists aided by Haiti 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 310, Doc. 311, and Doc. 312], 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 314, Doc. 315, and Doc. 316], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, and Doc. 321], 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, and Doc. 343]

financial affairs 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 487, Doc. 488, and Doc. 489]

paper money, refusal of the United States to recognize legality of issue of 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551] et seq., 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578]

plan of the United States for establishment of constitutional government 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540]

political and financial affairs 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 487, Doc. 488, and Doc. 489]

President Oreste, resignation of 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497]

President Zamor, recognition by the United States of the government of 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 487, Doc. 488, and Doc. 489]

President Theodore, requisites for recognition by the United States of the government of 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 487, Doc. 488, and Doc. 489]

protection of Haitian officials and their families by American diplomatic and consular officers 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596]

recognition by the United States of new governments 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511], 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 579]

treaty negotiations 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 525] et seq.

Honduras: message of the President, Francisco Bertrand, to the Congress 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 600]

Huai River conservancy 95 [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

Huerta, Victoriano, President of Mexico 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 818, Doc. 819, and Doc. 820]

I.

Immigration in war time, invitation to all governments to cooperate with the United States in regard to 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

Immigration laws concerning perjury 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]

Immigration: See Japan: protest against certain California land laws; Venezuela: certificates of good conduct, etc.

Immunity from arrest 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 705], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025]

Immunity from military service 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 440], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602]

Imprisonment of an American citizen in Ecuador 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419]

Imprisonment. See Arrest.

Inalienable property 910 [Pg. 910 is part of Doc. 1631]

Indemnity payments by— China 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and Doc. 68]

United States 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

Industrial models, international convention concerning protection of 1110 [Pg. 1110 is part of Doc. 1865]

International conferences and congresses. See Conferences and congresses.

International conventions. See Treaties, international: by subject.

International exposition. See Exposition.

International Preparatory Committee recommended by the Second Hague Peace Conference 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 10]

Interoceanic canal treaty correspondence 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 1685, Doc. 1686, and Doc. 1687]

Intervention of the United States, removal of gold from Haiti on U. S. S. Machias held by Haiti to be 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 573, Doc. 574, and Doc. 575], 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 579 and Doc. 580], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 582 and Doc. 583]

Intervention, diplomatic, limitations of 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 413]

Invasion for purpose of kidnapping 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 1615, Doc. 1616, Doc. 1617, and Doc. 1618]

Inventions, international convention concerning protection of 1110 [Pg. 1110 is part of Doc. 1865]

Italy: American citizens held liable to military service 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602]

arbitration agreement between the United States and Italy extending the duration of the Convention of March 28, 1908 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 601]

naturalization convention between the United States and Italy, correspondence concerning the negotiation of a 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602]

J.

Japan: abolition of foreign settlements in Chosen (Korea) 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637]

arbitration agreement between the United States and Japan extending duration of the convention of 1908; text 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 633]

protest of Japan against certain land laws of California 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634]

Jiménez, Ricardo, President of Costa Rica 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 177]

Jones, Robert B., imprisonment in Ecuador 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419]

Jurisdiction: agents of signatory powers in terra nullius (Spitzbergen) 978 [Pg. 978 is part of Doc. 1711]

assumed by one nation over the nationals of another 976 [Pg. 976 is part of Doc. 1711]

consular 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 477], 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 1628 and Doc. 1629], 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 1707, Doc. 1708, and Doc. 1709], 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 1711], 1095 [Pg. 1095 includes portions of Doc. 1843 and Doc. 1844]

delegated by one nation to another 977 [Pg. 977 is part of Doc. 1711]

extraterritorial. See Extraterritorial jurisdiction.

reserved in accepting restrictive regulations 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

ships 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461]

territorial waters (q. v.).

violated for purposes of kidnapping 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 1615, Doc. 1616, Doc. 1617, and Doc. 1618]

See also Great Britain: Jurisdiction of the United States, etc.

K.

Kidnapping a Mexican citizen in the United States 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 1615, Doc. 1616, Doc. 1617, and Doc. 1618]

King Carol I of Roumania, death of 1072 [Pg. 1072 includes portions of Doc. 1816, Doc. 1817, Doc. 1818, and Doc. 1819]

King Ferdinand I of Roumania, accession of 1072 [Pg. 1072 includes portions of Doc. 1816, Doc. 1817, Doc. 1818, and Doc. 1819]

Korea. See Japan.

L.

Land tenure 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637], 910 [Pg. 910 is part of Doc. 1631]

Legislative power of States of the Union in relation to the Federal treaty-making power 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634] et seq.

Liability to military service. See France, Italy.

Liberia: financial affairs 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 642, Doc. 643, and Doc. 644]

Loans: China 95 [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104]

Dominican Republic 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 215]

Ecuador 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]

Nicaragua 944 [Pg. 944 includes portions of Doc. 1662, Doc. 1663, Doc. 1664, and Doc. 1665]

Panama 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 1753, Doc. 1754, and Doc. 1755]

Loubet Award. See Panama: boundary dispute, etc.

M.

Marines, United States: escort to protect transfer of gold 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 560, Doc. 561, and Doc. 562] et seq., 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 579 and Doc. 580]

Maritime law: extraterritoriality of boat from public vessel 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 705]

jurisdiction of the United States over foreign ships in American waters, and American ships in foreign waters 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461]

Maza, Enrique, pardon of 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211]

Mediation of plenipotentiaries of Argentina, Brazil, and Chile between the United States and Mexico 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 729, Doc. 730, and Doc. 731] et seq. adherence of Colombia 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 146], 145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 147]

adherence of Ecuador 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 379]

Mediation does not per se suspend hostilities 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 777, Doc. 778, and Doc. 779] See also Award; Intervention.

Melendez, Carlos, President of Salvador 1075 [Pg. 1075 is part of Doc. 1823], 1077 [Pg. 1077 includes portions of Doc. 1824, Doc. 1825, and Doc. 1826]

Merchant vessels, jurisdiction of the United States over 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461] See also Great Britain: Panama Canal tolls.

Messages of the President of the United States to the Congress: annual address xi [Pg. XI is part of Address of the President, annual]

special messages— Panama Canal: March 5, 1914, requesting the repeal of the provision of the Panama Canal Act exempting vessels in the coastwise trade of the United States from payment of tolls 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 463]

Mexico: April 20, 1914, submitting a statement on “The Situation in our dealings with General Victoriano Huerta at Mexico City” 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705]

Messages of the Presidents of— Brazil 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 40]

Chile 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 51]

Costa Rica 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 177]

Ecuador 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 379]

Guatemala 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486]

Honduras 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 600]

Panama 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 1719]

Salvador 1075 [Pg. 1075 is part of Doc. 1823]

Mexico: Aguascalientes Convention. See Conventionists.

American citizens and interests, protection of 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 1052, Doc. 1053, and Doc. 1054], 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1113, Doc. 1114, Doc. 1115, and Doc. 1116], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 1168, Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, and Doc. 1171], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 1260, Doc. 1261, Doc. 1262, and Doc. 1263]

anti-American demonstrations 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025], 659 [Pg. 659 includes portions of Doc. 1027 and Doc. 1028], 660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, and Doc. 1030], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, Doc. 1059, and Doc. 1060]

Argentina. See Mediation.

armistice 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, and Doc. 743], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, and Doc. 849], 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 853 and Doc. 854]

arms— exportations from the United States to Mexico; revocation of the prohibition proclaimed in 1912 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 656 and Doc. 657]

firing across the boundary line by Mexican troops; preventive measures taken by the United States 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 1012 and Doc. 1013]

exportation from the United States into Mexico; removal of prohibition; proclamation of February 3, 1914, revoking the proclamation of March 14, 1912 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 656 and Doc. 657]

arrest at Tampico of men from the U. S. S. Dolphin 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658] et seq.

arrest at Vera Cruz of orderly from the U. S. S. Minnesota 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 705]

arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers— Consular Agent Edward A. Powers, at Parral 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025]

Consul General Philip C. Hanna, at Monterey 659 [Pg. 659 includes portions of Doc. 1027 and Doc. 1028]

Vice Consul John R. Silliman, at Saltillo 660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, and Doc. 1030]

Consul Wilbert L. Bonney, at San Luis Potosi 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 1030, Doc. 1031, Doc. 1032, and Doc. 1033]

Benton, William S., execution of 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 1463, Doc. 1464, and Doc. 1465]

Brazil. See post, mediation; severance of diplomatic relations.

Brazilian Minister to Mexico— good offices— transfer of government to the Constitutionalists 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, and Doc. 874], 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 874, Doc. 875, and Doc. 876], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 876 and Doc. 877], 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 878, Doc. 879, and Doc. 880]

release of Vice Consul Silliman 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 1037, Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, and Doc. 1040]

represents the interests of the United States in Mexico. See post, mediation; severance of diplomatic relations; protection of American citizens.

British interests; execution of William S. Benton 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 1463, Doc. 1464, and Doc. 1465]

Cantú, kidnapping of Samuel 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 1615, Doc. 1616, Doc. 1617, and Doc. 1618]

Carbajal, Francisco S., provisional presidency of 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 815, Doc. 816, and Doc. 817], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 818, Doc. 819, and Doc. 820], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, and Doc. 823] recognition by the United States 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, and Doc. 823]

dissolves his government and delivers authority to the governor of the Federal district 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, and Doc. 874]

Carranza, Venustiano: attitude toward unofficial representations made by American officials in behalf of non-American foreigners 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 1334, Doc. 1335, and Doc. 1336], 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 1463, Doc. 1464, and Doc. 1465], 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 1528], 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 1568, Doc. 1569, and Doc. 1570], 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 1603, Doc. 1604, and Doc. 1605]

correspondence concerning— occupation of Vera Cruz 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717], 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 722 and Doc. 723] See also Vera Cruz; evacuation.

mediation between the United States and Mexico 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 725, Doc. 726, and Doc. 727], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 727, Doc. 728, and Doc. 729], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 779], 517–558 [Pgs. 517–558 include portions of Doc. 779, Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, Doc. 787, Doc. 788, Doc. 789, Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, Doc. 793, Doc. 794, Doc. 795, Doc. 796, Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, Doc. 800, Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812], 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 818]

relations with the United States 564–568 [Pgs. 564–568 include portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, Doc. 827, Doc. 828, Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, Doc. 832, and Doc. 833], 588–592 [Pgs. 588–592 include portions of Doc. 878, Doc. 879, Doc. 880, Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, Doc. 884, Doc. 885, Doc. 886, Doc. 887, Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, Doc. 891, Doc. 892, and Doc. 893], 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 906, Doc. 907, and Doc. 908], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 941]

relations with the Carbajal government 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, and Doc. 823], 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 831, Doc. 832, and Doc. 833], 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, and Doc. 837], 572–574 [Pgs. 572–574 include portions of Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, and Doc. 849], 578–585 [Pgs. 578–585 include portions of Doc. 855, Doc. 856, Doc. 857, Doc. 858, Doc. 859, Doc. 860, Doc. 861, Doc. 862, Doc. 863, Doc. 864, Doc. 865, Doc. 866, Doc. 867, Doc. 868, Doc. 869, Doc. 870, Doc. 871, Doc. 872, Doc. 873, and Doc. 874]

entry into Mexico City and assumption of executive power 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 878, Doc. 879, and Doc. 880], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, and Doc. 883], 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 884, Doc. 885, and Doc. 886], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 886, Doc. 887, Doc. 888, and Doc. 889], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 890, Doc. 891, Doc. 892, and Doc. 893], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 896, Doc. 897, and Doc. 898], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 941]

calls a convention to organize permanent government 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 896, Doc. 897, and Doc. 898], 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 924, Doc. 925, and Doc. 926], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, and Doc. 929]

break with Villa 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 923 and Doc. 924], 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 932, Doc. 933, Doc. 934, Doc. 935, and Doc. 936], 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 936, Doc. 937, Doc. 938, and Doc. 939], 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 959, Doc. 960, and Doc. 961]

relations with Zapata 589–592 [Pgs. 589–592 include portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, Doc. 884, Doc. 885, Doc. 886, Doc. 887, Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, Doc. 891, Doc. 892, and Doc. 893], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 896, Doc. 897, and Doc. 898], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 901, Doc. 902, Doc. 903, and Doc. 904], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, and Doc. 972]

relations with the Aguascalientes convention 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 936, Doc. 937, Doc. 938, and Doc. 939], 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 942 and Doc. 943], 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 949, Doc. 950, Doc. 951, and Doc. 952], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 952, Doc. 953, Doc. 954, and Doc. 955], 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 959, Doc. 960, and Doc. 961], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965]

announces decision to transfer executive power to Gutiérrez 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 956, Doc. 957, and Doc. 958], 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 959, Doc. 960, and Doc. 961]

suggests plan for permanent organization of government 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 959, Doc. 960, and Doc. 961]

establishes capital at Vera Cruz 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, and Doc. 972]

declaration and decree issued at Vera Cruz December 12, 1914, establishing the Provisional Constitutionalist Government 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 975 and Doc. 976]

Catholic Church, treatment of 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 1528], 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 1545]

Chile. See post, mediation.

Chinese interests 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 1603, Doc. 1604, and Doc. 1605]

claims of American citizens against Mexico £or damages arising from revolutionary disturbances 569 [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 833], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 850 and Doc. 851], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 1020 and Doc. 1021]

confiscatory taxation 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1113, Doc. 1114, Doc. 1115, and Doc. 1116], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 1168, Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, and Doc. 1171], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191] See also, post, taxation.

Constitutionalists— attitude toward Huerta 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 727, Doc. 728, and Doc. 729]

attitude toward Carbajal 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, and Doc. 823]

assume governmental authority 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, and Doc. 874], 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 874, Doc. 875, and Doc. 876], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, and Doc. 883]

declare war on Villa 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 961 and Doc. 962]

establish capital at Vera Cruz 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, and Doc. 972]

decree formally establishing the Provisional Government 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 975 and Doc. 976]

definition of “Constitutionalists” 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 976, Doc. 977, and Doc. 978] See also Carranza.

Convention— Aguascalientes Convention— declares its sovereignty 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 929, Doc. 930, Doc. 931, and Doc. 932]

elects Gutiérrez provisional President 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948], 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 949, Doc. 950, Doc. 951, and Doc. 952], 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 965, Doc. 966, Doc. 967, and Doc. 968]

declares Carranza in rebellion 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 952, Doc. 953, Doc. 954, and Doc. 955]

relations with the United States 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 944 and Doc. 945]

relations with Zapata 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 929, Doc. 930, Doc. 931, and Doc. 932], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, and Doc. 972]

elects Villa commander in chief 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 929, Doc. 930, Doc. 931, and Doc. 932], 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 932, Doc. 933, Doc. 934, Doc. 935, and Doc. 936], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 952, Doc. 953, Doc. 954, and Doc. 955], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965], 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 965, Doc. 966, Doc. 967, and Doc. 968]

appoints a Permanent Commission 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 956, Doc. 957, and Doc. 958]

Permanent Commission calls a meeting of the Convention for January 1, 1915 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 973, Doc. 974, and Doc. 975]

detention of diplomatic correspondence 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 705]

Diaz, ex-President Porfirio 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 909, Doc. 910, Doc. 911, and Doc. 912]

discriminatory legislation 711–715 [Pgs. 711–715 include portions of Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, Doc. 1164, and Doc. 1165], 720–722 [Pgs. 720–722 include portions of Doc. 1173, Doc. 1174, Doc. 1175, and Doc. 1176], and 690–784 [Pgs. 690–784 include portions of Doc. 1113, Doc. 1114, Doc. 1115, Doc. 1116, Doc. 1117, Doc. 1118, Doc. 1119, Doc. 1120, Doc. 1121, Doc. 1122, Doc. 1123, Doc. 1124, Doc. 1125, Doc. 1126, Doc. 1127, Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, Doc. 1131, Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, Doc. 1134, Doc. 1135, Doc. 1136, Doc. 1137, Doc. 1138, Doc. 1139, Doc. 1140, Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, Doc. 1143, Doc. 1144, Doc. 1145, Doc. 1146, Doc. 1147, Doc. 1148, Doc. 1149, Doc. 1150, Doc. 1151, Doc. 1152, Doc. 1153, Doc. 1154, Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, Doc. 1157, Doc. 1158, Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, Doc. 1164, Doc. 1165, Doc. 1166, Doc. 1167, Doc. 1168, Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, Doc. 1171, Doc. 1172, Doc. 1173, Doc. 1174, Doc. 1175, Doc. 1176, Doc. 1177, Doc. 1178, Doc. 1179, Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, Doc. 1182, Doc. 1183, Doc. 1184, Doc. 1185, Doc. 1186, Doc. 1187, Doc. 1188, Doc. 1189, Doc. 1190, Doc. 1191, Doc. 1192, Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, Doc. 1197, Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, Doc. 1203, Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, Doc. 1206, Doc. 1207, Doc. 1208, Doc. 1209, Doc. 1210, Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, Doc. 1213, Doc. 1214, Doc. 1215, Doc. 1216, Doc. 1217, Doc. 1218, Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, Doc. 1221, Doc. 1222, Doc. 1223, Doc. 1224, Doc. 1225, Doc. 1226, Doc. 1227, Doc. 1228, Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, Doc. 1231, Doc. 1232, Doc. 1233, Doc. 1234, Doc. 1235, Doc. 1236, Doc. 1237, Doc. 1238, Doc. 1239, Doc. 1240, Doc. 1241, Doc. 1242, Doc. 1243, Doc. 1244, Doc. 1245, Doc. 1246, Doc. 1247, Doc. 1248, Doc. 1249, Doc. 1250, Doc. 1251, Doc. 1252, Doc. 1253, Doc. 1254, Doc. 1255, Doc. 1256, Doc. 1257, Doc. 1258, Doc. 1259, Doc. 1260, Doc. 1261, Doc. 1262, Doc. 1263, Doc. 1264, Doc. 1265, Doc. 1266, Doc. 1267, Doc. 1268, Doc. 1269, Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, Doc. 1274, Doc. 1275, Doc. 1276, Doc. 1277, Doc. 1278, Doc. 1279, Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, Doc. 1282, Doc. 1283, Doc. 1284, Doc. 1285, Doc. 1286, Doc. 1287, Doc. 1288, Doc. 1289, Doc. 1290, Doc. 1291, Doc. 1292, Doc. 1293, Doc. 1294, Doc. 1295, Doc. 1296, Doc. 1297, Doc. 1298, Doc. 1299, Doc. 1300, Doc. 1301, Doc. 1302, Doc. 1303, Doc. 1304, Doc. 1305, Doc. 1306, Doc. 1307, Doc. 1308, Doc. 1309, Doc. 1310, Doc. 1311, Doc. 1312, Doc. 1313, Doc. 1314, Doc. 1315, Doc. 1316, Doc. 1317, Doc. 1318, Doc. 1319, Doc. 1320, Doc. 1321, Doc. 1322, Doc. 1323, Doc. 1324, Doc. 1325, Doc. 1326, Doc. 1327, Doc. 1328, Doc. 1329, Doc. 1330, Doc. 1331, Doc. 1332, Doc. 1333, Doc. 1334, Doc. 1335, and Doc. 1336] passim exportation of arms and munitions of war into Mexico from the United States: revocation of the prohibition proclaimed in 1912 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 656 and Doc. 657]

firing across the boundary line by Mexican troops 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 1012 and Doc. 1013]

forced loans imposed on American citizens 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 1260, Doc. 1261, Doc. 1262, and Doc. 1263]

French interests 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 1528]

French good offices to Americans 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 984, Doc. 985, Doc. 986, and Doc. 987]

German interests 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 1568, Doc. 1569, and Doc. 1570]

Great Britain: good offices of British diplomatic and consular officers in behalf of Americans 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 984, Doc. 985, Doc. 986, and Doc. 987]

Gutiérrez, Gen. Eulalio— elected Provisional President 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948], 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 949, Doc. 950, Doc. 951, and Doc. 952], 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 965, Doc. 966, Doc. 967, and Doc. 968]

communication to and from the United States Government 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 952, Doc. 953, Doc. 954, and Doc. 955], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 956, Doc. 957, and Doc. 958], 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 976, Doc. 977, and Doc. 978], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 978, Doc. 979, Doc. 980, Doc. 981, and Doc. 982]

establishes capital at San Luis Potosi 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 965, Doc. 966, Doc. 967, and Doc. 968]

reestablishes capital at Mexico City 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 973, Doc. 974, and Doc. 975]

rupture with Villa and Zapata 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 978, Doc. 979, Doc. 980, Doc. 981, and Doc. 982]

Huerta, Victoriano— policy of the United States 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 651], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 653], 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717]

accepts mediation 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741]

suggests armistice 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, and Doc. 743]

complaint to mediators 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 751, Doc. 752, and Doc. 753], 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 754, Doc. 755, and Doc. 756]

resignation 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 806], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 818, Doc. 819, and Doc. 820], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, and Doc. 823], 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, and Doc. 826], 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, and Doc. 837], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 909, Doc. 910, Doc. 911, and Doc. 912]

Iturbide, E. N., governor of the Federal District: receives executive power from Provisional President Carbajal and transfers it to Gen. Obregón of the Constitutionalist Army 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, and Doc. 874], 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 874, Doc. 875, and Doc. 876]

kidnapping of Samuel Cantú 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 1615, Doc. 1616, Doc. 1617, and Doc. 1618]

mediation of Argentina, Brazil, and Chile between the United States and Mexico— Chile offers to act with Argentina and Brazil 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 729, Doc. 730, and Doc. 731]

plenipotentiaries of Argentina, Brazil, and Chile tender their good offices 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733]

acceptance by the United States 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 733 and Doc. 734]

acceptance by Gen. Huerta 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, and Doc. 738]

Spanish Ambassador, good offices of the 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741], 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, and Doc. 743]

armistice suggested by Huerta declined by the United States 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, and Doc. 743]

Carranza accepts mediation 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 744, Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747]

representation before the mediators 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 748, Doc. 749, and Doc. 750], 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 750 and Doc. 751], 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 751, Doc. 752, and Doc. 753], 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 754, Doc. 755, and Doc. 756], 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 757 and Doc. 758], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 759, Doc. 760, Doc. 761, and Doc. 762], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 779], 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 807 and Doc. 808], 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 811 and Doc. 812], 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 829, Doc. 830, and Doc. 831]

Niagara Falls, Canada, seat of the conference 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 751, Doc. 752, and Doc. 753], 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 754, Doc. 755, and Doc. 756]

suspension of hostilities discussed 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, and Doc. 743], 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 751, Doc. 752, and Doc. 753]

reports of proceedings and instructions to the American representatives 501–563 [Pgs. 501–563 include portions of Doc. 762, Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, Doc. 766, Doc. 767, Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, Doc. 771, Doc. 772, Doc. 773, Doc. 774, Doc. 775, Doc. 776, Doc. 777, Doc. 778, Doc. 779, Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, Doc. 787, Doc. 788, Doc. 789, Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, Doc. 793, Doc. 794, Doc. 795, Doc. 796, Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, Doc. 800, Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, Doc. 819, and Doc. 820]

plans of the mediators and of the United States for transfer of power to a provisional government 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 795 and Doc. 796], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 800 and Doc. 801], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 803] (“Niagara protocol”), 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807], 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 815, Doc. 816, and Doc. 817]

recess 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 808]

mining interests, protection of American 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 1168, Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, and Doc. 1171] decrees affecting mining lands 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 1175 and Doc. 1176], 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 1178 and Doc. 1179], 726 [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 1182, Doc. 1183, and Doc. 1184]

Obregón, Álvaro— agent of the Constitutionalist Army for the transfer of government from Carbajal to Carranza 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 874, Doc. 875, and Doc. 876], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 876 and Doc. 877]

relations with Villa and Carranza 593–625 [Pgs. 593–625 include portions of Doc. 893, Doc. 894, Doc. 895, Doc. 896, Doc. 897, Doc. 898, Doc. 899, Doc. 900, Doc. 901, Doc. 902, Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, Doc. 906, Doc. 907, Doc. 908, Doc. 909, Doc. 910, Doc. 911, Doc. 912, Doc. 913, Doc. 914, Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, Doc. 922, Doc. 923, Doc. 924, Doc. 925, Doc. 926, Doc. 927, Doc. 928, Doc. 929, Doc. 930, Doc. 931, Doc. 932, Doc. 933, Doc. 934, Doc. 935, Doc. 936, Doc. 937, Doc. 938, Doc. 939, Doc. 940, Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, Doc. 948, Doc. 949, Doc. 950, Doc. 951, Doc. 952, Doc. 953, Doc. 954, Doc. 955, Doc. 956, Doc. 957, Doc. 958, Doc. 959, Doc. 960, Doc. 961, Doc. 962, Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965]

oil interests, protection of American 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1113, Doc. 1114, Doc. 1115, and Doc. 1116] decrees affecting oil lands 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 1160 and Doc. 1161], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 1161 and Doc. 1162], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 1165]

Plan of Guadalupe of March 26, 1913; text 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, and Doc. 883] basis of assumption of executive power by Carranza 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, and Doc. 883], 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 976]

policy of the United States— payment by foreigners of taxes to de facto authorities 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191]

protection of American citizens— advice to withdraw from Mexico 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 1052, Doc. 1053, and Doc. 1054] et seq.

instructions to diplomatic and consular officers 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709], 568–569 [Pgs. 568–569 include portions of Doc. 831, Doc. 832, and Doc. 833], 576–577 [Pgs. 576–577 include portions of Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, and Doc. 854], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 1052, Doc. 1053, and Doc. 1054] et seq. See also severance of diplomatic relations; firing across the boundary line; arrest and imprisonment of American consular officers.

good offices of the Brazilian Minister to Mexico 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 1037, Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, and Doc. 1040], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 1050, Doc. 1051, and Doc. 1052]

good offices of the British Vice Consul and his assistant at Saltillo 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 1050, Doc. 1051, and Doc. 1052]

protection of other foreign interests by the United States— instructions to diplomatic and consular officers 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 710, Doc. 711, and Doc. 712], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 831, Doc. 832, and Doc. 833], 573–576 [Pgs. 573–576 include portions of Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, and Doc. 853]

See also Vera Cruz; evacuation.

protection of Mexicans by the United States 568–570 [Pgs. 568–570 include portions of Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, and Doc. 837], 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 973, Doc. 974, and Doc. 975], 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 976, Doc. 977, and Doc. 978], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 978, Doc. 979, Doc. 980, Doc. 981, and Doc. 982] See also Vera Cruz: withdrawal of United States forces, passim.

statements of the purposes of the United States in Mexico 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 651], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 653], 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656], 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 677, Doc. 678, and Doc. 679], 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 695, Doc. 696, and Doc. 697], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717], 482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 720, Doc. 721, and Doc. 722], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 727, Doc. 728, and Doc. 729], 568–570 [Pgs. 568–570 include portions of Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, and Doc. 837], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 851, Doc. 852, and Doc. 853], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 904 and Doc. 905], 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 955 and Doc. 956], 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 976, Doc. 977, and Doc. 978], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 1363]

political affairs: Constitutionalist revolution against Huerta dictatorship; arrest at Tampico of an officer and men of the U. S. S. Dolphin; occupation of Vera Cruz by United States forces; severance of diplomatic relations and representation of the United States by Brazil; mediation of Argentina, Brazil, and Chile; flight of Huerta; provisional presidency of Carbajal; transfer of the government by Carbajal to the Constitutionalist Army; assumption of executive power by Carranza; Aguascalientes Convention; provisional presidency of Guitérrez; withdrawal of United States forces from Vera Cruz 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 651]

protection by the United States of non-American foreign interests in Mexico 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 1334, Doc. 1335, and Doc. 1336], 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 1463, Doc. 1464, and Doc. 1465], 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 1528], 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 1568, Doc. 1569, and Doc. 1570], 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 1603, Doc. 1604, and Doc. 1605]

protection of American citizens and interests 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 1052, Doc. 1053, and Doc. 1054], 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1113, Doc. 1114, Doc. 1115, and Doc. 1116], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 1168, Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, and Doc. 1171], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 1260, Doc. 1261, Doc. 1262, and Doc. 1263] See also policy of the United States: protection, etc.

recognition by the United States of the government— of Carbajal 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, and Doc. 823]

of Carranza 569 [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 833], 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 853 and Doc. 854], 585–586 [Pgs. 585–586 include portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, and Doc. 876]

refugees, American 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 1052, Doc. 1053, and Doc. 1054]

refugees, admission into the United States of Chinese 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 1603, Doc. 1604, and Doc. 1605]

religious orders, treatment of 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 1528]

severance of diplomatic relations between the United States and Mexico; representation of American interests by the Brazilian Legation; withdrawal of consular officers; good offices of the British Minister and of British and French consular officers 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 735], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 744, Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 984, Doc. 985, Doc. 986, and Doc. 987] et seq.

Spanish interests 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 1334, Doc. 1335, and Doc. 1336]

Tampico incident— Admiral Mayo’s ultimatum 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658]

Admiral Mayo’s report 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 664]

Admiral Fiske’s report 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675]

the President’s message to Congress 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705]

Constitutionalists occupy Tampico 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 757 and Doc. 758], 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 815, Doc. 816, and Doc. 817]

taxation of American citizens 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191] decrees of a confiscatory nature 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191], 731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 1191 and Doc. 1192], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 1196, Doc. 1197, Doc. 1198, and Doc. 1199]

payment of taxes to de facto authorities 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191] et seq., passim. See also forced loans; mining interests; oil interests.

Vera Cruz, occupation of, by United States forces— customhouse taken 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709], 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 712, Doc. 713, and Doc. 714]

Admiral Fletcher’s proclamation 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 717, Doc. 718, and Doc. 719]

city of Vera Cruz taken 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 717, Doc. 718, and Doc. 719]

United States flag raised 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, and Doc. 738]

precedents for 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, and Doc. 743]

armistice suggested by Huerta 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, and Doc. 743]

suspension of hostilities during mediation 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, and Doc. 743], 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 751, Doc. 752, and Doc. 753]

transfer of Vera Cruz from the United States Navy to the United States Army 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 744, Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747]

military government established 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 748, Doc. 749, and Doc. 750]

evacuation by United States forces 625–627 [Pgs. 625–627 include portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, Doc. 965, Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, and Doc. 972]

correspondence preceding 595–623 [Pgs. 595–623 include portions of Doc. 898, Doc. 899, Doc. 900, Doc. 901, Doc. 902, Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, Doc. 906, Doc. 907, Doc. 908, Doc. 909, Doc. 910, Doc. 911, Doc. 912, Doc. 913, Doc. 914, Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, Doc. 922, Doc. 923, Doc. 924, Doc. 925, Doc. 926, Doc. 927, Doc. 928, Doc. 929, Doc. 930, Doc. 931, Doc. 932, Doc. 933, Doc. 934, Doc. 935, Doc. 936, Doc. 937, Doc. 938, Doc. 939, Doc. 940, Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, Doc. 948, Doc. 949, Doc. 950, Doc. 951, Doc. 952, Doc. 953, Doc. 954, Doc. 955, Doc. 956, Doc. 957, Doc. 958, Doc. 959, Doc. 960, and Doc. 961]

Villa, Gen. Francisco— relations with Carranza 485–620 [Pgs. 485–620 include portions of Doc. 725, Doc. 726, Doc. 727, Doc. 728, Doc. 729, Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, Doc. 733, Doc. 734, Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, Doc. 738, Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, Doc. 748, Doc. 749, Doc. 750, Doc. 751, Doc. 752, Doc. 753, Doc. 754, Doc. 755, Doc. 756, Doc. 757, Doc. 758, Doc. 759, Doc. 760, Doc. 761, Doc. 762, Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, Doc. 766, Doc. 767, Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, Doc. 771, Doc. 772, Doc. 773, Doc. 774, Doc. 775, Doc. 776, Doc. 777, Doc. 778, Doc. 779, Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, Doc. 787, Doc. 788, Doc. 789, Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, Doc. 793, Doc. 794, Doc. 795, Doc. 796, Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, Doc. 800, Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, Doc. 819, Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, Doc. 827, Doc. 828, Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, Doc. 855, Doc. 856, Doc. 857, Doc. 858, Doc. 859, Doc. 860, Doc. 861, Doc. 862, Doc. 863, Doc. 864, Doc. 865, Doc. 866, Doc. 867, Doc. 868, Doc. 869, Doc. 870, Doc. 871, Doc. 872, Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, Doc. 876, Doc. 877, Doc. 878, Doc. 879, Doc. 880, Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, Doc. 884, Doc. 885, Doc. 886, Doc. 887, Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, Doc. 891, Doc. 892, Doc. 893, Doc. 894, Doc. 895, Doc. 896, Doc. 897, Doc. 898, Doc. 899, Doc. 900, Doc. 901, Doc. 902, Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, Doc. 906, Doc. 907, Doc. 908, Doc. 909, Doc. 910, Doc. 911, Doc. 912, Doc. 913, Doc. 914, Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, Doc. 922, Doc. 923, Doc. 924, Doc. 925, Doc. 926, Doc. 927, Doc. 928, Doc. 929, Doc. 930, Doc. 931, Doc. 932, Doc. 933, Doc. 934, Doc. 935, Doc. 936, Doc. 937, Doc. 938, Doc. 939, Doc. 940, Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, Doc. 948, Doc. 949, Doc. 950, Doc. 951, Doc. 952, Doc. 953, Doc. 954, and Doc. 955] passim.

manifesto against Carranza 605–608 [Pgs. 605–608 include portions of Doc. 920, Doc. 921, Doc. 922, Doc. 923, Doc. 924, Doc. 925, and Doc. 926], 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 936, Doc. 937, Doc. 938, and Doc. 939]

joint entry of Villa and Zapata forces into Mexico City 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 973, Doc. 974, and Doc. 975]

rupture with Gutiérrez 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 978, Doc. 979, Doc. 980, Doc. 981, and Doc. 982]

execution of William S. Benton 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 1463, Doc. 1464, and Doc. 1465]

withdrawal of Americans from Mexico 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 1052, Doc. 1053, and Doc. 1054] et seq.

withdrawal of United States forces from Vera Cruz 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965]

Zapatistas 589–628 [Pgs. 589–628 include portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, Doc. 884, Doc. 885, Doc. 886, Doc. 887, Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, Doc. 891, Doc. 892, Doc. 893, Doc. 894, Doc. 895, Doc. 896, Doc. 897, Doc. 898, Doc. 899, Doc. 900, Doc. 901, Doc. 902, Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, Doc. 906, Doc. 907, Doc. 908, Doc. 909, Doc. 910, Doc. 911, Doc. 912, Doc. 913, Doc. 914, Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, Doc. 922, Doc. 923, Doc. 924, Doc. 925, Doc. 926, Doc. 927, Doc. 928, Doc. 929, Doc. 930, Doc. 931, Doc. 932, Doc. 933, Doc. 934, Doc. 935, Doc. 936, Doc. 937, Doc. 938, Doc. 939, Doc. 940, Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, Doc. 948, Doc. 949, Doc. 950, Doc. 951, Doc. 952, Doc. 953, Doc. 954, Doc. 955, Doc. 956, Doc. 957, Doc. 958, Doc. 959, Doc. 960, Doc. 961, Doc. 962, Doc. 963, Doc. 964, Doc. 965, Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, Doc. 972, Doc. 973, Doc. 974, and Doc. 975] passim. joint entry of Villa and Zapata forces into Mexico City 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 973, Doc. 974, and Doc. 975]

rupture with Gutiérrez 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 978, Doc. 979, Doc. 980, Doc. 981, and Doc. 982]

Military service in foreign countries of residents and citizens of the United States, liability for 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 440], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602]

Military servitudes 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 1631]

Mining regulations in— China, affecting treaty rights 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 140]

Mexico, affecting property rights 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 1168, Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, and Doc. 1171]

Missionaries and missionary societies 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 1528], 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 1545], 1099 [Pg. 1099 includes portions of Doc. 1849 and Doc. 1850]

Models, industrial, international convention concerning protection of 1110 [Pg. 1110 is part of Doc. 1865]

Moreno, Alfredo, President pro tern of Ecuador 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 395, Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399]

Morocco: French protectorate in Morocco; relinquishment of extraterritorial jurisdiction of foreign powers; attitude of the United States 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 1628 and Doc. 1629]

Benatuil, Jacob, case of 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 1631]

Most-favored-nation treatment 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 636]

N.

Nationality: dual nationality. See Citizenship.

naturalization abroad does not cause a loss of French nationality 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 441]

proof of nationality prerequisite to filing claim 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 1021, Doc. 1022, and Doc. 1023] See also Naturalization.

Nativity. See Citizenship.

Naturalization: Chinese wives or widows of American citizens, status of 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

Exclusion from Ecuador of Goo Kwai, an American citizen of Chinese birth 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432]

See also Citizenship; Italy: liability to military service, etc.; France: same subject.

Naval rendezvous. See Panama Canal.

Naval station at: Guantánamo 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Gulf of Fonseca: protest of Salvador and Costa Rica against proposal of Nicaragua to the United States 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 1685, Doc. 1686, and Doc. 1687]

Navigation. See Great Britain: jurisdiction, etc.; Panama Canal tolls.

Negroes, colonization of the Gold Coast, West Africa, by American 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 468, Doc. 469, and Doc. 470]

Netherlands: agreement between the United States and the Netherlands in relation to oil interests in Mexico 707–708 [Pgs. 707–708 include portions of Doc. 1151, Doc. 1152, Doc. 1153, and Doc. 1154]

Second International Opium Conference: final protocol; text 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 1640]

Third International Opium Conference: report of the American delegates 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 1651 and Doc. 1652]

final protocol; protocol for putting into effect the International Opium Convention 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 1640]

Neutrality: interference with bombardment of a rebel stronghold 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 314, Doc. 315, and Doc. 316], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, and Doc. 324], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 325]

smuggling of arms into hands of revolutionists 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 310, Doc. 311, and Doc. 312], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, and Doc. 321]

See also Panama: neutrality, etc.

Neutralization of oil-bearing zone 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1113, Doc. 1114, Doc. 1115, and Doc. 1116]

Nicaragua: canal treaty with the United States proposed, and protests of Salvador and Costa Rica in relation thereto 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 1685, Doc. 1686, and Doc. 1687]

financial affairs: good offices of the United States in securing a loan for current expenses 944 [Pg. 944 includes portions of Doc. 1662, Doc. 1663, Doc. 1664, and Doc. 1665]

political affairs: attack on the barracks at Bluefields and other insurrections implicating American citizens; asylum sought at American Consulate; attitude of the United States 940 [Pg. 940 includes portions of Doc. 1655, Doc. 1656, and Doc. 1657]

protest of the United States against the presence in Costa Rica of certain Nicaraguan revolutionists 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193]

Norway: arbitration agreement with the United States 970 [Pg. 970 is part of Doc. 1705]

Spitzbergen, international conference on 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 1707, Doc. 1708, and Doc. 1709]

treaty for the advancement of general peace, concluded with the United States 971 [Pg. 971 includes portions of Doc. 1705 and Doc. 1706]

O.

Oil interests in Mexico, American 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1113, Doc. 1114, Doc. 1115, and Doc. 1116]

Open ports: effect of certain Chinese internal taxes on their value 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]et seq.

Opium Conference. See Netherlands Opium Convention. See Netherlands.

Opium laws and regulations 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 12 [Pg. 12 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 1640]

Oreste, Michel, resignation of Presidency of Haiti 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497]

Ottoman Government. See Turkey.

Ownership of land 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634]

P.

Panama: assault on American citizens 985 [Pg. 985 includes portions of Doc. 1720, Doc. 1721, and Doc. 1722]

boundary dispute between Costa Rica and Panama; refusal of Panama to accept the award; acceptance by Costa Rica of the good offices of the United States tendered to both parties 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 1735, Doc. 1736, and Doc. 1737]

Colombia’s interests in the Isthmus 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

Costa Rica. See boundary dispute.

independence of Panama, the United States, the sole guarantor of 1040 [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 1769 and Doc. 1770]

loans 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 1753, Doc. 1754, and Doc. 1755]

message of the President, Belisario Porras, to the Assembly 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 1719]

neutrality in the waters of the Isthmus: protocol of 1914 984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 1719 and Doc. 1720]

railroad construction, attitude of the United States toward 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 1753, Doc. 1754, and Doc. 1755]

wireless telegraph control by the United States 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 1766 and Doc. 1767]

Panama-California Exposition 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8]

Panama Canal: opening 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

naval rendezvous 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 13]

operation and navigation: regulations 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]

protection 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 1753, Doc. 1754, and Doc. 1755], 1040 [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 1769 and Doc. 1770]

tolls 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 463]

Panama Canal Act: tolls: repeal of exemption clause 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 463]

wireless telegraph: citation of provisions concerning 1037 [Pg. 1037 is part of Doc. 1768]

Panama Canal tolls: agreement of 1909 between Great Britain and the United States;

reference 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Hay-Pauncefote Treaty of 1901; reference 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 163]

repeal of the exemption provision of the Panama Canal Act 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 463]

Panama Canal Zone: railroad construction in Panama in relation to 1030 [Pg. 1030 includes portions of Doc. 1757, Doc. 1758, and Doc. 1759]

wireless telegraph in Panama in relation to 1037 [Pg. 1037 is part of Doc. 1768]

Panama-Pacific International Exposition 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8], 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 13], 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14] Colombia, attitude of 145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 147]

Panama Railroad Company. See Panama: railroad construction, etc.

Pan American arbitration treaty, desirability of a 145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 147]

Pan American Scientific Congress, Second 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]

Paraguay: boundary dispute with Bolivia 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]

extradition treaty between the United States and Paraguay 1053 [Pg. 1053 is part of Doc. 1789]

Patents, international convention concerning protection of 1110 [Pg. 1110 is part of Doc. 1865]

Peace Conference, postponement of the Third International 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 10]

Peace plan of the President 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 146]

Peace treaties, See Treaties: by subject.

Perjury, publicity to be given to provisions of Immigration Act concerning 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]

Persia: coronation of Sultan Ahmad Kadjar, Shah of Persia 1059 [Pg. 1059 includes portions of Doc. 1790, Doc. 1791, and Doc. 1792]

Peru: political affairs: revolution; resignation of President Billinghurst; recognition by the United States of the Government Junta and of Provisional President Benavides 1061 [Pg. 1061 is part of Doc. 1795]

Platt Amendment 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 1685, Doc. 1686, and Doc. 1687]

Plaza, Leónidas, President of Ecuador 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 379]

Plaza, Victorino de la: succession to the presidency of Argentina 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26]

Plebiscite necessary to concession to the United States of naval station 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 1688], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 1690 and Doc. 1691]

Police powers 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 1711]

Policy of the United States in relation to— Dominican Republic 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333]

Franco-Moroccan Protectorate Treaty of 1912, 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 1629 and Doc. 1630]

Haiti 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506], 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568], 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 571, Doc. 572, and Doc. 573]

internal regulations of foreign governments 1099 [Pg. 1099 includes portions of Doc. 1849 and Doc. 1850]

Mexico. See Mexico: policy of the United States.

Nicaragua 940 [Pg. 940 includes portions of Doc. 1655, Doc. 1656, and Doc. 1657], 944 [Pg. 944 includes portions of Doc. 1662, Doc. 1663, Doc. 1664, and Doc. 1665]

Panama 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 1753, Doc. 1754, and Doc. 1755], 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 1766 and Doc. 1767], 1040 [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 1769 and Doc. 1770]

Panama Canal tolls 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 463]

religious freedom 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 1851 and Doc. 1852]

Spitzbergen 975 [Pg. 975 includes portions of Doc. 1710 and Doc. 1711] et seq.

Turkey: repeal of the Capitulations 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 1836, Doc. 1837, and Doc. 1838]

Venezuela 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 1851 and Doc. 1852]

Porras, Belisario, President of Panama 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 1719]

Porto Rico. See Dominican Republic; Venezuela.

President of the United States: annual address to the Congress xi [Pg. XI is part of Address of the President, annual]

peace plan 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 146]

special messages 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 463], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705]

Presidents of— Argentina: death of President Roque Saenz Pena and succession of the Vice President, Victorino de la Plaza, to the presidency 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26]

Brazil: message of President da Fonseca to the Congress 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 40]

Chile: message of President Barros Luco to the Congress 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 51]

Colombia: message of President Restrepo to the Congress 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 146]

Costa Rica: message of President Jimenez to the Congress 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 177]

Ecuador— Plaza, Leónidas: message to Congress._ 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 379]

Moreno, Alfredo B.: assumption of presidency pro tern 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 395, Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399]

Guatemala: message of President Estrada Cabrera to the Congress 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486]

Haiti— Oreste, Michel: resignation of 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497]

Zamor, Oreste: election, 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, and Doc. 501]; resignation 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 531, Doc. 532, Doc. 533, and Doc. 534], 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540]

Theodore, Davilmar: election, 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545]; conditions precedent to recognition by the United States 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545], 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 579]

Honduras: message of President Bertrand to the Congress 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 600]

Mexico— Huerta, Victoriano: resignation 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 818, Doc. 819, and Doc. 820], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, and Doc. 823] See also Mexico: Huerta.

Carbajal, Francisco S.: Provisional President, 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 818, Doc. 819, and Doc. 820]; recognition by the United States, 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, and Doc. 823]; resignation 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, and Doc. 874]

Carranza, Venustiano: assumes executive power, 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 878, Doc. 879, and Doc. 880]; appointed Provisional President by military junta 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 896, Doc. 897, and Doc. 898] See also Mexico: Carranza.

Gutiérrez, Eulalio: elected Provisional President by Aguascalientes Convention 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948]

Panama: message of President Porras to the Assembly 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 1719]

Peru— Billinghurst, Guillermo E., resignation of 1061 [Pg. 1061 is part of Doc. 1795]

Benavides, Oscar, recognition by the United States of Provisional President 1061 [Pg. 1061 is part of Doc. 1795]

Salvador— Meléndez, Carlos: message to the Assembly, 1075 [Pg. 1075 is part of Doc. 1823]; resignation 1077 [Pg. 1077 includes portions of Doc. 1824, Doc. 1825, and Doc. 1826]

Quinénez, Alfonso, succession to the Presidency 1077 [Pg. 1077 includes portions of Doc. 1824, Doc. 1825, and Doc. 1826]

Property 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637], 910 [Pg. 910 is part of Doc. 1631]

Protection by American diplomatic and consular officers of Haitian officials and their families 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596]

Protection as American citizens not extended to persons whose American fathers have never resided in the United States 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]

Protection of American life and property in— China 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 140]

Dominican Republic 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 215], 264 [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378]

Ecuador 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419], 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432]

Prance 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 440]

Italy 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602]

Mexico 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 1052, Doc. 1053, and Doc. 1054], 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1113, Doc. 1114, Doc. 1115, and Doc. 1116], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 1168, Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, and Doc. 1171], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 1260, Doc. 1261, Doc. 1262, and Doc. 1263]

Morocco 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 1628 and Doc. 1629]

Panama 985 [Pg. 985 includes portions of Doc. 1720, Doc. 1721, and Doc. 1722]

Spitzbergen 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 1707, Doc. 1708, and Doc. 1709]

Turkey 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 1836, Doc. 1837, and Doc. 1838]

Venezuela 1095 [Pg. 1095 includes portions of Doc. 1843 and Doc. 1844]

Protectorate, French, in Morocco 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 1628 and Doc. 1629]

Proteges of the United States in Morocco 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 1628 and Doc. 1629]

Protest of Japan against certain land laws of California 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634]

Public domain inalienable 919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 1636], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 1690 and Doc. 1691]

Q.

Quiñónez, Alfonso, President of Salvador 1077 [Pg. 1077 includes portions of Doc. 1824, Doc. 1825, and Doc. 1826]

R.

Radiotelegraph control in Panama by the United States 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 1766 and Doc. 1767]

Railroad construction in Panama, attitude of the United States toward 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 1753, Doc. 1754, and Doc. 1755]

Recognition by the United States of new governments in— Dominican Republic 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341], 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 350, Doc. 351, and Doc. 352]

Haiti 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511], 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 579]

Mexico 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, and Doc. 823], 569 [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 833], 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 853 and Doc. 854], 585–586 [Pgs. 585–586 include portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, and Doc. 876], 589–592 [Pgs. 589–592 include portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, Doc. 884, Doc. 885, Doc. 886, Doc. 887, Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, Doc. 891, Doc. 892, and Doc. 893], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 904 and Doc. 905], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 909, Doc. 910, Doc. 911, and Doc. 912]

Morocco 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 1628 and Doc. 1629]

Peru 1061 [Pg. 1061 is part of Doc. 1795]

Red Cross: Huai River conservancy and prevention of famine 95 [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

Refuge, temporary: granted to— political refugees, at the American Legation at Quito 271 [Pg. 271 includes portions of Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, and Doc. 395]

political refugees, at the French Legation at Port-au-Prince, protected by United States forces 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596]

American citizen, at the American Consulate at Bluefields 940 [Pg. 940 includes portions of Doc. 1655, Doc. 1656, and Doc. 1657]

Refugees: Americans in Mexico 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 1052, Doc. 1053, and Doc. 1054]

Chinese admitted into the United States from Mexico 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 1603, Doc. 1604, and Doc. 1605]

Mexicans in Mexico protected by American officials 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 831, Doc. 832, and Doc. 833], 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 973, Doc. 974, and Doc. 975], 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 976, Doc. 977, and Doc. 978]

Religious orders, treatment of, in— Mexico 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 1528], 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 1545]

Venezuela 1099 [Pg. 1099 includes portions of Doc. 1849 and Doc. 1850]

Representation by American diplomatic and consular officers of Chinese interests in Costa Rica 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

Representations by American consular officers in Mexico. See Consular officers.

Restrepo, Carlos E., President of Colombia: message to Congress 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 146]

Retroactivity of laws 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 1160 and Doc. 1161], 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 1631]

Revised Statutes of the United States cited: sec. 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 1187 and Doc. 1188] 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 462]

sec. 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191] 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 462]

sec. 1992 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]

sec. 1993 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]

sec. 1994 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

sec. 2169 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 4]

sec. 4079–4081 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 462]

sec. 4086 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

sec. 5346 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 462]

Revolutionists in— Dominican Republic 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 215]

Ecuador 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 379, Doc. 380, and Doc. 381]

Haiti 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 487, Doc. 488, and Doc. 489]

Mexico 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 651]

Nicaragua 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193], 940 [Pg. 940 includes portions of Doc. 1655, Doc. 1656, and Doc. 1657]

Peru 1063 [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 1798, Doc. 1799, Doc. 1800, and Doc. 1801]

Rights: of aliens to hold land in— Japan 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637]

Morocco 910 [Pg. 910 is part of Doc. 1631], 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 1631], 912 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 1631]

United States 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634]

of citizens of the United States. See American citizens.

destroyed by retroactive law 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 1631]

continued existence of the power by which they were acquired not necessary to their preservation 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 636] See also Treaty rights.

Rojas, Dr. Pedro Ezequiel, death of 1104 [Pg. 1104 includes portions of Doc. 1855, Doc. 1856, and Doc. 1857]

Roumania: death of King Carol I and accession of King Ferdinand I 1072 [Pg. 1072 includes portions of Doc. 1816, Doc. 1817, Doc. 1818, and Doc. 1819]

Russia: Spitzbergen, participation in plan for government of 977 [Pg. 977 is part of Doc. 1711]

S.

Saenz Pena, Roque, President of Argentina: death 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26]

Salvador: arbitration agreement with the United States extending duration of convention of 1908 1076 [Pg. 1076 is part of Doc. 1824]

message of President Melendez to the Assembly 1075 [Pg. 1075 is part of Doc. 1823]

Nicaragua canal treaty, protest of Salvador against a proposed 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 1685, Doc. 1686, and Doc. 1687]

transfer of the presidency by President Meléndez to First Designado Quinónez 1077 [Pg. 1077 includes portions of Doc. 1824, Doc. 1825, and Doc. 1826]

Sands, Clifford D., deportation from Nicaragua 940 [Pg. 940 includes portions of Doc. 1655, Doc. 1656, and Doc. 1657]

Scientific Congress, Second Pan American 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]

Seamen. See Great Britain; jurisdiction, etc.

Servitudes, military 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 1631], 919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 1636]

Ship. See Vessel.

Sovereignty: determination of internal policy an attribute of 1101 [Pg. 1101 is part of Doc. 1852]

China: right to tax foreigners 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 127]

Colombia in the Isthmus of Panama 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 163]

Mexico 652 [Pg. 652 includes portions of Doc. 1015 and Doc. 1016]

Salvador: claim to joint sovereignty over the Gulf of Fonseca 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 1688, Doc. 1689, and Doc. 1690]

Spitzbergen a terra nullius 975–977 [Pgs. 975–977 include portions of Doc. 1710 and Doc. 1711]

Turkey: repeal of the Capitulations restricting sovereignty in relations with certain powers 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 1836, Doc. 1837, and Doc. 1838]

Spain: arbitration agreement with the United States; text 1081 [Pg. 1081 is part of Doc. 1832]

treaty with the United States for advancement of peace 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 1832 and Doc. 1833] See also Mexico: protection of Spanish subjects, etc.

Spitzbergen: international conference on 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 1707, Doc. 1708, and Doc. 1709]

terra nullius, its political status as 976 [Pg. 976 is part of Doc. 1711] et seq.

State laws. See Legislative power.

Statue of Washington presented to Great Britain 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465]

Status of American citizens— of Chinese origin, in Ecuador 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432]

of French origin, in France 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 440]

of Italian origin, in Italy 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602]

of Porto Rican origin, in the Dominican Republic 264 [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378]

of Syrian origin, in Haiti 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516] See also American citizens; Great Britain: jurisdiction, etc.

Status of persons whose American fathers have never resided in the United States 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]

Status of treaty ports 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Sultan Ahmad Kadjar, coronation of 1059 [Pg. 1059 includes portions of Doc. 1790, Doc. 1791, and Doc. 1792]

Sweden: arbitration agreement with the United States extending convention of 1908; text 1086 [Pg. 1086 is part of Doc. 1834]

Spitzbergen, participation in plan for government of 977 [Pg. 977 is part of Doc. 1711]

Switzerland: arbitration agreement with the United States extending duration of convention of 1908; text 1088 [Pg. 1088 is part of Doc. 1835]

Syrian-born citizen of the United States in Haiti, rights of 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516]

T.

Tariff: China: relation between an internal tax and the tariff on imports and exports 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127] et seq.

Morocco: discriminatory customs duties 912 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 1631], 919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 1636]

Turkey: agreement of the Powers to an increase of the customs tariff. See History of the World War.

Taxation of American citizens and other foreigners in— China 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Mexico 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1113, Doc. 1114, Doc. 1115, and Doc. 1116], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 1168, Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, and Doc. 1171], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191]

Temporary refuge 271 [Pg. 271 includes portions of Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, and Doc. 395], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596], 940 [Pg. 940 includes portions of Doc. 1655, Doc. 1656, and Doc. 1657]

Terra nullius: administration 976 [Pg. 976 is part of Doc. 1711] et seq.

Territorial waters: joint sovereignty of Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua over the Gulf of Fonseca 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 1685, Doc. 1686, and Doc. 1687] See also Great Britain: jurisdiction, etc.

Territory, violation of 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 1615, Doc. 1616, Doc. 1617, and Doc. 1618]

The Hague Peace Conference 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 10]

Théodore, Davilmar, President of Haiti 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545], 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 579]

Tolls, repeal of exemption clause of Panama Canal Act 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465]

Trade discriminations 912 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 1631], 919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 1636]

Treaties: adherence: provisions requisite for submission to the Senate 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 1629 and Doc. 1630]

arbitrator’s powers limited by convention 998 [Pg. 998 is part of Doc. 1740]

Treaties1 : by country2 — Austria-Hungary and the United States- arbitration agreement extending duration of the convention of 1909; text 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 28]

consular convention of July 11, 1870, cited 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 462]

Bolivia and Paraguay: boundary agreement fixing a modus Vivendi (the Ayala-Mujía protocol); good offices of the United States 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]

British-Moroccan treaty of 1856; reference 909 [Pg. 909 is part of Doc. 1631]

Central American States. See Treaties, international.

China and Japan: treaty of 1896 cited in relation to the status of treaty ports 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

China and the United States: treaty of 1903: treaty ports provisions interpreted 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Colombia and the United States— treaty of April 6, 1914; brief history, 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 146], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 147]; correspondence, 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]; text 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 166]

agreement by exchange of notes relating to par. 5 of Art. II of the treaty of April 6, 1914. 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

canal convention of 1903 violation of 1030 [Pg. 1030 includes portions of Doc. 1757, Doc. 1758, and Doc. 1759], 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 1771, Doc. 1772, and Doc. 1773]

Colombia and Costa Rica— treaty of 1880; reference 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 1740]

treaty of 1886; reference 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 1740]

Costa Rica and Nicaragua: boundary treaty of 1858; reference 964 [Pg. 964 is part of Doc. 1699], 968 [Pg. 968 is part of Doc. 1703]

Costa Rica and Panama: arbitration treaty of 1910; citation 995 [Pg. 995 is part of Doc. 1740]

Costa Rica and the United States— treaty for the advancement of general peace; text 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 178]

protocol of 1900 for canal construction; reference 965 [Pg. 965 is part of Doc. 1699]

Ecuador and New Granada, 1832; reference 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 163]

France and Germany: protectorate treaty of 1911; reference 907 [Pg. 907 includes portions of Doc. 1630 and Doc. 1631]

Great Britain and the United States— arbitration agreement extending duration of convention of 1908; text 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 459]

boundary waters treaty of 1909; reference 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 460]

Mexico— agreement by exchange of notes for preservation of mining interests; texts 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 1168, Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, and Doc. 1171]

agreement by exchange of notes for preservation of oil interests; texts 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 1151]

Panama Canal— Hay-Pauncefote Treaty (1901): references, 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 163]; contravened by Panama Canal Act 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 463]

Agreement, of 1909 as to tolls; reference 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

peace: text of treaty for the advancement of general peace 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]

Greece and the United States: consular convention of 1902 interpreted 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 477]

Guatemala and the United States: treaty for the advancement of general peace; text 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 485]

Haiti and the United States: draft of a convention concerning customs and other financial adjustments 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 525], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 568]

Honduras and Nicaragua: Gámez-Bonilla treaty of 1894; reference 958 [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 1691]

Honduras and Salvador: boundary treaty of 1884; reference 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 1688], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 1690 and Doc. 1691]

Italy and the United States— arbitration agreement extending duration of the Convention of 1908; text 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 601]

naturalization convention, correspondence relating to negotiation of a 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602]

Japan and the United States— arbitration agreement extending duration of the Convention of 1908; text 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 633]

treaty of commerce and navigation of 1911; reference 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 636]

Japan and Treaty Powers: abolition of foreign settlements in Chosen (Korea)— protocol of April 21, 1913; text 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 637]

exchange of notes approving above protocol 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639]

Morocco and France: protectorate treaty of 1912; reference 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 1628 and Doc. 1629], 910 [Pg. 910 is part of Doc. 1631]

Morocco and Spain— treaty of 1861; reference 909 [Pg. 909 is part of Doc. 1631]

protectorate treaty of 1912 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 1628 and Doc. 1629]

Morocco and the United States: treaty of 1836; citation 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 1631]

Netherlands and the United States: agreement by exchange of notes for preservation of oil interests in Mexico 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 1151]

Nicaragua and the United States— canal treaty, correspondence concerning a proposed inter-oceanic 948 [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 1673, Doc. 1674, Doc. 1675, and Doc. 1676], 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 1685, Doc. 1686, and Doc. 1687]

protocol of 1900 for canal construction; reference 965 [Pg. 965 is part of Doc. 1699]

North German Confederation and the United States: citation of the naturalization convention of 1868 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 602]

Norway and the United States— arbitration agreement extending the duration of the convention of 1908; text 970 [Pg. 970 is part of Doc. 1705]

peace, treaty of 1914 for the advancement of; text 971 [Pg. 971 includes portions of Doc. 1705 and Doc. 1706]

Norway and Sweden, and the United States: citation of the naturalization convention of 1869 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 602]

Panama and the United States: protocol of an agreement concerning neutrality in the waters of the Isthmus of Panama; text 984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 1719 and Doc. 1720]

Paraguay and the United States: extradition treaty of 1913; text 1053 [Pg. 1053 is part of Doc. 1789]

Portugal and the United States— arbitration agreement of 1913; text 1070 [Pg. 1070 includes portions of Doc. 1814 and Doc. 1815]

peace, treaty for advancement of; text 1068 [Pg. 1068 is part of Doc. 1814]

Salvador and the United States: arbitration agreement extending duration of convention of 1908; text 1076 [Pg. 1076 is part of Doc. 1824]

Spain and the United States— arbitration agreement extending duration of convention of 1908; text 1081 [Pg. 1081 is part of Doc. 1832]

peace, treaty for advancement of general; text 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 1832 and Doc. 1833]

agreement by exchange of notes for preservation of mining interests in Mexico 720 [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 1173, Doc. 1174, and Doc. 1175]

Sweden and the United States: arbitration agreement extending duration of convention of 1908 1086 [Pg. 1086 is part of Doc. 1834]

Switzerland and the United States: arbitration agreement extending duration of convention of 1908; text 1088 [Pg. 1088 is part of Doc. 1835]

Turkey and Serbia: treaty of peace, 1914 ratifying treaty of London, 1913; reference 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 1836, Doc. 1837, and Doc. 1838]

United States. (Entered under the names of the other contracting parties.)

Venezuela and New Granada, 1834 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 163]

Treaties: by subject— arbitration: Costa Rica and Panama, 1910; citation 995 [Pg. 995 is part of Doc. 1740]

arbitration agreements extending the duration of conventions of 1908 and 1909 between the United States and— Austria-Hungary 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 28]

Great Britain 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 1382, Doc. 1383, and Doc. 1384]

Italy 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 601]

Japan 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 633]

Norway 970 [Pg. 970 is part of Doc. 1705]

Portugal 1070 [Pg. 1070 includes portions of Doc. 1814 and Doc. 1815]

Salvador 1076 [Pg. 1076 is part of Doc. 1824]

Spain 1081 [Pg. 1081 is part of Doc. 1832]

Sweden 1086 [Pg. 1086 is part of Doc. 1834]

Switzerland 1088 [Pg. 1088 is part of Doc. 1835]

boundary— Bolivia and Paraguay; good offices of the United States 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]

Costa Rica and Colombia— treaty of 1880; references 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 1740]

treaty of 1886; references 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 1740]

Costa Rica and Nicaragua: treaty of 1858; references 964 [Pg. 964 is part of Doc. 1699], 968 [Pg. 968 is part of Doc. 1703]

Honduras and Nicaragua: Gamez-Bonilla treaty of 1894; reference 958 [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 1691]

Honduras and Salvador: treaty of 1884; references 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 1688], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 1690 and Doc. 1691]

canal, proposed interoceanic— United States and Costa Rica: protocol of 1900; reference 965 [Pg. 965 is part of Doc. 1699]

United States and Nicaragua— protocol of 1900; reference 965 [Pg. 965 is part of Doc. 1699]

Correspondence 948 [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 1673, Doc. 1674, Doc. 1675, and Doc. 1676], 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 1685, Doc. 1686, and Doc. 1687]

Canal, Panama— agreement of 1909 with Great Britain; reference 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

contravention of convention of 1903 with Panama 1030 [Pg. 1030 includes portions of Doc. 1757, Doc. 1758, and Doc. 1759]

Hay-Pauncefote treaty (1901)— References 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 163]

contravened by Panama Canal act 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 463]

Chosen (Korea), foreign settlements in— protocol of April 21, 1913; text 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 637]

exchange of notes approving the above protocol 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639]

commerce and navigation— China and France: treaty of 1858 cited 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 127], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 139]

China and Great Britain: revised British commercial treaty cited 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 127]

China and Japan: treaty of 1896 cited 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Spain and Morocco: treaty of 1861; reference 909 [Pg. 909 is part of Doc. 1631]

United States and China: treaty of 1903 interpreted 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

United States and Japan: treaty of 1911; reference 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 636]

consular— Austria-Hungary and the United States: convention of 1870 Cited 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 462]

Greece and the United States: convention of 1902 interpreted 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 477]

customs, and other financial adjustment: draft of a convention between the United States and Haiti 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 525]

extradition treaty of 1913 between Paraguay and the United States; text 1053 [Pg. 1053 is part of Doc. 1789]

financial” New Granada and Venezuela, 1834; reference 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 163]

general: British-Moroccan treaty of 1856; reference 909 [Pg. 909 is part of Doc. 1631]

mining interests in Mexico— United States and Great Britain: agreement by exchange of notes for the preservation of the status quo 718–719 [Pgs. 718–719 include portions of Doc. 1168, Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, Doc. 1171, and Doc. 1172]

United States and Spain: agreement by exchange of notes for preservation of the status quo 720 [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 1173, Doc. 1174, and Doc. 1175]

oil interests in Mexico— United States and Great Britain: agreement by exchange of notes for preservation of the status quo 707–708 [Pgs. 707–708 include portions of Doc. 1151, Doc. 1152, Doc. 1153, and Doc. 1154]

United States and the Netherlands: agreement by exchange of notes for preservation of the status quo 707–708 [Pgs. 707–708 include portions of Doc. 1151, Doc. 1152, Doc. 1153, and Doc. 1154]

naturalization— correspondence relating to negotiation of a naturalization convention between Italy and the United States 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602]

North German Confederation and the United States: convention of 1868 cited 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 602]

Norway and Sweden and the United States: convention of 1869 Cited 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 602]

neutrality: protocol of an agreement concerning neutrality in the waters of the Isthmus of Panama; text 984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 1719 and Doc. 1720]

Panama Canal. See Canal,

peace— Ecuador and New Granada, 1832 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 163]

Turkey and Serbia: treaty of 1914; reference 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 1836, Doc. 1837, and Doc. 1838]

United States and Morocco: treaty of 1836; citation 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 1631]

peace, advancement of general: texts of treaties of 1913 and 1914 between the United States and— Costa Rica 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 178]

Great Britain 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]

Guatemala 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 485]

Norway 971 [Pg. 971 includes portions of Doc. 1705 and Doc. 1706]

Portugal 1068 [Pg. 1068 is part of Doc. 1814]

Spain 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 1832 and Doc. 1833]

protectorate— Franco-German treaty of 1911; reference 907 [Pg. 907 includes portions of Doc. 1630 and Doc. 1631], 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 1634 and Doc. 1635]

Franco-Moroccan treaty of 1912; reference 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 1628 and Doc. 1629], 910 [Pg. 910 is part of Doc. 1631]

Spanish-Moroccan treaty of 1912; reference 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 1628 and Doc. 1629]

relations: United States and Colombia— text of the treaty of April 6, 1914 as submitted to the Senate July 16, 1914 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 166]

agreement by exchange of notes relating to par. 5 of Art. II of the treaty of April 6, 1914 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

taxation: interpretation of the treaty of 1903 with China 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

treaty ports: interpretation of the treaty of 1903 with China 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Treaties, international: by subject arbitration of pecuniary claims: proclamation of the convention signed at Buenos Aires, August 11, 1910 1109 [Pg. 1109 is part of Doc. 1864]

Central American Court of Justice, reference to the Washington treaties of 1907 creating institutions including the 959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 1691 and Doc. 1692], 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 1693 and Doc. 1694], 962 [Pg. 962 includes portions of Doc. 1696 and Doc. 1697]

copyright, literary and artistic: proclamation of the convention signed at Buenos Aires, August 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 1910 1108 [Pg. 1108 is part of Doc. 1863]

inventions, patents, designs, and industrial models; proclamation of the convention signed at Buenos Aires, August 20, 1910 1110 [Pg. 1110 is part of Doc. 1865]

Morocco, protection in— convention signed in Madrid July 3, 1880; citation 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 1631], 909 [Pg. 909 is part of Doc. 1631], 910 [Pg. 910 is part of Doc. 1631], 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 1631]

convention of 1863; reference__: 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 1631], 909 [Pg. 909 is part of Doc. 1631]

opium, morphine, and cocaine; convention of January 23, 1912; texts of— final protocol of Second Opium Conference 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 1640]

final protocol of Third Opium Conference 938 [Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 1654]

protocol relative to putting into effect the International Opium Convention 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 1654]

wireless telegraph convention of 1912; adherence of Panama to 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 1773, Doc. 1774, and Doc. 1775]

Treaty-making power 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634] et seq.

Treaty ports, status of 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Treaty rights— affected by Chinese mining regulations 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 140]

in conflict with local laws 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 636]

protection of 912 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 1631]

waiver of 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Turkey: American educational institutions, protection of. See Foreign Relations: History of the World War.

Capitulations, refusal of the United States to recognize executory force in the abrogation of the 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 1836, Doc. 1837, and Doc. 1838]

customs tariff, agreement of the powers to increase of. See Foreign Relations: History of the World War.

Serbia, treaty of peace between Turkey and 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 1836, Doc. 1837, and Doc. 1838]

U.

Ultra petita, doctrine of 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 1740]

Unilateral action 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 1836, Doc. 1837, and Doc. 1838]

Union, Central American, mention of restoration of 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 1688], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 1690 and Doc. 1691]

United States: Army engineer appointed to superintend surveys in China 95 [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

citizens. See American citizens,

consular officers (q. v.).

Federal treaty-making power in relation to legislative power of the States 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634]

flag 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461], 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658] et seq., 659 [Pg. 659 includes portions of Doc. 1027 and Doc. 1028], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, Doc. 1059, and Doc. 1060]

good offices— Bolivia 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]

China 95 [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

Ecuador 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 379, Doc. 380, and Doc. 381]

Nicaragua 944 [Pg. 944 includes portions of Doc. 1662, Doc. 1663, Doc. 1664, and Doc. 1665]

Panama 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 1735, Doc. 1736, and Doc. 1737], 995 [Pg. 995 is part of Doc. 1740]

Jurisdiction 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461]

legation. See Refuge.

marines (q. v.).

mediation (q. v.).

minister. See American diplomatic officers.

policy. See Policy of the United States.

Revised Statutes (q. v.).

V.

Venezuela: American consular officers authorized to visit vessels bound for the United States, Porto Rico, and Colon 1095 [Pg. 1095 includes portions of Doc. 1843 and Doc. 1844]

Constitution of Venezuela, 1914 1095 [Pg. 1095 includes portions of Doc. 1843 and Doc. 1844]

ecclesiastical patronage law applied to missionary societies 1099 [Pg. 1099 includes portions of Doc. 1849 and Doc. 1850]

protest of the United States against requirement of certificate of good conduct in relation to admission of immigrants 1097 [Pg. 1097 includes portions of Doc. 1845, Doc. 1846, and Doc. 1847]

Rojas, Dr. Pedro Ezequiel, Minister of Venezuela to the United States; death 1104 [Pg. 1104 includes portions of Doc. 1855, Doc. 1856, and Doc. 1857]

Vessels: authority of American consular officers to visit 1095 [Pg. 1095 includes portions of Doc. 1843 and Doc. 1844]

extraterritoriality of boat from public vessel 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675]

jurisdiction over 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461]

Virginia, statue of Washington presented to Great Britain by the State of 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465]

W.

Waiver by an individual of a treaty right granted to his government is incompetent 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

War. See Neutrality; World War.

War, state of 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, and Doc. 743]

Washington statue presented to Great Britain by the State of Virginia 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465]

Waters: Jurisdiction 807 [Pg. 807 includes portions of Doc. 1390, Doc. 1391, and Doc. 1392]

neutrality 984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 1719 and Doc. 1720]

sovereignty, joint 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 1685, Doc. 1686, and Doc. 1687]

Wireless telegraph control in Panama by the United States 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 1766 and Doc. 1767]

World War, editorial note on the 1 [Pg. [1] is part of Doc. 1]

Z.

Zamor, Oreste, President of Haiti 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, and Doc. 501], 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540]

1 Including agreements, arrangements. Declarations, and understandings.

2 See also “Treaties: by subject,” and “Treaties, international: by subject.”
